P VffDLff^ 




LETTERS 5 

\\\ \ -Si fi;om 

) A SENIOR 

TO 

(4{\ A JUNIOR PHYSICIAN, 



f 



THE IMPORTANCE OF PROMOTING THL 

RELIGIOUS WELFARE OF HIS 

PATIENTS. 



I ,HB~. T H/),M ft R ~H.~£iIiM> £&,, 

XKH8&9 

PUBLISHED BY THE 

American trac^ociety, 

. \SSAU STREET, /iW YORK. 
fc » . ■ i n] * , n» » n 






LETTERS 



SENIOR TO A JUNIOR PHYSICIAN, 



THE IMPORTANCE OF PROMOTING THE RELIGIOUS WELFARE 
OF HIS PATIENTS. 



Y,J2JL XJIO^AS.H^BJO-P^Jl, . 

LIBRARY 

SURGEON GENERAL'S OFFICE 



AUG 10 189 



h~ *-■ 




PUBLISHED BY THE, 
AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 



1 i NASSAU-STREET, NEW YORE. 



CONTENTS. 



LETTER I 

The difficulties of the undertaking, 5 

LETTER II. 
The enpoiu-2.gem.eni to be expected in the attempt, 14. 

LETTER III. 

The most eligible methods to be pursued, 26 



LIBRARY 

SURGEON GENERAL'S OFFICE 
AUC 10 1899 



■ •■!< « > ^ 



LETTERS 



SENIOR TO A JUNIOR PHYSICIAN. 



LETTER I. 

THE DIFFICULTIES OF THE UNDERTAKING. 

My dear Friend — You were pleased to desire 
me to send you the result of my observation 
and experience on the deeply interesting sub- 
ject of endeavoring to promote the spiritual 
welfare of the sick committed to your care. 
I cheerfully accede to your wish, although I 
can scarcely hope to offer any suggestions which 
have not already occurred to your own reflect- 
ive mind. 

If the soul of man be immortal, and if the 
state of the soul at the moment of its separa- 
tion from the body determine its happiness or 
misery through endless ages, with what deep 



g LETTERS FROM A SENIOR 

solicitude should every Christian approach the 
bed of a fellow-creature who, to all appearance,, 
is about to undergo the momentous change, 
yet unprepared " to meet his God ! n If we 
saw a human being proceeding blindfold tow- 
ards a tremendous precipice, even already at 
its brink, how eagerly should we try to snatch 
him from the threatening destruction! And 
can we, my friend,, remain insensible to the 
spiritual danger of the dying man, who seems 
about to "take a leap in the dark" into the 
gulf of inconceivable, irretrievable ruin ? How 
often, alas, are we called to witness the appal- 
ling scene, unalleviated by the presence of a 
Christian minister, or any pious relative, whe 
might direct the helpless sufferer to Him "who 
is able to save to the uttermost !" 

I am aware, indeed, that those alone, who 
like ourselves have felt the weight of medical 
responsibility, can fully estimate the difficulties 
to be encountered in attempting to advance the 
highest interest of a patient, while conscien- 
tiously discharging our primary duty, in the 
exertion of our utmost efforts for the restoration 
or relief of his bodily frame. Even to those 
who by habits of early rising, punctuality, 



TO A JUNIOR PHYSICIAN. 7 

systematic arrangement, and calm dispatch 
have been able to allot a sufficient portion of 
time to each appointment of the day, how often 
does it happen that some unexpected emer- 
gency, some sudden complication of disease, 
the alarming sickness of another member of the 
family, some anxious inquiries of the patient 
or his friends, or other unforeseen circumstances, 
have more than consumed the allotted time, and 
in justice to the indispensable claims of other 
cases, rendered an immediate departure neces- 
sary: thus affording no opportunity of even 
alluding "to things unseen and eternal." 

Another difficulty is often found to arise from 
the almost exclusive occupation of the physi- 
cian's mind by the diseased condition of the 
sufferer, the relief of which is, of course, our 
primary and incumbent duty. In order to give 
to each symptom, as well as to the whole as- 
semblage of symptoms, a close and discriminat- 
ing attention, and to adapt, with equal care, a 
corresponding treatment in medicine, diet, and 
general management — to do this within a lim- 
ited space of time, requires a concentration of 
all the energies of the mind in a degree scarcely 
compatible with attention to any other subject. 



3 LETTERS FROM A SENIOR 

Under such circumstances, it is difficult in the 
extreme to dispossess the mind of the engross- 
ing anxiety just described, so as to leave it suf- 
ficiently free for availing itself of any suitable 
moment for introducing, with needful delicacy 
and tenderness, the all-important subject of 
eternity. How frequently, too, have we found 
that by the time we have completed our medi- 
cal inquiries and directions, the patient has be- 
come too much exhausted to render any further 
exertion safe or practicable ! 

In addition to the obstacles already specified, 
you have probably, my dear friend, sometimes 
encountered opposition from the mistaken kind- 
ness of the patient's relatives, who have deemed 
it next to madness to endanger the comfortable 
serenity of one "whose goodness of heart," they 
persuade themselves, "must secure him a hap- 
py hereafter." Generally, however, the con- 
fidence reposed in the kindness and discretion 
of the medical attendant, will soon allay such 
a feeling of alarm, and afford the assurance 
that nothing will be attempted of a doubtful or 
hazardous character. 

But the most formidable hinderance, I ap- 
prehend, exists within ourselves. I refer to 



TO A JUNIOR PHYSICIAN. 9 

the prevailing impression among us, that the 
religious welfare of a patient is foreign to our 
province; that to aim in any direct manner at 
promoting it, is superfluous, if not also obtru- 
sive ; and that the attempt might be regarded, 
moreover, as an unbecoming interference with 
the sacred office. The sedative influence of 
this opinion is often rendered still more para- 
lyzing by a consciousness of not possessing the 
facility and tact supposed to be essential to the 
success of the effort. Hence, opportunities for 
speaking a "word in season" are scarcely 
looked for or desired. The mind at length rests 
satisfied with an abandonment of the matter 
as hopeless and impracticable, not duly consid- 
ering whose cause it is, nor recollecting the 
divine promise, that "strength shall be made 
perfect in weakness." 

Such, my valued friend, are among the diffi- 
culties in our way ; great indeed we must allow 
them to be, yet happily they are not insur- 
mountable. 

Assuming for the moment that the duties 
and qualifications of the medical practitioner 
do not impose upon him a higher degree of 
responsibility relative to the spiritual good of 

Letters. 2* 



JO LETTERS FROM A SENIOR 

his patient, than attaches to every other well- 
informed Christian in reference to his neighbor, 
I may safely assert that the profession of medi- 
cine does in no wise release its member from a 
duty common to all Christians — that of em- 
bracing every opportunity to testify their grati- 
tude to the adorable Saviour, and their anxious 
desire to extend the blessings of redeeming 
mercy to those who " are ready to perish." 
But the assumption itself is incorrect ; for it 
would not be difficult to prove that the favor- 
able opportunities and peculiar facilities pos- 
sessed by the physician, do proportionably aug- 
ment his responsibility, and the consequent 
amount of obligation. Nor can this fearful 
responsibility be evaded by a general impres- 
sion of our unfitness for the task, unless we can 
conscientiously affirm that we have tried to the 
utmost — that we have done all that we were 
able to do. 

As regards the alleged interference with the 
ministerial office, I may truly say that, to the 
extent of my own observation, the apprehension 
is entirely groundless. So far removed, indeed, 
are the judicious, well-timed suggestions of the 
physician, in relation to the immortal interest 



TO A JUNIOR PHYSICIAN. H 

of his patient, from any thing like interference 
with the sacred function, that in the instances 
in which they are most needed, they may be 
strictly regarded as precursory and introductory 
to the more direct instructions of the minister ; 
as opening a way for him which would other- 
wise be closed, as removing ill-founded objec- 
tions to his assistance, and enkindling a desire 
for his spiritual counsel. In many other in- 
stances, the Christian physician proves a pow- 
erful auxiliary to the faithful minister of Christ, 
especially by facilitating his visits, pointing out 
at what time, under what circumstances, and 
to what extent the patient may be likely to 
attend with safety and advantage to "the 
things which make for his eternal peace." I 
have good reason, indeed, to believe that the 
enlightened ambassadors of the Saviour, so far 
from entertaining a feeling of jealousy, do really 
hail with cordial satisfaction such auxiliaries in 
their trying visits to the bed of sickness and 
death ; persuaded that none can feel a deeper 
interest than a Christian physician in the well- 
being of the whole man, bodily and spiritually, 
in reference to eternity, as well as to time. 
And how can jealousy be felt? Is not the 



JO LETTERS FROM A SENIOR 

glory of his divine Master in the salvation of 
immortal souls the supreme object of every 
pious minister's pursuit ? If so, even the feeblest 
attempt to subserve the same cause must gain 
his hearty concurrence. Happily the unscrip- 
tural, unprotestant notion of religious instruc- 
tion devolving exclusively on the clergy has 
become obsolete. As well might the Bible itself 
be read and studied by them alone. The very 
constitution, indeed, of our most efficient relig- 
ious institutions speaks a contrary language ; 
especially that of the visiting and district so- 
cieties, in which the principle of lay cooperation 
is clearly recognized, and the obligation hence 
arising is fully avowed. In truth, it requires 
but little sagacity to predict, that in the noble 
enterprise now in progress for evangelizing the 
world, the zealous exertions of Christians gen- 
erally will be more and more called forth. 
Such an active and pervading influence seems 
evidently implied in the prophecy of Jeremiah, 
as cited by the apostle of the Gentiles, alluding 
to the period when "they shall not teach every 
man his neighbor, and every man his brother, 
saying, Know the Lord ; for all shall know me, 
from the least unto the greatest." "We have 



TO A JUNIOR PHYSICIAN. 13 

yet indeed to realize the happy day when, even 
comparatively, every man shall seek the spirit- 
ual good of his neighbor ; but we are surely 
authorized to expect it, as well as bound to 
hasten it, by earnest prayer and vigorous en- 
deavor. We are even encouraged to anticipate 
the more distant and glorious period when the 
omnipotent Saviour shall have given complete 
efficiency to the universal labor of love, and 
when "He shall be all in all." 

Not to weary your patience further, I will here 
close my letter, hoping in a second communica- 
tion to present a few encouragements which 
may serve to cheer you under the difficulties 
we have been considering. I shall endeavor 
also to add some practical suggestions in refer- 
ence to the most eligible methods of introducing 
the subject of religion to persons dangerously 
ill. Of the power of executing the latter part 
of my task especially, I cannot but entertain 
much self-distrust. 

I remain, my valued friend, 

Yours, with sincere regard, 

T. H. BURDER. 
Tilford House, January 1, 1836. 



14 LETTERS FROM A SENIOR 



LETTER II. 

ON THE ENCOURAGEMENT TO BE EXPECTED 
IN THE ATTEMPT. 

My dear Friend — In my former communi- 
cation I placed before you the considerations 
which had most impressed my own mind, in 
reference to the importance of aiming to pro- 
mote the spiritual welfare of the sick. You 
will have observed that, far from concealing, I 
fully admitted the difficulties attendant on the 
effort, while I endeavored to show that they 
were by no means insurmountable. I am now 
desirous of presenting to your attention a few 
of the encouragements which the physician is 
warranted to expect in pursuing this "work of 
faith and labor of love." Such, I apprehend, 
will be found to arise from the peculiar fa- 
cilities WHICH THE PROFESSION AFFORDS ; FROM 
THE DIVINE BENEDICTION WHICH MAY BE HUMBLY, 
YET CONFIDENTLY ANTICIPATED | AND FROM THE 
SUCCESS WHICH HAS ALREADY CROWNED SIMILAR 



TO A JUNIOR PHYSICIAN. 15 

1. No one who has witnessed the respect and 
confidence with which the suggestions of a con- 
scientious physician are received, can doubt of 
his possessing an almost unlimited influence in 
the sick-chamber. He has become, in truth, 
the attached friend of the family, to whom they 
freely unbosom their sorrows and their fears, 
particularly such as appear to be inducing or 
aggravating any existing or threatened disease. 
Hence, the medical adviser, having gained an 
important acquaintance with the mental con- 
stitution of his patient, its individual peculiar- 
ities and tendencies, and with the varying com- 
plexion of thought and feeling which bodily 
disturbance has been wont to excite, is already 
prepared to introduce with delicacy and address 
such incidental remarks in reference to his 
highest interests as the peculiar condition of 
the sufferer may naturally call forth ; and in 
the way best adapted to interest and impress, 
while least likely to endanger that general 
quietude, on the maintenance of which his 
recovery may materially depend. Being aware, 
moreover, of the different aspect in which 
other topics of practical importance have at 
various times appeared to his patient, or to 



1G LETTERS FROM A SENIOR 

persons under similar circumstances, while 
viewed through the distorting medium of dis- 
ease, he will not be surprised if the momentous 
subject of religion should also share, so far as 
natural effects may he permitted, in the ob- 
liquity or indistinctness of the mental vision. 
The same previous knowledge will often enable 
him to calculate with tolerable precision the 
degree of influence, whether exciting or de- 
pressing, which an allusion to the realities of 
eternity may be likely to exert on the patient's 
bodily frame ; and thus to attemper and appor- 
tion his suggestions to the particular exigencies 
of the case. 

2. Among the facilities to which we have 
adverted, I cannot but regard as one of the 
most valuable, that arising from the numerous 
opportunities possessed by the physician of 
connecting in the most easy and natural man- 
ner some serious remark with his medical 
counsel. So intimately indeed is the mind 
united to the body, and so generally does the 
one sympathize with the sufferings of the other, 
as constantly to demand a considerable portion 
of the physician's vigilance and discrimination. 
He cannot but observe the baneful influence of 



TO A JUNIOR PHYSICIAN. 17 

agitating and corroding emotions, in thwarting 
every healing expedient ; and being constrained, 
therefore, to inculcate the importance of tran- 
quillity, acquiescence, and cheering hope, he is 
led by the most gentle transition to trace those 
virtues to the true source of "every good and 
perfect gift," and to the surpassing value and 
efficacy of the Saviour's peace, and of the 
"hope that maketh not ashamed." 

You have often, my friend, observed in the 
moment of danger with what eager, anxious 
attention the patient listens to every word that 
falls from his physician. He knows that his 
friend and counsellor is deeply concerned for 
his well-being, and can have no interest apart 
from his. He is aware of the value of pro- 
fessional time, and has experienced the un- 
wearied assiduities which have been exerted 
for the preservation of his life. Should, there- 
fore, the physician appear to overstep the pre- 
cise boundary of his province while touching 
upon the concerns of immortality, the patient, 
I am persuaded, will usually regard the solici- 
tude thereby evinced as an additional and grati- 
fying proof of genuine friendship. The sick 
man has also the tranquillizing conviction, that 



10 LETTERS FROM A SENIOK 

nothing is likely to proceed from his judicious- 
adviser which would either aggravate the dis- 
ease or interfere with the salutary operation of 
remedies. Hence no alarm, no perturbation 
is induced ; while two or three well-adapted 
hints are gaining a quiet admission into the 
mind, and affording useful materials for pri- 
vate meditation and self-inquiry. Now, my 
dear friend, if such be the advantageous posi- 
tion of a humane and Christian physician in 
the chamber of sickness, and I am sure your 
own observation will verify the statement, how 
deep must be the regret that such vantage- 
ground has ever been lost, yea, lost for ever ; 
that where the sick man's anxious eye be- 
tokened confidence, expectation, desire, we 
should have allowed so fair an opportunity to 
pass away, without affectionately and urgently 
directing him to "behold the Lamb of God!" 
I will not again expatiate on the serious re- 
sponsibility which these facilities involve, but 
I respectfully entreat my professional brethren 
to be on their guard, lest timidity, apathy, or 
worldly policy should deprive* them of the ex- 
alted privilege of being instrumental in saving 
a soul from death, and thus adding another jewel 



TO A JUNIOR PHYSICIAN. 19 

to the Redeemer's crown. It may still be saidj 
that the afflicted patient will not he disposed to 
listen to the religious advice of his physician, 
considering it as altogether foreign to his depart- 
ment. I believe, on the contrary, that such 
advice, when tendered with kindness and discre- 
tion, will generally be regarded the more highly 
because it is not professional, because it is not 
a matter of course, but springing spontaneously 
from the lively interest which the physician 
feels in the entire welfare of his charge. This 
view of the subject seems to me quite compat- 
ible with the sincerest respect for the labors of 
a Christian minister in the time of sickness. 
His invaluable instructions have the weight 
and sanction of official character ; while from 
the aptitude afforded by kindred studies and 
pastoral duties, they may be expected to pos- 
sess an appropriateness not otherwise attain- 
able. They are held moreover in high estima- 
tion, because they are regular and ministerial ; 
whereas the religious hints of the physician, as 
I have before remarked, acquire much of their 
interest and influence from the very opposite 
consideration — from the fact of their being 
occasional, unexpected, and spontaneous. 



20 LETTERS FROM A SENIOR 

3. The powerful incentive arising from an 
humble expectation of the divine blessing, 
appears to me fully authorized. If I have 
adequately shown the importance of the en- 
deavor, and have satisfactorily proved that the 
peculiar facilities afforded to the physician in- 
volve a proportionate amount of obligation — 
in those cases at least which have not, and 
perhaps cannot have the advantage of minis- 
terial instruction — it will follow, as a necessary 
consequence, that in performing a Christian 
duty of such moment, we are warranted to 
implore and expect the special aid of Omnipo- 
tence. The object at which we aim is nothing 
less than the glory of the divine Saviour, in 
the salvation of an immortal soul ; and how 
cheering are the assurances of infallible truth : 
"I will make my strength perfect in weak- 
ness;" "Him that honoreth me, I will honor;" 
"He that converteth a sinner from the error oi 
his ways, shall save a soul from death, and 
hide a multitude of sins." 

And let not my valued friend be discouraged 
at the difficulty of the undertaking. The cause 
is G-od's. He hath all hearts in his hand, all 
events at his disposal, and is often pleased to 



TO A JUNIOR PHYSICIAN. 21 

effectuate the greatest designs by the most 
feeble instrumentality, in order to show that 
the excellency of the power is not in man, 
but in God alone. Far be it from me to de- 
preciate the value of prudence and discretion 
in an attempt of such importance ; but I am 
bound to confess that the danger has not gen- 
erally arisen from the neglect of cautionary 
maxims, but from permitting them to obtain 
an undue and paralyzing influence. Where 
eternity is at stake, let us not be exclusively 
guided by the cold, calculating axioms of worldly 
policy. Selfishness may whisper, "Am I my 
brother's keeper ?" and as the priest and the 
Levite, in the parable of the good Samaritan, 
were probably willing to persuade themselves 
that their spiritual functions imposed upon 
them no obligation to afford bodily succor to 
the "wounded, half-dead man;" so, my friend, 
may we be in danger of resting satisfied in 
withholding our spiritual aid from our dying 
patients, on the hollow and untenable ground 
that our responsibility extends only to the body 
and to time. let us be rather like the good 
Samaritan, and without hesitation or delay, 
endeavor to pour into the wounded spirit the 



22 LETTERS FROM A SENIOR 

wine and oil of heavenly consolation — thus 
adopting our blessed Lord's special application 
of the parable, " Go, and do thou likewise." 
Surely we may confidently hope, that in ren- 
dering this obedience we shall experience su- 
perhuman aid ; and though our path may be 
dark and rugged, and the obstacles many and 
powerful, yet may we cheerfully and implicitly 
rely on that Almighty God who is "a Sun 
and a Shield " to those who put their trust in 
Him. 

May I not add, as a collateral encouragement, 
that while thus aiming to promote the honor 
of the divine Immanuel, we may humbly hope 
that he will be "with us" in granting efficiency 
to our strictly professional exertions ? When 
it is considered that the skilful or unskilful 
decision of a moment may save or lose a valu- 
able life, and that even a well-selected remedy 
may prove salutary or detrimental as the divine 
benediction is vouchsafed or withheld, how 
inconceivably important must we regard the 
guidance and the smile of Him "in whom we 
live and move and have our being," and in 
whom are all our springs of intelligence and of 
usefulness. By " seeking the kingdom of God 



TO A JUNIOR rHYSICIAN. 23 

and his righteousness" in the way we have 
described, we may be rendered the happy in- 
struments of giving occasion to our grateful 
patients to unite with the sweet singer of Israel 
in ascribing, from their inmost souls, blessing 
and praise to Jehovah, for having not only 
" forgiven all their iniquities," but also "healed 
all their diseases." 

One especial ground of encouragement yet 
remains — that which rests upon the actual 
success with which the God of all grace has 
been pleased to crown similar efforts. He 
who hath all power in heaven and on earth, 
has given efficiency to such exertions : and 
while, with " a single eye to his glory," they are 
"begun, continued, and ended in Him," we 
cannot doubt that the ardent desire and perse- 
vering endeavor to rescue immortal souls from 
endless perdition will be accompanied by those 
gracious influences which can at once direct 
and animate and bless. Thus, "our labors 
shall not be in vain in the Lord." 

It has already been remarked, that in aiming 
to subserve the spiritual, as well as temporal 
interests of our patients, we shall usually re- 
tain, if not increase their confidence and regard. 



24 LETTERS FROM A SENIOR 

Sometimes, however, it may prove otherwise ; 
especially in reference to the relatives and 
friends of the sick. This was strikingly evinced 
in the experience of an aged and eminent, but 
now deceased physician, then practising in 
"Westminster, as communicated by him to the 
writer of this letter. The veteran practitioner 
was called to the bedside of a young lady, 
whom he found passing to her long home, yet 
destitute of hope, unacquainted with the way 
to Christ and peace and heaven, and surrounded 
by relatives equally ignorant with herself. He 
placed in the hands of her attentive and, as it 
afterwards appeared, pious nurse a volume of 
the "Village Sermons," requesting that a por- 
tion might be occasionally read to the youth- 
ful patient. On getting out of his carriage at 
the next visit, he was met by the mother, and 
thus abruptly accosted : " I will not trouble you, 
doctor, to go up stairs;" assigning no motive 
for so unceremonious a dismission, except such 
as might be read in a countenance of high dis- 
pleasure. My sagacious friend at once pene- 
trated her mind, and retired. After sometime 
had elapsed, the nurse informed him that the 
young lady lived but a few days after his visit, 



TO A JUNIOR PHYSICIAN. 2d 

yet long enough to afford a delightful evidence 
of having obtained pardon and peace through 
a crucified Redeemer. The very volume, it 
appeared, that excluded the physician from the 
family, was rendered instrumental in introduc- 
ing the dying patient into spiritual life. And 
never can I forget the pious elevation and the 
grateful emphasis with which my venerable 
friend closed his affecting narrative: "Cheer- 
fully," said he, "would I lose the best family 
in my professional connection, if by my feeble 
instrumentality I could be the means of saving 
another soul from death." 

Thus, my dear friend, I have endeavored to 
set before you the principal encouragements 
for the endeavor. I have still to accomplish 
the most difficult part of my task — that of sub- 
mitting to you a few suggestions on the mode 
of communicating serious counsel to the sick. 
This I must attempt in a future letter. 
Believe me, with esteem, 

Your very faithful friend, 

T. H. B. 

Tilford, January 28, 1836. 



26 LETTERS FROM A SENIOR 



LETTER III. 

ON THE MOST ELIGIBLE METHODS TO BE 
PURSUED. 

My dear Friend— rln accordance with your 
request, I now proceed to offer a few sugges- 
tions derived from personal observation on the 
methods which appear to me best calculated 
to secure the important object of our present 
correspondence. You will remember, that 
even at a distance, I doubted my ability for 
properly executing this part of the undertak- 
ing : and I candidly own that my conscious- 
ness of inadequacy has not diminished on a 
nearer view of the attending difficulties. Should, 
however, the plain remarks you are about to 
receive possess little value in themselves, they 
may, I am willing to hope, prove indirectly 
useful, by engaging your own attention more 
closely and continuously to the subject. 

You are too well aware how deeply the feel- 
ing of medical responsibility has pressed upon 
myself, to suppose for a single moment that I 



TO A JUNIOR PHYSICIAN. 27 

would inconsiderately superadd to a similar 
burden upon you any unnecessary weight of 
obligation, as connected with the spiritual con- 
dition of your patients. I cannot, indeed, re- 
linquish the opinion I have deliberately formed, 
and which has been before avowed, namely, 
that the peculiar facilities afforded to the med- 
ical practitioner entail upon him a proportion- 
ate responsibility ; yet am I very solicitous 
not to endanger the peace of a conscientious 
mind by incautious or exaggerated statements, 
or by urging the adoption of any doubtful or 
impracticable measures. On a subject of such 
manifest delicacy, as well as difficulty, it is 
highly important that our views should be well 
defined, and our opinions of the duties and 
obligations involved, most carefully guarded 
and qualified ; otherwise, we may not only in- 
flict a needless wound on a pious mind, but 
may actually defeat the very object we desire 
to promote, by the disheartening influence of 
plans of operation unfeasible in themselves, or 
inconsistent with our proper, indispensable, and 
untransferrable duties. Allow me, therefore, 
to request your attention to two preliminary 
observations. 



28 LETTERS FROM A SENIOR 

First, I would remark that the desire of 
promoting the patient's religious welfare should 
never be allowed to interfere with the thorough 
performance of medical duties. These cannot 
be superseded by any other claims. Under 
this decided impression, I would suggest, as a 
general rule, the propriety of giving your sole, 
undivided attention to the relief of the patient's 
malady, as well as to every circumstance and 
arrangement which his bodily condition may 
demand, before you permit yourself to advert 
to his spiritual exigencies. You will kindly 
observe that I recommend this as a general 
rule, which may possibly admit of some ex- 
ceptions. For example, I can conceive that 
some highly gifted individuals may have the 
power of interspersing, in an unobjectionable 
manner, a few religious hints among their 
medical inquiries and directions, and without 
materially distracting their attention, or en- 
dangering the temporal well-being of their 
charge. Yet, even with such facilities, there 
would sometimes, I apprehend, be a risk of 
dispersing those energies of mind which the 
physician ought assuredly, in the first place, to 
concentrate on his patient, in the earnest, per- 



TO A JUNIOR PHYSICIAN. 29 

severing endeavor to remove his disease and 
preserve his life. Consequently, the talent re- 
ferred to should be used with much judgment 
and caution. But I foresee that your habits 
of discrimination will lead you to doubt wheth- 
er the example I have supposed really consti- 
tutes an exception to the rule. It certainly is 
not foreign to the spirit of the rule, which I 
think may be thus expressed : that no attempt 
should be made by the physician to promote the 
religious welfare of the sick, which is incompat- 
ible with the full, efficient, satisfactory discharge 
of his medical duties and obligations. 

The second preliminary relates to the dis- 
tinction which it is important to mark between 
the general responsibility, which in my hum- 
ble opinion requires the physician to be always 
on the alert to profit by every incidental oppor- 
tunity of employing his influence for the spirit- 
ual good of his patient, and that special obli- 
gation which may sometimes devolve upon 
him, in consequence of the total absence of re- 
ligious instruction, to attempt in a more par- 
ticular manner to rescue the thinking soul from 
perdition, and direct it to Him "who is able to 
save to the uttermost." This distinction leads 



30 LETTERS FROM A SENIOR 

me to propose, as a second general rule, that, 
inasmuch as religious instruction forms a part 
of ministerial and relative duty, it would be 
highly inexpedient for the physician to add to 
his already onerous engagements, that of under- 
taking the spiritual supervision of his patient, 
except under circumstances of imperious ne- 
cessity. Whenever, therefore, the aid of a 
Christian minister or a pious relation can be 
obtained, the medical practitioner may, I oon- 
ceive, regard himself as free from any special 
obligation of that nature. 

These limitations obviously imply, that in by 
far the greater number of instances, the relig- 
ious influence of the physician should be exer- 
cised in an occasional, rather than in a stated 
and formal manner. If alive to the spiritual 
welfare of his patient, such opportunities of use- 
fulness will not be wanting. Perhaps nothing 
would so essentially contribute to the further- 
ance of the object, as the offering up of earnest 
supplication to the "Father of lights," for his 
especial guidance and help, before the physi- 
cian enters upon his daily engagements, that he 
may be enabled both to discern and improve every 
suitable opportunity which, even in the ordinary 



TO A JUNIOR PHYSICIAN 31 

exercise of his profession, may be presented, of 
doing good to the souls of his patients. 

In seeking, and humbly expecting thus to 
employ your influence in this sacred cause, I 
feel the most encouraging persuasion that "your 
labors will not be in vain in the Lord." 

It may be convenient to arrange the few 
thoughts which have occurred to me in refer- 
ence to the mode of offering "a word in sea- 
son" in a few leading particulars; premising 
that, next to the divine blessing, the secret of 
usefulness will be found, I humbly anticipate, 
in the careful, discriminating adaptation of 
advice to the particular circumstances of the 
case. Age, sex, degree of intellect and culti- 
vation, particular habits of body and of mind, 
the actual stage of the disease, the hopes and 
fears of the patient in relation to futurity, the 
religious knowledge already possessed, the pres- 
ence or absence of spiritual instruction, and many 
other circumstances, will, I am persuaded, ap- 
pear to you deserving of special consideration. I 
can therefore only hope to suggest a few general 
principles, which may be indefinitely modified 
and applied according to the varied and ever- 
varying circumstances of each individual case. 



32 LETTERS FROM A SENIOR 

My first suggestion has already "been antici- 
pated. I refer to the importance of recommend- 
ing and even urging the assistance of a Chris- 
tian minister or a pious friend, in cases of serious 
and dangerous illness. I am aware that the 
very mention of the subject is sometimes pro- 
ductive of considerable alarm, and certainly 
requires much prudence and caution. "With 
skilful management, however, the exciting of 
any injurious degree of apprehension and fore- 
boding may generally, I would hope, be avoided. 
One may say, for example, in the course of 
conversation, to a patient apparently uncon- 
cerned or uninstructed in reference to eternity, 
"You must find the change from active life to 
the confinement of this room rather irksome. 
Yet some time for calm reflection is really 
needful for us all. When withdrawn from 
busy life, we can look upon the world at a dis- 
tance, as well as come into closer contact with 
ourselves. Indeed, serious consideration can 
never be unsuitable. Human life itself is con- 
fessedly uncertain, and of course, under dis- 
ease, still more so. Should you not find a little 
conversation with a pious minister interesting 
under your present circumstances?" In this 



TO A JUNIOR PHYSICIAN. 33 

familiar way — pardon its homeliness — one may 
sometimes introduce the subject without ab- 
ruptness. From having had much personal 
illness, I have been able to press the matter 
further, by assuring the patient that such as- 
sistance has repeatedly proved very consolatory 
to my own mind ; thus presenting a living in- 
stance of the incorrectness of the popular opin- 
ion, that to propose the visit of a minister to 
the sick is tantamount to a death-warrant. 

Should the recommendation prove entirely 
fruitless — should the unhappy patient, not- 
withstanding our utmost professional efforts, 
be so rapidly hastening into eternity as to afford 
no opportunity of procuring more efficient spir- 
itual aid — the case will then present one of 
those special occasions before alluded to, which 
call for our more immediate and devoted atten- 
tion, in reference to the immortal spirit. And 
who, that values his own soul, would not, under 
such circumstances, endeavor with all possible 
earnestness and affection, to exhibit to the dying 
man the compassionate and almighty Redeemer, 
as able to save even at the eleventh hour? 

I may next suggest, that the allusions of the 
physician to the subject of religion should 



34 LETTERS FROM A SENIOR 

generally be incidental and conversational; 
arising spontaneously from a solicitous regard 
to the particular situation of the sufferer. When 
such occasional advice appears naturally to 
flow from the heart, partaking of the disposi- 
tion and character of the speaker, and having 
an evident bearing on the special circumstances 
of the patient, there will be little risk of its 
being regarded as superfluous or obtrusive. 
On the contrary, I believe it will usually be 
welcomed as a gratifying proof of disinterested 
friendship. In this incidental way, one may 
sometimes refer to the experience of great and 
good men under similar sufferings, and to the 
signal support vouchsafed to them, and to the 
happy results of their afflictions. On some 
occasions, it may be useful to adduce the re- 
markable fact that some of the brightest orna- 
ments of the church and of the world have 
ascribed much of their success in life to the 
discipline they were once called to endure in 
the chamber of sickness and seclusion. 

May I add, that the occasional hints of the 
physician should also be brief? A single sen- 
tence well-timed, well-directed, appropriate, 
and expressive, will possess the great advan- 



TO A JUNIOR PHYSICIAN. 35 

tage of not wearying the attention of the suf- 
ferer, while it may, notwithstanding, supply 
ample materials for reflection during the suc- 
ceeding hours of solitude and silence. " A word 
spoken in season, how good it is !" 

Nor is it less important, I conceive, that such 
advice be expressed with clearness and sim- 
plicity, in a few plain words and short sen- 
tences, bearing a direct and obvious meaning, 
and free from ambiguity and circumlocution. 

Allow me also to suggest that the advice 
should be considerate and kind, the evident 
effect of genuine sympathy and tender concern. 
No word should be dropped that might seem to 
imply an unmind fulness of the suffering, help- 
less, unresisting state of the patient, or oblige 
him to attempt a lengthened and laborious 
reply. One kind sentence, delivered in a tone 
of kindness, and accompanied with a look of 
kindness, may, and often will, juvante Deo, 
penetrate the heart. 

In certain states of disease, in which high 
excitement or extreme debility prevails, it may 
sometimes be expedient to address a passing 
hint to a relative or friend who may be pres- 
ent, rather than to the patient himself, thus 



36 XETTERS FROM A SENIOR 

leaving to the option of the latter, whether or 
not to reply to the observation. 

Yet should the hints he faithful. Any ap- 
proach to temporizing would be cruel in itself, 
and might prove fatally delusive in its conse- 
quences. It would be, in effect, to administer 
a moral opiate, from which the helpless victim 
might awake — only in eternity. 

Permit me also to remark, that whenever the 
circumstances of the case will permit, our 
allusions to spiritual subjects should be attrac- 
tive and encouraging. Doubtless, the torpid 
insensibility of the sinner may require to be 
roused by an alarming representation of the 
direful consequences of transgression and un- 
belief; nor can we reasonably expect that mercy 
will be sought until it be felt to be needed. In 
general, however, I apprehend that a cheering 
exhibition of the almighty Saviour, as "full of 
grace and truth," as "ready to forgive," and 
"plenteous in mercy to all who call upon him," 
will be found most effectual in softening the 
heart, and in exciting those earnest desires for 
pardon and acceptance, which are emphatically 
described in our Lord's own test of sincerity, 
in the case of Saul, " Behold, he prayeth." 



TO A JUNIOR PHYSICIAN. 37 

Let us, my friend, never forget that "he who 
ivinneth souls, is wise." The promises of the 
gospel are indeed peculiarly adapted to meet 
the exigencies of the afflicted and distressed. 
The blessed Redeemer was pleased to describe 
himself as having come purposely "to seek and 
to save that which was lost." Were we even 
restricted to the use of a single sentence, as a 
scriptural vade-mecum in the sick-chamber, we 
should still have a volume of encouragement 
and consolation in our Lord's assurance, "Him 
that cometh to me, I will in no wise cast out." 
Upon the whole, my dear friend, the best 
preparation for speaking " a word in season" will 
be found in carefully studying the example, and 
seeking to imbibe the spirit of the incarnate Sav- 
iour, that all-perfect Physician of the soul and 
of the body. What a lovely union of simplicity 
and sincerity, of faithfulness and tenderness, 
pervaded his addresses to the sick and afflicted ! 
How much is comprised in that short sentence, 
" The gentleness of Christ !" He did ' ' not break 
the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax ;" 
but "came to bind up the broken-hearted," and 
to heal their every wound. May we be enabled, 
by grace from on high, though necessarily in a 
very humble measure, to tread in his steps. 



38 LETTERS FROM A SENIOR 

In truth, the Christian-like deportment of 
the physician comprises within itself a sphere 
of very important usefulness, affording ample 
scope for the development of those graces and 
affections which characterize the sincere fol- 
lower of the meek and forbearing, the benevo- 
lent and sympathizing Saviour. And even 
should my friend find it sometimes difficult or 
impracticable to offer a word of spiritual coun- 
sel as he could wish, he may yet, in his habitual 
demeanor, present to the patient and the sur- 
rounding relatives a living " epistle " which they 
can read and understand, and which, by directing 
them to the source of every good gift, may issue 
in the attainment of true and saving wisdom. 

In concluding this letter, I must not alto- 
gether omit to refer to the season of convales- 
cence, as peculiarly favorable to religious im- 
pression. If ever the mind and the heart be 
open to the feelings of gratitude, love, and 
praise, it is under the circumstances of return- 
ing ease and health, and in the hope of being 
again permitted to enter on the duties and en- 
joyments of life. It is then that the physician, 
in my humble opinion, is more especially bound 
to avail himself of the grateful attachment of 
his patient, by referring any skill or care he 



TO A JUNIOR PHYSICIAN. 39 

may have evinced to the G-od of all grace, and 
thus endeavor to give a right direction to those 
kind and gladsome emotions which are bursting 
from a full heart. It is then, I conceive, that 
the rescue from the grave should be held out 
as a signal warning, and as a powerful incen- 
tive. Then also, by adroitly following out the 
convalescent's own suggestions, a powerful 
appeal may be made to his best feelings, and 
an affectionate plea presented for an immediate 
and entire surrender of himself, "body, soul, 
and spirit," unto an almighty and most merci- 
ful Father, who "hath redeemed his life from 
destruction, and crowned him with loving-kind- 
ness and tender mercies." 

At such a period, too, we may often recom- 
mend with great advantage some interesting 
volume adapted to our patient's state. Biog- 
raphy and easy letters, as being both interest- 
ing and not requiring much effort of attention, 
will often be found peculiarly acceptable. In- 
deed, the judicious recommendation of books 
and tracts may be regarded as an important 
mode of employing our influence during every 
period of illness, but particularly during the 
season of convalescence. 



40 LETTERS, ETC. 

Such, my dear friend, are the few imperfect 
hints which have occurred to me. I might 
indeed have availed myself of the assistance of 
some valuable writers on the subject of afflic- 
tion, particularly of the highly interesting work 
of my pious and intellectual friend Mr. Shep- 
pard, " On Christian Encouragement and Con- 
solation," and the excellent " Thoughts in 
Affliction," by another able friend, the Rev. 
A. S. Thelwall. I might also have enriched 
these humble letters by a reference to the 
"Essays to do Good" of the eminent Dr. 
Cotton Mather, which contain some admirable 
suggestions on the same subject. From these 
several works I have formerly derived much 
instruction and pleasure, but was unwilling to 
have recourse to them on the present occasion, 
as well from the wish of not unnecessarily ex- 
tending these letters, as in compliance with your 
particular desire that I would send you the 
result of my own observation and experience. 
With every kind wish, 

Believe me, my dear friend, 

Ever faithfully yours, 

T. H. B. 

Tilford, March 1, 1836. 



Mf IB M <B 1 M S 

PUBLISHED 

BY THE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 

Including his researches in Asia; 

REV. JOHN NEWTON, HENRY MARTYN, 

AND 

DAVID BRAINERD; 
Isabella (Sraljant, Harriet £. tOinslow, 

SARAH L. HUNTINGTON SMITH ; 

DR. PA/SON, JAMES BRAINERD TAYLOR, NORMAND SMITH, 

AND 

HARLAN PAGE; 

ELIZABETH BALES, 
THE PASTOR'S DAUGHTER, 

©mils Ittaria; 

AND 

A GREAT VARIETY 

OF 

N ARR A TI V E S F OR; THE YOUNG, 

/v i '*\f 'jp^AUTIFUbLV ILLUSTRATED. 



