Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 




m 



-^Sim, .'a^sr-sm''9m 






* 




/ 



/ 



/, 



C-'^'t^J *^^ i^^^-^- t^^-'^^W' . 



^ 



t^ 




/ 




4. *i^ 



r 






«. t>»r 



/ 



y 



>v ' 









V' ■/' : * * '. • 



/.- - 



C' -•*-*• 



ADVICE 

TOA 

YOUNG CHRISTIAN 

ON THB 
IBIPORTANCE OF AIMIMG AT AM 

ELEVATED STANDARD OF PIETY. 



BY A VILLAGE PASTOR. 



WITH 



AJX INTRODUCTORY ESSAY, ^ 

or THB BET. DB. ALEXANOEB, OF PBINCETON, K. J 



"Feed my Lambs." 



NEW-YORK: 
JOHN S. TAYLOR. 



1838. 



Southern District of New- York, as. 

BB IT REMEMBERESD, That on the eighteenth day of 
February, in the year of our Lord one thonaand eight hundred 
«nd thirty, and in the fifty-fourth year of the Independence of the 
Vnited ^tcs of America, Zechariah Lewia^ of the said district 
baa deposited in this office the title of a book, the right whereof 
he claims as proprietor, in the words following, to wit : — 

" Advice to a i oung Christian, on the importance of aiming at 
an Elevated Standard of Pie^. By a Village Pastor. With an In- 
troductory E^ay, by the Rev. Dr. Alezan&r, of Princeton, N J, 
* Peed my Lambe.' " 

In conformity to the Act of Ckxigrese of the United States, enti* 
tlc/d, " An Act for the encouragement of Learning, by securing the 
copies of Haps, Cltarts, and Kx^ to the authors and proprietoni 
of such copies, during the time therein mentioned." Ana also to 
an Act, entitled, " An Act, surolementary to an Act, entitled, an 
Act for the encouragranent of Learning, uy securing the copies of 
Maps, Charts, and Books, to the authors and proprietors of such 
copies, durii^ the times therein mentioned, and extending the 
benefits thereof to the arts of designing, engraving, and etching 
historical and other prints ^ 

FREDERICK J. BETTS, 
Clerk of the Southern Diatria of New-York. 



S. W. BBNSDICT, VtaHTER. 



FEB 291908 

LIBRARY- 



PREFACE. 



To the Lambs of Christ's flock, whom Peter 
was enjoined by the Good Shepherd to feed, 
I dedicate this little book. The letters which 
compose it, were written to instruct one of 
their nmnber, the daughter of an highly valued 
fnend. Since they are now made public, it is 
the ardent prayer of the Author, that they may 
comfort and edify many more. 

As reyivals of Religion have become so fre- 
quent, and have embraced in their sanctifying 
influence, so many youth of both sexes : these 
letters are given to the public, with the hope, 
that under God, they may stimulate such youth 
to activity in the cause of Christ ; and awaken 
a desire for those exalted spiritual attainments, 
which it is their object to recommend. 

The age in which we live, demands a high 



iv PREFACE. 

Standard of Christian character. Anf thing 
which contributes to elevate it, must be useful. 

In presenting this little volume, the Author 
has no apologie^i t9 offpr, lipt that he suppo- 
ses it free from defects, or impervious to the 
shafts of criticism ; but because, if it is calcu- 
lated to be useful, apologies are unnecessary; if 
it is not, none, however laboured or eloquent 
can atone for so grand and radical a defect 



ESSAY 

ON TIIE NATURE OF VITAL PIETY;— ITS SAMENESS IN 
ALL AGES AND COUNTRIES— AND ITS VARIOUS ASPECTS 
IN DIFFERENT CiRCUBISTANCES. 

True religion not only enlightens the under- 
standing, but rectifies the affections of the heart. 
All genuine feelings of piety are the effects of 
divine truth. The variety and intensity of 
these feelings depend on the different kinds of 
truth, and the various aspects in which the same 
truth is viewed ; and also, on the distinctness 
and clearness with which it is presented to the 
mind. In a state of moral perfection, truth 
would luiiformly produce all those emotions 
and affections which correspond with its na- 
ture, without the aid of any superadded influ- 
ence. That these effects are not ei^perienced, 
by all who have the opportunity of knowing 
the truth, is a strong evidence of human de- 
pravity. In a state of moral depravity, the 
mind is incapable alike, of perceiving and feel- 
ing the beauty and excellence of divine truth. 
The dead neither see nor feel, and man is by 
nature *' dead in trespasses and sins." Hence 



6 DR. Alexander's 

the necessity of the agency- of the Holy Spirit 
to illuminate and regenerate the mind. The 
nature of divine agency, in every case, is in- 
scrutable by mortals. " The wind blowetI| 
where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound 
thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, 
or whither it goeth : so is every one that is 
born of the Spirit." We know, however, that 
the work of the Spirit, in the regeneration of 
the heart, is adapted to the rational nature of 
man. The thing to be accomplished is not the 
creation of some new faculty ; it is a moral re- 
novation ; and all moral changes must be ef- 
fected by understanding and choice. To put 
the soul, therefore, in that state in which it will 
rightly understand the truth, and cordially 
choose the highest good, is the end of regene- 
ration. Truth, therefore, must be the means 
by whicli actual conversion to God takes place. 
" Being born again, not of corruptible seed, 
but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which 
liveth and abideth for ever." " Of his own 
will begat he us with the word of truth.'* 
" Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is 
truth." Although piety in the heart is the ef- 
fect of a divine operation, yet all its exercises 
i^^ place a^eei^bly to ^e common laws of 



INTRODUCTORY EMAY. 7 

onr rational nature. The understanding is en- 
lightened, die judgment is convinced, motives 
operate on the will, and conscience approves 
or disapproves. That the soul, in the exercises 
of piety, is under the renovating influences of 
the Holy Spirit, is not known by any con- 
sciousness which it has of these divine opera- 
tions, but by the effects produced in a change 
of views and feelings; and this change is ascri- 
bed to God, because no other is able to produce 
it ; and his word assuj-es us that he is its author* 
Now, as all men are endowed with the same 
natural susceptibilities, and as all Christians con- 
template the same fundamental truths, the work 
of grace in the hearts of all, must be substan- 
tially the same. All have, by the knowledge 
of the law, been convinced of sin ; have been 
made to feel sorrow, shame, and compunction^ 
upon the recollection of their transgressions ; 
and to submit to the justice of the sentence of 
condemnation, which the law denounces against 
them. All have been made sensible of their 
own inability to save themselves, and under the 
influence of these humbling and peniteftt feel- 
ings, have been led to seek refuge in Jesus 
Christ, as the only hope of their souls. This 
plaftof salvation appears glorious and suitable 



6 DR. ALEXAKBeR's 

to all believerB ; so that they not only acqtii 
esce in it, as the. only method of salvation, but 
they are so well pleased with it, that they would 
not have another if they could. And, in the 
acceptance of Christ as a complete Saviour, 
there is, in every case, some experience of joy 
and peace. Connected with the views which 
the true believer has of Christ as a Saviour^ 
there is also a discovery, more or less clear, oi 
the glory of the divine attributes, especially oi 
those which are most conspicuously manifest- 
ed in the cross of Christ. Holiness, justice, 
mercy, and truth, shine, in the view of the sin- 
cere convert, with a lustre surpassing all other 
excellence ; and God is venerated and loved for 
his own intrinsic excellence, as well as for 
the rich benefits bestowed upon us. But, al- 
though these views may be distinguished, yet 
in experience, they are not separated. The 
brightest discovery of divine excellence ever 
made, is God's love io our miserable race. 
The law of God is also viewed to be holy, just, 
and good, by every regenerated soul. The un- 
renewed heart never is, nor ever can be, recon- 
ciled to the law ; " it is not subjeGJ; Jn it, nor 
indeed can be," but the " new man" a i! ^^^^ 
m the law of God, and would not h^xr^ ^^ShU 

* ^'^e pre. 



<^ of it altered ; and while it condemns all 
Im feelings and works as imperfect, he ap- 
proves of it still, and blames himself for his 
want of conformity to a rule so perfect 

Another thing in whi^h the experience of all 
Christians is uniform, is that they all are 
brought to a deliberate purpose to be on the 
Lord's side. On this point there is no hesitan- 
cy. Many are affected, and much agitated with 
religious impressions, and yet never come to a 
full decision to choose God and his service. 
They halt between two opinions, and have a di- 
vided mind. Such persons, however lively 
their feelings, are not yet truly converted : all 
true converts, after counting the cost, have set- 
tled this point for ever. And they can say 
with the Psalmist, ''My heart is fixed, O God, 
my heart is fixed." They are, therefore, pre- 
pared now to comply with the terms of disci- 
pleship laid down by Christ himself. They are 
willing to "deny themselves, to take up their 
cross, and follow him; to forsake fiither and 
mother, wife and children, houses and lands, 
yea also their own lives, for the sake of Him, 
who gave himself for them." 

Out of such views and feelings as have been 
deaciibed, arises, an ardept hungering and 



10 DR. Alexander's 

thirsting after righteousness, an intense desire 
to know more of Grod, and to be admitted into 
closer union and more intimate communion 
with him. These habitual desires of the re- 
newed soul, find their proper expression in 
prayer, and lead to a patient and earnest wait- 
ing upon God in all the ordinances and means 
o( his appointment True piety, however, does 
not stop in mere desires, or in attendance on 
religious duties ; it seeks to glorify God by ac- 
tion. The earnest inquiry of every soul, in- 
spired with the love of God, is, " Lord, what 
wouldst thou have me to do ?" And wherever 
there is piety towards God, there will exist be- 
nevolence towards men. One of the most sen- 
sible emotions of the young convert, is, ** good- 
will to men ;*' a sincere desire of the welfttre 
and eternal salvation of all, not even excepting * 
its most inveterate enemies. And towards the 
children of God, there springs up a strong and 
tender affection. Such seem to be brethren 
indeed, because they are the brethren of Christy 
«nd bear something of his image, in the humi- 
lity, meekness, and benevolence of their cha- 
racter. In short, genuine piety disposes and 
determines all who are its subjects, to obey and 
respect all the commandments of God, and to 



INTRODUCTORY ESgAY. II 

hftte and avoid all sin, according to that deck- 
ration of David, **I esteem all thy precepts 
concerning all things to be right, and hate eve- 
ry false way." 

In all the above-mentioned essential charac- 
teristics of piety, there is a perfect sameness^ 
in the exercises of all true Christians. The 
same impression has been made on every re- 
newed heart, and the only difference is, that it 
is imprinted more deeply on some, than others; 
but still, the characters are identical; and, 
therefore, the evidences of a work of grace, 
contained in the Holy Scriptures, are equally 
applicable to all persons who have been brought 
from darkness to light. There often is, more- 
over, a striking resemblance in those accompa- 
nying exercises and circumstances, which arc 
not essential. Awakened sinners are liable to 
the same erroneous conceptions, and usually 
fall into the same mistakes. Thiey are all prone 
to think, that by reforming their lives they can 
restore themselves to the favour of God. They 
commonly apply to the works of the law for 
relief, in the first instance ; and when driven 
from this false refuge, by a clearer view of the 
spirituality and extent of the law, and the depth 
of their own depravity, they are apt to give up 



19 Pn. ALCXANDBR^S 

bU for lost, and seriously to conclude that ther4 
is no hope in their case. They are all prone 
to misapprehend the nature of the gospel : of 
its freeness they can at first form no concep- 
tion ; and, therefore, they think it necessary to 
come with some price in their hands — to ob* 
tain some kind of preparation or fiti^ess, before 
they venture to come to Christ. And when it 
is clear that no moral fitness can be obtained, 
until they apply to himi this legal spirit will 
lead the soul under conviction to think* that 
very deep.and pungent distress will recommend 
it to Christ; and thus many are found seeking 
and praying for a more deep and alarming im« 
pressipn of their sin and danger. It is also 
very common to place undue dependence on 
particular means ; especially on such as have 
been much blessed to others* Anxious soul« 
are prone to think, that in reading some parti- 
cular book, or in hearing some auceessfid 
preacher, they will receive the grace of God 
which bringeth salvation ; in which expectati<m 
they are always disappointed, and are brought 
at last to feel that they are entirely dependent 
on sovereign grace ; and that they can do no* 
thing to obtain that grace. Before, they were 
iike a drowning maa catching st every tbinf 



4 



INTRODtJCTORY ES9AY. 1%-' 

wtteh seemed to promise support ; bnt ndt^, 

thev are like a man who feels that he has n6 

support, but is actually sinking. Their cry, 

therefore, is now truly a cry for mercy, " God 

be merciful unto me a sinner!" "Lord sitve, 

I perish !" And it has often been proverbially 

said, " Man's extremity is God's opportunity," 

which is commonly realised by the soul eut off 

from all dependence on itself — ^the arm of the- 

Lord is sixetched forth to preserve it from sink-* 

ing ; the Saviour's voice of love and mercy is 

heard ; light breaks in upon the soul, and it 

find^ itself embraced iii the arms of the Hfi- 

viour'; and so wonderful is the transition, that 

it can scarcely trust to its own experience/ 

This similarity of feelings in the experfenee 
of the pious has often been remarked, and hacf 
b^n justly considered a fitrong evidence of the 
divine origin of experimental religitfh : for hoW, 
otlierwise, can this uniformity of Ae views and!- 
feelings of the pious, in all ageiS and countries, 
be accoiuited for ? Enthusias^^ assumes a thou- 
sand different shapes and h<!kes, and is marked 
by no uniform characteristics; but scriptural 
piety is the same now, 4s in the days of David 
and Asaph $ the same^ as when Paul lived; the 
9i eiperiem^ by die piondi iaihfi(r# ^^ 

2 



14 DR« iXEXANDER's 

the Christian church; the same, as described by 
the Reformers, by the Puritans, and by the 
evangelical preachers and writers of the present 
day. When the gospel takes effect on any 
of the heathen, although it is certain that they 
never had the opportunity of learning any 
thing of this kind from others, yet we find 
them expressing the same feelings which are 
common to other Christians. Persons from dif- 
ferent quarters of the globe, whose vernacular 
tongue is entirely different, yet speak the same 
language in religion. Members of churchesy 
wUch hold no communion ; and which, 
perhaps, view each other, when at a distance; 
as heretics, often, when brought together, re* 
cognize in one another dear brethren, who are 
of one mind in their religious experience. 

The late, eminently pious and learned theo- 
logian, the iR^ev. Dr. Livingston, related to me, 
not many yeahs before his decease, a pleasant 
anecdote, whicK^will serve to illustrate the 
point under consiiteration ; and which I com- 
municate to the punic the more willingly, be- 
cause I do not know that he has left any record 
of it behind him. Whi^ a student at the uni- 
versity of Utrecht, a num\^r of pious persons, 
from the town and from an^ong the students* 



UrrROOUCTORT KSSAY. 15 

were accustomed to meet for free conversatioii 
on experimental religion, and for prayer and 
praise, in a social capacity. On one of these 
occasions, when the similarity of the exercises 
of the pious, in all countries and ages, was the 
subject of conTersation, it was remarked by 
one of the company, that there was then pre- 
sent a representative from each of the four 
quarters of the world. These were Dr. Living- 
ston from America, a young man from the 
Cape of Good Hope in Africa, another student 
from one of the Dutch possessions in the East 
Indies, and many natives of Europe of eeurse. 
It was therefore proposed, that at the next 
meeting, the three young gentlemen first re- 
ferred to, together with an eminen^y pious 
young nobleman of Holland, should each give 
a particular narrative of the rise and progress 
of the work of grace in his own soul. The 
proposal was universally acceptable ; and ac- 
cordingly, a narrative was heard from a native 
of each of the four quarters of the globe— of 
their views and feelings, of their trials and 
temptations, &c. The result was highly gra- 
tifying to all present ; and I think Dr. Living- 
ston said, that it was generally admitted by 
those present, that they had never before wit* 



|i6 PR. Alexander's 

Defscd so interesting a scene. And since I h&ve 
tal^en the liberty of mentioning the name of 
|hat veperable and distinguished theologian, I 
beg leave to add, th^t I have never seen a man 
i^ho appeared to love vital piety more, or to 
imd^stand its nature better. 

But the identity of religious feeling which 
•lias bepn described above, is consistent with a 
great variety in many of the accompanying 
circumstances. Indeed, it sQems probable, that 
each individual Christian has something dis- 
tinctly characteristic in his own case ; so that 
4h§re exists, at least, as much difference in the 
peculiar features of the inner as of the outward 
Q^an. The causes of this diversity are mani- 
fold ; as first, the different degree of grace re- 
ceived, in the commencement of the divine 
life ; secondly, the extent to which they have 
respectively run in sin, and the suddenness, or 
gradual nature of their change; thirdly, the 
degree of religious knowledge which is possess- 
ed; and finally, no small diversity arises from 
the various constitutional temperaments of dif- 
ferent persons, which must have a powerful ef- 
fect in giving complexion to the exercises of 
religion. To all which may be added, the xnan- 
ner in which persons under religious imprfs- 



INTRODUCTORY ESSAY. 17 

sions are treated by their spiritual guides ; and 
especially the manner in which the gospel is 
preached to them. 

It has been remarked by men of exact obser- - 
ration, that particular revivals of religion are 
often marked by something peculiar in the ex- 
ercises, and in the spirit of those who are the 
subjects of them. In , some revivals, convic- 
tions are more pungent and awful, or continued 
for a longer time, than in others ; and the con- 
verts, in some revivals, appear to acquire a 
much deeper and more abiding impression of 
the reality and glory of divine things, and are 
evidently more under the constraining influ- 
ence of the love of Christ, than is observable in 
other cases. These are subjects which deserve a 
careful investigation ; and as revivals are increa- 
sing in frequency and extent in our churches ; 
and as different modes of conducting them 
are in use, it is highly important, that some man 
of deep experience, and sober, impartial judg- 
ment, should make observations extensively, 
and communicate them to the religious public; 
which is, in many places, perplexed and dis- 
tracted, with the different methods of treatment 
recommended by different persons, and differ- 
ent parties. It may, however, be laid down as 



18 DR' ALEXANDB&'S 

a sound maxim, that in proportion as the truth 
of God is clearly brought to view, and faithful- 
ly applied to the heart and conscience, the good 
effects will be manifest. Erroneous opinions, 
although mingled with the essential truths of 
the gospel, will ever tend to mar the work of 
God. The good produced on any individual, 
■or on a society, must not be judged of by the 
violence of the feelings excited, but by their 
character. Men may be consumed by a fiery 
zeal, and yet exhibit little of the meekness, hu- 
mility, and sweet benevolence of Jesus. Great 
pretenders and high professors may be proud, 
arrogant, and censorious. When these are the 
effects, we may, without fear, declare, " that 
they know not what manner of spirit they are 
of." Any religion, however corrupt, may have 
its zealots; but true Christianity con&ists in the 
fruits of the Spirit, which are " love, joy, peace, 
long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, 
meekness, temperance." 

Piety seems aUo to assume an a^pect some- 
what different, in different ages and periods of 
the church. There is in human nature a strong 
tendency to run to extremes ; and from one ex- 
treme, immediately to the opposite. And as 
|]b^ inypfrfi^ctipns of pur i^ture nyj^gl^ with 



INTRODUCTORY ESSAY. 19 

every thing which we touch, so piety itself is 
not exempt from the i/ifluence of the tendency 
above mentioned* In one age, or in one reli- 
gious community, the leaning is to enthusiasm ; 
in another, to superstition. At one time, reli- 
gion is made to assume a severe and gloomy 
aspect ; the conscience is morbidly scrupulous ; 
things indifferent are viewed as sins ; and hu- 
man infirmities are magnified into crimes. At 
such times, all cheerfulness is proscribed ; and 
the Christian whom nature prompts to smile, 
feels a check from the monitor within. This 
alloy of genuine piety is also often connected 
with bigotry and censoriousness. Now, when 
true religion is disfigured by such defects, it 
appears before the world to great disadvantage* 
Men of the world form their . opinions of the 
nature of piety, from what they observe in its 
professors ; and from such an exhibition of it 
as we have described, they often take up preju- 
dices, which are never removed. There is, 
however, an opposite extreme, not less dange- 
rous and injurious than this. When professors 
of religion conform to the world, so far that no 
clear distinction can be observed between the 
Christian and the worldling. If the former 



20 Dit. Alexander's 

error drives men away from religion, as a sour 
and miserable thing, this leads them to the opi- 
nion, that Christians are actuated by the same 
principles as they are ; and therefore they con- 
clude that no great change of their character 
is necessary. It is sometimes alleged by pro- 
fessors wiio thus accommodate themselves to 
the fashions and amusements of the world, that 
they hope by this means to render religion at- 
tractive, and thus gain over to piety those who 
neglect it ; but this is a weak pretext, for such 
conformity always tends to confirm people in 
their carelessness. When they see professors 
at the theatre, or figuring in the ball-room, 
their conclusion either is, that there is no reali- 
ty in vital piety, or that these professors act 
inconsistently. 

The religious habits of some serious profes- 
sors of religion, are adapted to make a very 
unfavourable impression on the minds of sen- 
sible men. They assume a demure and sanc- 
timonious air, and speak in an afiected and 
drawling tone ; often sighing, and lifting up 
their eyes, and giving audible utterance to their 
ejaculations. Now these persons may be, and 
I doubt not, often are, truly pious ; but the im- 



INTRODUCTORY KS8AT. 21 

pression made on most mincUy by this affecta- 
tion of religious solemnity, is, that they are 
hypocrites, who aim at being thought uncom- 
monly devout. It appears to me, that religion 
^ever appears so lovely, as when she wears the 
jdress of perfect simplicity. We ought not, 
juideed, to be ashamed of our religion, before 
the world ; but it behooves us to be very care- 
ful, not to give to others an unfavourable opi- 
nion of serious piety. The rule is, " Let your 
light so shine that, others seeing your good 
works may glorify your Father, who is in hea- 
ven.'' " Let not your good be evil spoken of." 
But the aspect and characl^r of the piety of 
one age, may differ from th^ of another, more 
from the peculiar circumstances in which Chris- 
tians are placed, th^n from the prevalence of 
erroneous views or incorrect habits. In one 
age, vital piety seeks retirement, and runs in 
hidden channels. At such a time, the attention 
of Christians is turned chiefly on themselves. 
Much time is devoted to devotional exercises ; 
often whole days. The secret recesses of the 
^eart are explored with diligence and rigour ; 
in-dwelling sin is detected in its multiform ap- 
pf^ra^ces, and is mortified with invincible re- 



22 DR. Alexander's 

solution ; the various means of personal growth 
in grace are studied, and used with persevering 
assiduity ; and much useful knowledge of the 
nature of the spiritual life in the soul is acqui- 
red. But while vital piety is thus carefully 
cultivated, and the attention is earnestly turned 
to the exercises of the heart, there may be very 
little display of active, enlarged benevolence ; 
there may be few vigorous efforts made to 
meliorate the condition of the multitudes pe- 
rishing in sin. Under the influence of these de- 
fective views of the nature of religion, many 
pious persons, in tl^e early ages of Christiani- 
ty, withdrew entirely from the world, and lived 
in the wilderness ; which mistake occasioned 
Innumerable evils to the church, the effects of 
which are not yet obliterated. 

The spirit of piety among the Reformers, 
seems to have been pure and vigorous, but not 
as expansive as it might have been. They seem 
scarcely to have thought of the hundreds of 
millions of heathen in the world ; and of course, 
made no efforts to extend the knowledge of sal- 
vation to them. Indeed, they were so much 
occupied at home, in contending for the faith 
against the Romanists, that they had little time 



INTRODUCTORY ESSAY. 23 

left for benevolent enterprises at a distance; 
but if that zeal which was worse than wasted 
in controversy with one another, had been di- 
rected to the conversion of the heathen, their 
usefulness would have been far greater than it 
was. 

The Puritans also, although profoundly ac- 
quainted with experimental religion, seemed to 
have confined their attention too exclusively to 
themselves. Their ministers were, it is true, 
silenced, and driven into comers and into exile, 
by an ungrateful and tyrannical government ; 
but it seems wonderful to us, that when pre- 
vented from preaching the gospel to their own 
countrymen, they did not turn to the gentiles. 
But the era of missions had not yet arrived, 
and probably they had but small opportunity, in 
their persecuted state, of uniting their counsels 
or combining their energies in schemes of dis- 
tant benevolence. One thing, however, is now 
manifest, that the providence of God over- 
ruled the retirement and leisure of those godly 
ministers, who were ejected from their charges, 
so as to render their labours more useful to the 
church, than if they had been permitted to 
spend their lives in preaching the gospel ; for> 



34 DR. Alexander's 

when deprived of the liberty of employing 
their tongues, they betook themselves to tlieir 
pens, and they have left to tlie church such a 
body of practical and casuistical theology, as 
all ages before or since, cannot equal. I have 
no doubt, that such men as Owen, Baxter, Fla- 
vel, Bunyan, Goodwin, Manton, Howe, and 
Bates, have ejected much more good by their 
practical writings, than they could possibly 
have done by their preaching, supposing them 
to have been ever so successful. 

But our lot is cast in a different age, and in a 
different state of the church. After a long slum* 
ber, the attention of Christians has been arous* 
ed to consider the perishing condition of the 
heathen. We live in a period when great de- 
signs are entertained, and plans formed for the 
conversion of the whole world, — when one 
benevolent enterprise or institution follo\Ks an* 
other in rapid succession, until the Christian 
community begins to exhibit an entirely new 
aspect, from what it did within our own remem- 
brance. Christians have begun to feel, that by 
a combination of effort, they have power to 
accomplish much. The public attention is kept 
awpke by the frequent recurrence of public 



INTR0D17CT0RT E88AT. 25 

meetings of an interesting kind, and by that 
more potent engine, the wide circulation of re- 
ligious PERionicAiiS, by which, interesting in- 
telligence is conveyed to almost every corner 
of our extensive country. The duty of Chris- 
tians to be active is now inculcated, in almost 
every form ; tracts are multiplied ; the scrip- 
tures are circulated ; the young and ignorant 
are instructed, by new methods ; and many are 
found running to and fro to promote the pro- 
pagation of evangelical truth. Revivals of re- 
ligion also are exerting a mighty influence on 
the church. The number of serious Christians 
IB vastly increased; and many youth are brought 
forward to a course of preparation for the gos- 
pel ministry. A spirit of liberality also is wit** 
nessed, unknown to our fatiiers ; and the duty 
of consecrating to the Lord, a reasonable pro- 
portion of all their increase, is beginning to be 
extensively felt among serious Christians. And 
such is the spirit of enterprise, that no under- 
taking appears too arduous, which has for its 
object the advancement of the Redeemer's 
kingdom : and such is the favour of heav^i 
towards benevolent enterprises in our day, that 
scarcely one has failed of accomplishing some 

3 



26 Dr. Alexander's 

good ; and although the schemes of henevo* 
lence are so various and so multiplied, yet 
there has occurred no sensible interference of 
one with another. As they all aim at the same 
object, so they are all viewed as parts of the 
same great system of operations. Now, in all 
these favourable appearances and benevolent 
exertions, every pious heart must and will 
rejoiced 

But is there no danger, that many who feel 
interested in the operations of the day, and 
contribute to their advancement, should'be mis- 
taken as to their true spiritual condition? When 
a powerful current takes a set, many will be 
carried along with it, which ever way it may 
run. And is there no danger that Christians 
themselves, while they seem to flourish in ex- 
ternal profession, zeal and activity, may be de- 
caying at the root, for want of suflicient atten-' 
tion to their own hearts, and to the duties of 
the closet ? There is indeed much reason to fear 
that many professors now exist, who conflne 
their religion too much to those external itcts, 
which may be performed from motives no 
higher than those which operate on unrenewed 
men. The danger now is, that the religion of 



INTRODUCTORY E88A¥. 27 

the heart will be neglected, and that many will 
feel well satisfied with themselves, on accomit 
of their activity and zeal, who are yet stran- 
gers to a work of grace. This being the point 
on which Christiaftis of the present day are lia- 
ble to err, it is a matter of congratulation, that 
some writers seem disposed to turn the atten- 
tion of the Christian public, to the importance 
of diligence and punctuality in performing the 
iuties of the closet. The following letters 4ire 
well calculated to produce this effect They 
were forwarded to mo by an esteemed young 
clergyman, who is settled as a pastor in a dis- 
tant and retired village. They were addressed, 
as the author has stated in his preface, to a 
young lady of highly respectable connexions, 
upon the occasion of her making a public pro- 
fession of religion. The father of this young 
lady, who is distinguished for his benevolence 
and evangelical piety, was unwilling that the 
pious and judicious counsels and affectionate 
exhortations which they contain should be li- 
mited to an individual, since they are so well 
adapted to be useful to Christians generally ; 
and especially to the young, placed in circum- 
stances similar to those of the person to whom 



5S8 INTftODUCTORT ESSAY. 

ihey were ori^naHy addressed. A request was, 
therefore, made for their publication. The 
author through modesty has withheld his name, 
but has requested me to introduce them to the 
public with some preliminary essay of my own ; 
with which request I have here complied, be- 
lieving that the letters of my young friend arc 
seasonable, judicious, and pious, and that as 
they are written in an ornate and animated 
style, they will be. extensively perused by the 
young. 

A. ALEXANDER. 
Princeton^ K. X 



ADVICE, Ac 



LETTER I. 

DEAR TOUNe FRIEND, 

You are very young to profess the high 
character of a Christian; but your youth, while 
it serves as a caution, should not operate as a 
discouragement. Many a person of fewer 
years, and with less advantages, has not only 
given satisfactory evidence of conversion, but 
proved, in subsequent life, to be of that num- 
ber whose " path shineth more and more, unto 
the perfect day." 

It becomes you, however, to look narrowly 
into the eridences of such a change. A mis- 
take here will prove fatal. The word of God 
and prayer, are the great means, which, if faith- 
fully applied, will in due time, develope your 
true moral character. If you have been de- 
ceived, if yet in your sins, these duties will ere 
long become irksome, and be loosely perform* 
ed or utterly neglected. If you have been re- 
generated, you will not only persevere in these 
duties, but Mrill find that they elicit more and 

3* 



30 ADVICE TO A 

more of your interest, untjl you arrive at a 
well-grounded hope of eternal felicity. 

Taking for granted, that you do not make 
this profession on slight grounds, nor with in- 
adequate or erroneous views ; my object, in a 
few letters which I shall address to you, will 
be to urge you to the formation of an elevated 
Christian character. You profess to have ta* 
ken the first step in the strait and nao'ow way ; 
but recollect, it is only the first step. The 
concentrated gaze of many eyes is upon you. 
Some would exult in your downfall— others re- 
joice in your advancement. Invisible and wick- 
ed spirits will tempt you to ruin. Good and 
guardian angels will watch around your steps, 
and rejoice in your victories. To sustain your^ 
self, you have already been convinced is im- 
possible. If you are regenerated, you are not 
perfectly sanctified; nor will you be, until 
death shall be swallowed up in victory. But 
as Paul could do all things, by the strength pf 
bis master, so can the weakest believer ; and 
you must ever feel that the same grace, which 
brought "you out of nature's darkness," must 
enable you to overcome your enemies, and 
" persevere unto the end." 

As I have touched upon this point, I am for* 



YOftTKO CHRISTIAN. 31 

ciblf renninded of the beautiful dream of lihe 
Rev. John Newton, "While Ipng at anchor in 
the harbour of Venice, and within sight of a 
part of the Alps. For the particulars, I refer 
you to his volumes. The substance is as fol- 
lows: 

The anxiety of mind which he emlured in 
his waking hours, seemed to give a Colouring 
to his night vision. He felt himself in great 
perplexity and horror. While' musing on the 
wretchedness of his condition, there appeared 
suddenly, a celestial figure, who presented to 
him a ring, which she said, if preserved with 
care, would, on every difficult occasion, resolve 
his doubts, and extricate him from trouble. He 
was overjoyed at the reception of it. All his 
fears seemed to subside, and a heavenly sere- 
nity to succeed. While in this tranquil and 
happy frame of mind, another personage, of 
less inviting aspect, made his appearance, and, 
after many flattering words and artful insinua- 
tions, prevailed on him to part with the ring. 
He deliberately dropped it over the side of the 
vessel, and it sunk to th6 bottom. The flames, 
in an awful manner, immediately burst from 
the mountain, and he seemed threatened with 
instant destruction. At this moment of horrort 



32 ADVICE TO A 

t 

his celestial friend again appeared, and, \Hth a 
frown of mingled love and reproof, upbraided 
him for listening to the voice of the tempter. 
She then descended into the water, and soon 
returned bearing the ring, and thus addressed 
him: "As thou art unable to keep this token, I 
will preserve it for thee, and it shall be secure 
for ev6r." 

I have only given you from memory an out 
line of this beautiful vision. The interpreta- 
tion, which the author put upon it, is full of 
spiritual instruction. If left for one moment 
to our own strength, how soon do we abandon 
the "ring," even at the first suggestion of the 
tempter ! Then the soul is afirighted and dis- 
mayed. But Jesus, our guardian, is able to re- 
store the "ring," and lest we should lose it, he, 
in condescension to our infirmities, deigns to 
keep it. " I will never leave thee, nor forsake 
thee," is his language. Thus, my dear young 
friend, entrust the " ring" to Him, who alone 
is able to preserve it. When the tempter 
comes, whether in the artful guise of w^at the 
world calls innocent pleasure, or the bold as- 
saults of blasphemy and despair, look upward 
to Him who is charged with the care of all that 
is precious to the soul. Wait not until you 



YOtJNO CHRISTIAN. 33 

are ove]*whelmed by the consciousness of con- 
triacted guilt, but flee — oh flee, as for your life, 
to Jesus! You cannot trust him too confi- 
dently. He will permit you to sit even at his 
feet There is honour, there is safety, there is 
happiness. 

I congratulate you, on the favourable cir- 
cumstances in which you are placed for the 
formation of Christian character. The work 
of divine grace in which you profess to be a 
participant, is, I understand, still in progress. 
Doubtless you find some congenial spirits with 
whom you can mingle feelings, unite in mutual 
prayer, and converse on the sweetest of all 
topics, the love of your Lord and Master. Let 
it be a principle with you, to select as your 
companions, the most heavenly-minded of your 
sex. If such can be found in the higher walks 
of life, very well; be they your bosom friends; 
but, alas ! how seldom, in the higher circles, 
does religion, in its native simplicity and puri- 
ty, appear ! Yon must seek it, I apprehend, 
in the low vale of obscurity, and often amid 
the homely attire of honest poverty. If you 
have the spirit of Christ, you will Icfve his 
image, though arrayed in an humble garb. I 
know it has ever been the design of your pa- 



34 ADVICE TO A 

rents, to make you esti|nate character, not by 
rieheg, nor fadhionable appearance, but by in- 
trinsic moral worth ; and I am persuaded that 
you must now feel, that if Providence has gi- 
ven you advantages of wealth and education, 
above the plainest rustic, it is a ground of hu- 
mility, in as much as it lays you under the 
greater obligations. Where ^^much is given," 
oh, never forget it! "much will be required." 
On this principle, are you not bound to be 
humble, benevolent, condescending? 

In closing this letter, I must say to you as I 
lately said to a youth in my parish, who is about 
making a public profession of her faith in Christ: 
"I hope you will not be satisfied with being 
half a Christian." So, my young friend, I 
would exhort you to aim high. It is a day to 
elevate the standard of piety. We want more 
Newels, and Huntingtons, and Ramsays, and 
Smelts. These were devoted souls. It was not 
half-way work with them. Religion was " all 
in all." For this they lived — they suffered — and, 
supported by its consolations, they died. They 
have left a bright track for you to follow. Tread 
closely in their steps ; and then, though yon 
share in their sufferings, you shall also inherit, 
with them, the " crown of glory." 



TOUNO CHRISTIAN. 35 

LETTER II. 

Among the first temptations which yon wfll 
probably experience, will be an effort, on th6 
part of your spiritual enemies, to seduce you 
back to the |)leasures of the world. Sometimes 
it wHl be a direct and powerful attack. The 
ways of religion will be represented as diffi- 
cult, whilst those of worldly pleasure will be 
strewed with flowers. " What," the tempter 
will exclaim, ** shall one so young, so suscepti- 
ble of enjo3rment from all the varied delights 
of sense — one who has it in her power to com- 
mand almost any imaginable happiness-HshaU 
she put on the grave aspect of piety, and thus 
debar herself from every innocent pleasure? 
Look abroad, see thy young companions, 
how their hearts beat with rapture, as they 
float amid the circles of beauty and of fashion. 
Why shouldst thou become a sober religionist, 
when thou art ripening for so much bliss ?" 
In such false and flattering colours, will the 
tempter array the world. Knowing that vanity 
is one of the strongest principles of our de- 
praved nature, he will constantly, and often 
successftdly, appeal to it. His flatteries will 
respect yoQ» periODf your accoinplisluiioiitd^ 



38 A0VIOB TO A 

your fortune. He will suggest that with such 
advantages, the world must pay you homage, 
and become a sort of perpetual paradise. 

Had you, my young friend, been one of plea- 
sure's gay votaries, as / have been, he could 
not, and probably he would not, thus address 
you. I could say, from experience — thou se« 
ducing spirit, what thou sayest is false. Have 
I not mingled in the festival? Have I not 
courted pleasure in the brilliant assembly, and 
the crowded theatre, where beauty and wealth 
have poured around their shining and fascina^ 
ting attractions ? And what did I ever gain? 
A momentary rapture, I admit; an exhilaration 
of spirits, and a temporary oblivion of my 
cares. But this was all. And even these tran- 
sitory joys were not unalloyed. Jealousy, 
and envy, and hatred, and disappointment, 
would occasionally let fall the bitter drop, as 
the cup was passing to the lip ; and satiety, 
disgust, and self-loathing, would succeed. But 
conscience was more powerful than all. What 
reslless hours of wakeful solicitude, what anti« 
clpated wrath, what vain resolutions, what um« 
availing regrets ! And shall the tempter tell 
me, that the pleasures of the world are worthy 
tot be preferred to the calm delight of eom- 
nMHM ^rJMcCMt and ih^ high e^^oTmeutaof 



TOUNO CHRIflTIAN. 9! 

religion ? >* He was a Hair from the beginning*** 
and when, my young Christian friend, he as- 
saults you with such suggestions, or when, 
through his emissaries in human form, he would 
seduce you from your allegiance, recollect his 
character, resist his, suggestions — and, aceoi- 
ding to the promise, " he will flee from you.'* 

But it is far more probable, that his insinua- 
tions will be almost imperceptible. A* direct 
and powerful attack may throw a Christian on 
his £Bice, and overwhelm him with agony ; but 
Judah's lion shall appear, andaffiight the bold 
adversary. It is when your spiritual enemies 
are making a gradual advance on ^our purity 
and devotedness, that they are most to be 
dreaded, as most likely to be successful. Now, 
you are, I trust, conscientious in the discharge 
of the duty of private devotion. You love to 
retire from human observation, to commune 
with God. I would fain believe, that you are 
never so happy as when thus engaged ; that 
you have a consecrated spot, which you call 
your Bethel, where the soid daily drinks in the 
waters of life. 

Happy, dear youth, happy will ^^ou be, if 
that Bethel is always thus attnuitire and inte- 
resting. But the great danger is, that it will 

4 



38 ADVICE TO A 

be neglected, and perhaps forsaken. You are 
ready to exclaim, 'impossible ! I shall never 
cease to pray. I could sooner dispense with 
my daily food, than forego the privileges of a 
throne of grace." This is the language of 
sincerity, I doubt not. You verily think so ; 
but how little do you know the temptations 
which surround you, and the deceitfulness of 
your own heart ? You have much to fciar. 

When called myself from nature's darkness, 
and made, as I hope, to taste the sweetness of 
redeeming love, I was of the samo. opinion. 
I had waked up in a new world. 'Twas as if 
the Creator had formed a new being, akin to 
the happy spirits in heaven^ and dropped him 
on the earth, in the spring time of nature's 
magnificence and beauty. The foliage seemed 
greener and fresher than ever. The dew-drops 
glittered more brilliantly; the sky looked 
purer ; and every thing seemed to shine and 
wave, in silent but emphatic praise of God, 
their Creator. My soul beat in happy unison 
with these silent worshippers, and me thought 
I could never cease to sing and pray. My very 
being seemed to consist in it. But has it been 
so ever since ? Oh ye hours of anguish, ye days 
of sensuality — ambition — and folly; ye can 
fjsy how guilty, how careless, bow ungrateful. 



YOUNG CHRISTIAN. 39 

I have been. Little did I then dream of loving 
and serving the world. I thought I could have 
spent an eternity of happiness, on some lonely 
rock in the ocean, if God were with me there. 
I thought my soul would never forsake him, 
nor my voice ever be silent in his piaise. But I 
knew not my own heart, nor the power of the 
world's allurements. 

Now do not suppose, that because I and 
others have been tempted to backslide, and 
hav(», yielded to the temptation, you must ne- 
cessarily follow our disgraceful defection. I 
hope you never will. If you are a child of 
God, you need not. You may go **from strength 
to strength." You may accomplish victory af- 
ter victory. God grant that you may ! 

But, should you, by mournful experience, . 
have to look upon yourself as a backslider, 
you will remember this warning, and wish you 
had heeded it. Like the prodigal, you will be 
in spiritual beggary. I know of no condition, 
except that of hardened impenitence, more 
pitiable than the condition of a backslider. 
Conscience is too quick to allow him to enjoy 
the world ; and religion is too much neglected 
to yield him the smallest comfort. He lives in 
disquietude, and anguish, until he repents, and 
finds anew the favour of his God. 



40 ABVIOB TO A 

^ LETTER UL 

Ik my last, I touched upon the subject of 
temptation. I am constrained to add a few 
words more on the same subject. It has been 
too common for those who have betrayed their 
Lord by a disgraceful return to the world, to 
predict the same defection in others. Hence 
you often hear professors of religion address 
the youthful conrert in such language as the 
following: ''Your present ardour is no proof 
that it will continue; now you are all joy, all 
devotion ; by and by the scene will be changed, 
I once felt as you now feel ; perhaps I enjoyed 
more extatic pleasure: but I soon lost the 
glow of my first love, and so will you. A few 
years will cool you do'wn, and show you that 
such engagedness cannot always last." 

When I hear such language addressed to the 
young Christian, I am indignant. It is not ne- 
cessarily true ; my young friend, it is not true* 
The Bible, which is the only "lamp to our 
path," gives no warrant for such a prediction. 
True, it represents the cases of mai^y who at 
first bade fair, but subsequently apostatized. It 
records the cases of such, as a fiaming beacon* to 



YOUNO CHRISTIAN. 41 

warn those who should come after them. But 
does it not represent the path of the' just, as 
'*the shining light, which shineth more and 
more linto the perfect day ?" Does it not say, 
that he who hath clean hands, shall grow 
"stronger and stronger?" Does it not urge 
us to "grow in grace," to "forget the things 
which are behind," and "reach towards those 
which are before?" to make Christ our 
mark, and press towards it, with all the energy 
of an Olympic racer, struggling in competition 
for the goal? 

Now, I warn you not to listen to such cold 
predictions. They who make them from their 
own experience, may have be<5n hypocrites. 
They may have felt something, which they 
called spiritual joy ; hvt perhaps it was " Satan 
transformed into an angel of light :" perhaps 
it was the workings of their own imaginations, 
and not the legitimate fruits of the spirit. Let 
them take heed to themselves, lest they hare 
been deceived ; and not allure others on, in 
their down-hill course, by their disgraceful ex- 
ample. But suppose them to have been Chris^ 
tians ; and I allow that a Christian may grow 
cold, and backslide in the service of God ; is 
such language warranted by the word of God f 

4* 



4S ADTICB TO A 

Is it likely to urge forward the young convert 
in the path of holiness ? Is it likely to raise 
the standard of piety in the souls of others ? 
No, far from it. Young converts are prone to 
copy those who are older and more experien- 
ced. If they are persuaded that it is consist- 
ent with the existence of piety, to grow cold 
in feeling, they will probably yield to the se- 
ductions of the world, and the temptations of 
Satan. They will not press forward ; they will 
recede. They will take the cold dead level of 
their predecessors. 

But, my young friend, be you warned by 
this, not to listen to such language for a mo- 
ment ; nor to suppose it must be true in your 
case. I do assure you, your Bible holds a dif- 
ferent language. As you value your comfort, 
your peace of mind, your immortal hopes, 
your character> as a Christian, your influence 
as a follower of the Lamb — ^press forward. 
Strive every day to make some new attain- 
ments in knowledge and holiness. You are 
engaged in a conflict. You have put on the 
•nnour of God; and, put it off for a moment 
you must not. Your enemies are numerous, 
vigilant, and powerful. You must contend 
evtry day : nor mutt you think of rest or re- 



TOVNO CHRISTIAN. 48 

laxation. When death shall unbind for jou 
the gospel armour, and you hear the dark 
waves of Jordan lashing these mortal shores, 
then, and not till then, will your struggles. be 
elided, and your victory complete. You hare 
counted the cost ; do not shrink at the cross. 
Christ will be with you. Christ wfll support 
you. Under His banner you contend. His 
arm will shield you, and his grace bring you off 
more thait conqueror. 

I have digressed a little from the point at 
which I aimed. I wished to caution you par- 
ticularly, concerning the first step in a back- 
ward course. The first step in the retreat is 
an important o|ie. It is needful, therefore, to 
say, that generally, that step commences at the 
closet. Prayer is the strong hold to which the 
young Christian generally resorts. In doubts 
and difficulties, a throne of grace is his refuge. 
If the " devouring lion" roar, thither the lamb 
will flee, and house itself in the bosom of its 
shepherd. If the world entice, and for a mo- 
ment soil his purity, thither he repairs, and the 
stain is washed out in the blood of Jesus. If 
the path of duty be not obvious, if perplexity 
attend his course, at a throne of grace there is 
light and. direction. Henee it will be an im« 



44 ADYICK TO A 

portant advantage to your enemies, if they can 
draw you from this palladium, this strong tower 
of defence. Keep alive, then, I beseech you, 
to the first symptom of declension in prayer. 
Prayer is a difficult, often an arduous work ; 
but it is the life and soul of a Christian. It is 
not only his incumbent duty, but bis most pre- 
cious privilege. 

Now it will be the aim of the tempter, to 
withdraw you from being " instant in prayer.' 
He knows what a powerful weapon it is ; and, 
therefore, he will endeavour to wrest it out of 
your hands. He will represent it as an irksome 
duty. He will suggest that fewer and shorter 
prayers will answer. He will interpose obsta- 
cles between you and your closet. He will di- 
vert your attention while there, and then taunt 
you with your coldness and your folly. He 
will say that your prayers are hypocritical — in- 
sincere — an abomination to God. He will 
suggest, that now, you are not in a good 
frame — advise you to put it off until you feel 
in a better. Thus will he try every art, and 
use every machination to draw you from this 
refuge of your soul. But, "get thee behind 
me, Satan," must be your reply to all such 
suggestions. You must cling closer to the 



TOUNO CHKZ8TIAN. W 

"boras of the altar." You must "bind tbe 
sacrifice with cords," if you cannot keep it 
there. You must give yourself to prayer, and 
to the word of God. Like the yestals, you 
must live at the altar. 



46 ADVICE TO A 

LETTER IV. 

I FEEL constrained, my young friend, to add 
something more on the subject of prayer. This 
duty, in my view, is of such importance as to 
warrant a few more remarks ; although I do 
not intend enlarging on a subject upon which 
so much, and such excellent things have been 
written. 

You were taught, by your pious parents, to 
utter a form of prnyer, as soon as your infant 
mind could comprehend, and your infant tongue 
enunciate a sentence. In looking back upon 
these juvenile devotions, you doubtless see 
wherein they were deficient. Your ideas of 
the Being to whom they were addressed, were 
confused and inadequate. You could not then 
comprehend the necessity of a Mediator ; for 
as yet you had not discovered the evil of sin, 
and the wrath of God, as revealed against it. 
You had too deep a sense of obligation, to 
neglect prayer entirely ; but of the real nature 
and efficacy of prayer, you had little concep- 
tion. To your mind, prayer was a form of 
words to be repeated at stated intervals. When 



¥017NO CHRISTIAN. 47 

thus repeated, the obligatibR was discharged. 
This was probably all you knew about prayer. 

But shall parents omit to inculcate this duty 
on their children, because they cannot compre- 
hend the nature of it ? Certainly not. How 
can they tell but that when they have taught 
the little prattler to compose himself to rest, 
with his familiar and simple petitions, the 
Spirit of God may enlighten the child into the 
spiritual import of his prayer, and make it a 
means of leading him to more enlarged peti- 
tions^ offered up " in spirit and in truth." No 
person can estimate the advantages of early 
imbuing the youthful mind with a sense of its 
obligations to God. Such instructions should 
commence with the first dawn of intellect; 
and sure I am, that in subsequent life, the sub- 
ject of them will generally be the better and 
the happier. 

To illustrate this, I will recur again to my 
own case. I was taught by one of the best of 
mothers, never to close my eyes without re- 
peating my prayers. This I conscientiously 
adhered to, until about thirteen or fourteen 
years of age, when I began gradually to omit 
them. Whether I felt that they were too child- 
ish, or whether, as is most probable, my con- 



48 Apricm to ▲ 

science was becoming seared in the down4iiU 
course of iniquity, I cannot now remember. 
But at all events, my prayers were no longer 
offered ; and I went to sleep and r^Mte up like 
a brute. With the omission of these prayers, 
commenced a retrograde movement in morslS) 
until I hung over the abyss of ruin, ripe for 
the judgments of God. And what do you sup> 
pose occurred first, to rouse me from the fatal 
slumbers of death ? As I was retiring one night, 
the recollection of my former punctilious at- 
tention to prayer, rushed upon my mind. I 
paused. " What," said I to myself^ " am I go- 
ing to lie down without one thought of God, 
or offering one prayer for the safety of my 
soul ? Did I not once repeat my prayers ; and 
at a time too when I was far less guUty than 
now? Why have I omitted them so long? 
Suppose I should die this night, where then 
would my soul be ?" With such reflections I 
became impressed; and although I did not 
kneel that night, yet in a recumbent posture, I 
began again to repeat my juvenile devotions. 
I was nearly seventeen years of age when I 
resumed them. I had almost forgotten them. 
A few days and nights rolled away, and con- 
victions grew heavier on my soul. I thought 



TOUNG CHRISTIAN. 40 

8 repetition of these forms was not enough* 
My soul began to sink in the deep waters; 
and a few more days brought me on my knees 
at the bed-side, with the prayer of the publi- 
can : " God be merciful to me a sinner." 

Thus, my young friend, were my mother's 
early instructions, among the means, under 
God, of rescuing me from ruin, temporal and 
eternal. Thus it is ' evident, that the sooner 
children are taught to pray, the better ; and no 
assiduity can be too great, to impress on them 
the obligation and the necessity of prayer. 

Still I believe, that the Christian only, prays 
the acceptable prayer. Until the spirit of (rod . 
convince of sin, the soul will not see its odi- 
ousness, nor pray for its removal. The dan- 
ger to which it is exposed here and hereafter, 
it may see ; and it may deprecate the punish* 
ment to which it is subjected ; but- it is only 
when the soul is renewed in the image of God, 
that '* sin appears exceeding sinful," and that 
the effectual fervent prayer for sanctification 
is offered. 

If you are a Christian, my young friend, the 
throne of grace is yours. Your Father is seated 
on it. Your Saviour has sprinkled it with his 
Uood The Holy Spirit draws you sweetly 

5 



60 ADVICE TO A 

to kneel before it; and the promise, when 
there, is, " open your mouth wide, and I will fill 
it^" What an honour thus to approach the 
King of kings ! Were we to have audience 
with an earthly monarch, we should deem it an 
era in our history, and boast of it through life. 
But you, and I, and others, may have audi- 
ence with the King of the universe. Nay, we 
have liberty to approach Him at any time, aiid 
under all circumstances. Have we wants, He 
can supply them. Are we in trouble, He can 
extricate us. Do afflictions press our souls, He 
can mitigate and remove them. Does sin pol- 
lute our joys, with Him is the fountain of clean- 
sing. Does Satan vex our souls, He invites us 
to his arms as our refuge. All relief and every 
blessing is with God. 

There is nothing which so elevates a charac- 
ter, and especially a female character, as deep, 
and intimate communion with God. She seems 
then to be allied to angelic natures. A sort of 
mellow radiance is poured into her character, 
as if some particles of heaven's glory had 
been let fall uponiier. She moves in a higher 
sphere than the generality of her sex. She is 
another being than those idle, sickly daughters 
of pleaMure, who waste their lives in dreaming 



Y0VN6 CHRISTIAN. 51 

fanciful yisions of happiness, sporting awliile 
amid life's tumultuous joys, and then sinking 
unblessed into a wretched eternity. She con- 
Terses with God. At a throne of grace, she 
acquires a benevolence, a dignity, a humility, 
which throw around her an attractive lustre, 
put sweetness into every action and expression, 
make her contented in every condition of life, 
patient under every affliction, faithful in the 
discharge of every duty, and which even grace 
her dying hours, and make her " death-bed pri- 
vileged beyond the common walks of life." 



i9 ADTICS TO A 

LETTER V. 

There are three inquiries, my young firien^ 
respecting prayer, which every conscientious 
Christian will be likely to institute. How ought 
I to pray, when, or at what times, and for what 
things'? These are important inquiries. A fuU 
and satisfactory answer, I feel myself unabk 
to give. I shiall, in my desultory way, barely 
touch upon each. 

Those who worship God, are bound to •* wor- 
ship him in spirit and in truth." In spirit, as 
opposed to the mere external ceremonies. The 
Jews and the Samaritans, at the time our Lord 
uttered the prediction just alluded to, were re- 
posing an unfounded confidence in the mere 
forms and ceremonies of their religion ; while 
in the emphatic language of inspiration, their 
" hearts were far from God." 

We must pray then with the Spirit. The 
heart must be in the work, or it will be insin- 
cere and ineffectual. The Quakers, you know, 
reject all external forms. They are on one ex- > 
treme. The Jews and Catholics, having a mul- 
titude of forms, are on the other. I would not 
insinuate, that among Quakers and Catholics, 



YOUNe CHRISTIAN. 63 

there are no sincere worshippers ; fer from it. I 
believe there are many devout Christians among 
both. I am persuaded for my own part, that some 
attention to form and circumstance is an impor- 
tant auxiliary to us poor weak mortals, in our 
attempts to worship God. In my own experience 
I have found the benefit of it. For example ; 
when I have a particular room allotted to my 
devotions — a certain place in that room, where 
I am accustomed to kneel — ^a degree of obscu- 
rity shed over the place by the exclusion of too 
great a glare of light ; all these circumstances 
are a help to me, by the power of mental asso- 
ciation. There is nature in this : and God per- 
mits us to have recourse to every lawful auxi- 
liary in worshipping him. The great point is, 
to worship " in spirit and in truth." 

True worship is distinguished from false, in- 
asmuch as the one is scriptural, but the other is 
not. A true worshipper views the character of 
God as it is delineated in the Bible. The om- 
niscience, omnipresence, holiness, justice, good- 
ness, and truth, of God, are attributes of delight- 
ful contemplation; and centering in one eternal, 
unchangeable, and incomprehensible Spirit, 
they excite his reverence, his confidence^ his 
humility, and his love. He looks into his Bible 



54 ADVICE TO 'k 

to learn the character of God; and, as there 
found, worships him in spirit and in truth. 

But can a guilty creature, who has violated 
every obligation he is under to his Creator, ap- 
proach him without the intervention of a Me- 
diator ? I bring this question home to myself^ 
and inquire, would I dare, as a suppliant, to ap- 
proach my God and my Creator, in all my im- 
covered, aggravated guilt? This, my young 
friend, is the hinge of salvation. The Socinian 
will tell me, certainly you may. But my own 
conscience would give a different terdict. I 
see nought in my life but sin ; sin of the most 
aggravated kind : I repeat these sins, and con- 
fess them ; and again repeat them. Now, I say, 
is God holy ? Is He opposed to sin ? Then 
must I fall under His wrath and curse. Then 
how can I expect to escape His indignation ? 
He is merciful, says the Socinian. True, he is 
merciful ; but is not that mercy exercised in a 
peculiar way ? Is it indiscriminate, uncondi- 
tional mercy ? Must not something be done to 
show God's abhorrence of my sins ? Must not 
some sacrifice be made ? Now I am brought 
to the delightful, soul-cheering feature of the 
Gospel : '*God in ChrisU reconciling the world 
unto Himself, not imputing their trespasses 



TOVNe CHRISTIAN. 55 

toito them/' *'He so lored the world, that he 
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever be- 
lieveth in Him should not perish, but have ever* 
lasting life/' " He was wounded for our trans- 
gressions/' On this foundation, my soul finds 
firm footing, and I rest secure in the promise 
of eternal life. Whosoever cometh unto the 
Father, therefore, must come through Christ ; 
and so coming, shall not be cast out. 

All acceptable prayer, is rendered so, by the 
merits and intercession of the Divine Saviour. 
He is our merciful and faithM High Priest. 
His own blood was shed for the remission of 
our sins : and the apostle says, '4f any man sin, 
we have an adv^ocate with the Father, Jesus 
Christ the righteous.'* When you pray, there- 
fore, never lose sight of the Mediator. " His 
name is like ointment poured forth." The sin- 
ner's friend, he pleads the sinner's cause. He 
knows your infirmities, your temptations, and 
your trials, and is ever ready to afford you 
relief. 

The doctrine -of the Trinity is, 1 know, of- 
fensive to many, who are governed more by 
eamal reason, than by scripture; but to me, if 
I am not deceived, it is one of the most com- 
forting, cheering, and elevating truths of the 



/ 



&6 ADVICE TO A 

Bible. I see the persons of the Godhead har- 
moniouslj engaged in my deliverance. In 
prayer, the Spirit seems to lift my lagging af- 
fections, and to carry them upward, pouring 
light into the dark chambers of the mind. Jesus, 
the Mediator, pleads my cause, even when my 
own tongue is dumb with grief, and my soul 
overwhelmed with conscious guilt. Then the 
throne of grace is precious, and the soul is re- 
plenished as with marrow and fatness. 

I pity those whose scepticism has blotted out 
the glory of our Immanuel. Their religion is 
cold. It warms not the heart ; it pacifies not 
the conscience ; it prompts to few acts of self- 
denial ; it almost obliterates the line between 
•the righteous and the wicked ; and it makes re- 
tribution a farce. After all, it is only a substi- 
tute, and a very poor one, for the glorious Gos- 
pel of the Son of God. 

Having been inadvertently led, by the sub- 
ject, to these remarks, I must now return. In 
prayer, we must be earnest — ^we must be sin- 
cere — ^we must have faith in the promises. The 
*• fervent prayer availeth much." " Jacob wres- 
tled ;" what a strong expression ! Jesus, in 
prayer, sweat drops of blood. Paul prayed 
with tears. Hannah wept at the altar. All these 



exsmples, and numerous others^ such as the 
widow pleading with the anjust judge, show the 
necessity of earnestness in prayer. This X 
know IS often difficult. You will come to the 
mereynseat, with a cold heart and wandering^ 
thoughts ; and how at such times can you be 
fervent ? " The Spirit helpeth our infirmities,"" 
is the only reply I can offer. And this is suf-- 
fieient» In such a frame of mind, there is the 
greater need of earnestness. Tarry not until 
your thoughts take a more elevated and spirit- 
ual tone. I have always found, that the best 
way of proceeding in such a case, was to apply 
immediately to a throne of grace. There wres- 
tle ; renew the supplication, and still renew it ; 
imtil^ as is often the case, the fire of heaven 
descends, and the sacrifice is enkindled. The 
Lord give you the i^pirit and the success of the 
patriarch Jacob 



68 ADTICE TO ▲ 

LETTER VI. 

Sincerity, my dear young friend, is an es- 
sential ingredient in prayer. Without it, no 
prayer can be acceptable. Indeed, if we are 
insincere, we> cannot be said to pray. A mere 
form of words, is not prayer. 

Prayer, is the desire of the heart for some- 
thing which we judge to be necessary or bene- 
ficial. It implies a knowledge of our wants, 
and an urgent wish to have them supplied. If, 
therefore, the heart be roving after one object, 
while the lips are employed in asking for an- 
other, we are insincere and unacceptable wor* 
shippers. Such conduct is an insult to our 
Creator — a game of deception on ourselves. 
Such were the petitions at which God, in old 
times, declared himself indignant; when his 
professing people drew '' nigh unto Him with 
their mouth, and honoured Him with their lips, 
while their heart was far from Him." Such 
was the religion of the Scribes and Pharisees ; 
fair and beautiful without, but within, all rot* 
tenness and corruption. 

Reflect a moment ere you bend the knee at 
the throne of grace. I am not now about to 



YOUNG CHRISTIAN. 59 

approach an earthly monarchy who, though sur- 
rounded with the pomp and circumstance of 
royalty, is but a worm of the dust like myself; 
but I am to have audience with the King of 
kings — the Lord of the whole earth. I am 
about to come into the presence, and to utter 
the name of Him, at whose fiat all creation 
sprang into existence. Were I in the presence 
of a finite being, I might perhaps conceal my 
feelings under a form of words. I might utter 
one thing and mean another. But can I thus 
practice deception with God? Are not all 
things " naked, and opened unto the eyes of 
Him, with whom we ha ve"to do?" Does not 
He search the hearts of the children of men ? 
Will he be satisfied with any thing but " truth 
in the inward parts ?" " If I regard iniquity in 
my heart," says the sweet singer of Israel, 
"the Lord will not hear me." And again, in 
his bold and beautiful interrogatories: "He 
that formed the eye, shall He not see ? He 
that created the ear, shall He not hear ?" 

Let such be your meditation, when you are 
about to kneel at the throne of grace. Not 
that I would array the character of God in ter- 
rors to your mind, or send you to tremble like 
a slave »t his feet. No, he is a God of love. 



'60 ADTICi: TO X 

of compassioni of long forbearance; more be- 
neficent and tender than the kindest earthly pa- 
rent. You may go to Him, and you nrast so 
go, in the confiding simplicity of a child and a 
favourite. When you take to Him the name 
of Christ your Mediator, you take, so to speak, 
a passport into bis very bosom. You may un- 
burden your whole heart; tell Him things which 
you could confide to no mortal ear ; m^ke con- 
fession of sins, which you dare only whisper 
in your closet; and in the ingenuous frmakness 
of faith and penitence, humbly cast yourself on 
his all-supporting arm. He is your corenant 
God ; and, when alone with Him, you may in- 
dulge even a holy familiarity. 

Reflect on your own character, as w^ll as 
on that of the Being whom you address ; the 
thought of both will humble you in the dust, 
^d prepare you, in your approach to the mer- 
cy^seat, to appreciate the all-glorious, divine, 
«nd compassionate Mediator. Be careM to 
inquire into your wants. Say within yourself, 
why have I now retired ? What errand have I 
at the throne I what sins to confess, what mer- 
cies to acknowledge, what wants to be suppli- 
ed? For whom, beside myself, should I pray ? 
whilst temptations appear to be mo»t foFBuda* 



YOUNG CHRISTIAN. 01« 

ble? Let me not cover one sin, nor keep back 
one confession. Let me not ask for holiness, 
if I would retain a single lust ; if I am not re- 
solved to crucify all. Let me not ask for a re- 
vival of religion, if I do not secretly and sin- 
cerely wish for it "Search me, O God, and 
know my heart ; and see if there be any wicked 
way in me, and lead me in the way everlast- 
ing ;" should ever be your wish and your peti- 
tion. Let your sincerity be such, that you can 
ever thus appeal to the heart-searching God. 
Nothing is so well calculated to foster the spi- 
rit of devotion, as to be enabled to say with 
Peter^ "thou knowest;" to make the familiar 
appeal, although I cannot, by reason of infirmi- 
ty, express the number and aggravation of my 
sins, yet, oh Lord, "thou knowest," I lament 
them, and sincerely desire their removal ; al- 
though my words fail in expressing my grati- 
tude, yet " thou knowest," my heart is full ; al- 
though I cannot give expression to my feelings 
in behalf of Zion, yet " thou knowest," I love 
her prosperity, and earnestly desire her in- 
crease and glory. " Thou knowest," is a sweet 
expression in the ears of a prayer-hearing God. 
It gives- the soul a confidence and an earnest- 
iiesf^ when pleading for itself» or for others* 

9 



62 ADVICE TO A 

You will find, my young friend, strong tempt- 
ations to»be superficial and hurried in your 
prayers. Your enemies will suggest some en- 
gagements which will preclude or cut short 
your supplications. They will insinuate, that all 
this meditation is unnecessary. If in these at- 
tacks they prevail, you will immediately per- 
ceive an insincerity in your prayers. You will 
find yourself, at times, wishing the prayer was 
over ; and uttering it, rather as a sedative to 
conscience, than as the supreme delight of 
your soul. You will then, indeed, come like a 
slave to the altar ; and, having performed to 
conscience, as to an unrelenting tyrant, the ac- 
customed task, you will be glad of a speedy 
relief. You may even find yourself, at times, 
uttering words and forms, of the meaning of 
which, while your heart is wandering on for- 
bidden objects, you are totally unconscious. 
This is sinful in the extreme. 

May you never arrive at this melancholy 
pitch of insult, and of mockery ! 

Yield not, dear young fnend, to the power 
of the tempter. Give him no advantage over 
you ; dispute every inch of ground ; instead of 
retreating, advance ; instead of relaxing, brace 
anew your nerves for the conflict. Take the 



YOUNG CHRISTIAN. 63 

whole armour of God. Look upward for grace 
and strength to wield it. March forward to the 
'* wicket gate," and to the glory that lies he- 
yond. Keep your eye ^steadily on the Captain, 
of your salvation. Where His hanners wave, 
be you found, though it be in the thickest of the 
fight ; and soon, yes soon, your trials wiU be 
over ; your victory will be won ; and you will 
have nought to do, but to lay aside your wea* 
pons, and sing the note of eternal triumph. 



64 ADVICE TO A 



LETTER VII. 



In my last, I recommended earnestness and 
sincerity, as necessary to acceptable prayer. 
The third particular which I mentioned was, 
faith in the prbitiises. 

Does not your Bible, my young friend, insist 
upon this ? Does it not declare, that he who 
Cometh to God, " must believe that he is, and 
that he is the rewarder of them that diligently 
seek him ?" Does it not compare to the fluc- 
tuation of the restless wave, that prayer which 
is offered ^thout faith ? And does it not assert, 
that, without faith, it is impossible to please 
Him ? But what is meant by faith in the pro- 
mises, methinks I hear you say. How shall I 
know, when I incorporate this faith in my pe- 
tition ? It is not necessary, my young friend, 
that you know it ; but, it is necessary, and even 
indispensable, that you have it. 

There is afloat, a spurious and vain-confident 
feeling, that mistakes presumption for faith. 
This sometimes appears in communities, which 
are visited by the special influences of the 
Holy Spirit. Ignorant and proud enthusiasts* 
take advantage of excited feelings, and sow 



YOXJNG CHRISTIAN. 66 

ihe tares of error, while the servant of Jesus is 
scattering the seeds of truth. Some have de- 
clared, that, in praying for a blessing, we 
had only to believe that it would be granted, 
and success was certain. In praying for an in- 
dividual, all we had to do was- to be certain in 
our own minds, that the individual would be 
converted, and it would be so. When I look 
at the spirit which such people evince, and find 
little of the meekness and humility of the gos- 
pel, I view it as presumptive evidence against 
their characters, and their opinions. When Da- 
vid prayed for the life of his child, though with 
deep humility and earnestness, it was not spa- 
red. When Paul thrice besought the Lord for 
the removal of a grievous afHiction, the prayer 
was heard, and answered on the soul ; but not 
as he had expected, on the body. The prayer of 
faith is never lost. It is invariably answered. 
But to assert that it will be answered in the 
particular way, or for the particular thing which 
we have expected, is both anti-scriptural and 
presumptuous. Here lies th^ error of these 
enthusiasts. One step farther would make them 
claim inspiration. 

When we come to the throne of grace, we 
come, not to dictate, but to supplicate. ^ God, 



66 ADVICE TO A 

in his word, has given us a warrant to pray for 
all spiritual, and many temporal favours. In 
praying for the former, we may, and must, be 
importunate and persevering until death. In 
respect to the latter, we must be submissive ; 
and ever add, if it will be for thy glory, and the 
interests of my soul. When you pray, there- 
fore, for spiritual blessings, you know that your 
prayer is according to the will of God. If it be 
sincere, and presented with an exclusive refe- 
rence to the mediation of Christ, it will, it 
must be answered. I do not say, that the very 
things you ask, and in the precise way and 
time in which you look for them, will be re- 
ceived. Not at all. But still I say your prayer 
will be answered. We are short-sighted crea- 
tures. We often suppose that we know what 
is best for us, and would fain have, in our own 
hands, the management of our spiritual and 
temporal affairs. But, recollect the " ring," 
It is not for us to keep it. It is in the hands 
of God. There only, is it safe. There, no foe 
can reach it, and no fears need be entertained 
of its security. 

Recollect, then, that it is yours to believe. 
It is God's to plan and to execute. Confidence 
in God's veracity, and wisdom, and goodness. 



YOUNO CHRISTIAN. 07 

is the main ingredient in this prayer of f- •♦,. 
Say in the fullness of your confidence^ ' piead 
for this thing, O God. Although * may not 
be given hy Thee in a manner ...A at a time, 
which I expect, still I plead thy promise ; and 
I know Thou art faithful to hear and answer 
prayer. 

Permit me to recur again to my own experi- 
ence, and I am not alone in this (experience. 
Knowing that I was in a backslidden state, and 
feeling that for months there had been a me- 
lancholy distance between God and my soul, I 
gave myself to prayer. I entreated God to re- 
claim me, to give me repentance, and a more 
entire consecration of soul and body to his ser- 
vice. I knew that these wer« blessings which 
'were according to the will of God, and I knew 
that he had promised in his word, to answer 
prayer for such blessings. With the hope that 
I entertained of being in covenant with him, 
how could I doubt that he would answer the 
prayer for sanctification? But I verily suppo- 
sed, that it would be by a direct influence of 
the Spirit on the heart. I expected that, in 
some favoured moment, perhaps while I was 
then prajring, God would send down a holy in- 
fluencCf irradiate the darkened mind, melt the 



68 ADVICE TO A 

hard heart, purify the sordid affections, and ar- 
rest and reclaim the wanderer. This he might 
have done. This he sometimes does in the 
case of others ; hut it was not thus he answer^- 
ed my prayer. 

When that season of earnest supplication 
had passed away, and was almost forgotten, he 
stretched me upon a hed of affliction, and filled 
my mind with darkness, and my body with tor- 
turing pains. Every expedient was tried to al- 
leviate, but the waves and the billows rolled 
deeper and darker. Why is it, I was then led 
to inquire, that God's hand is pressed so heavily 
upon me? Look back, my soul, ujpon thy pride, 
thy worldly-mindedness, thy ambition, thy sen- 
suality, thy neglect of duty. Do not these com- 
pose the cloud that envelopes thee ? are they 
not the pains that rack thee ? Hast thou not 
forsaken "the fountain of living waters?" 
Then, like the prodigal's, my eyes were filled 
with penitential tears ; and I said, God is answer- 
ing my prayer for humility, for spirituality, for 
meekness, for more entire devotedness. 

Happy is that soul who can say : Oh Lord, 
sanctify me, if it be by fire. Sanctify me, eyen 
if it be through the deep waters of afi^iction. 

I cite this example to show, that our prayers 



YOUNG CHRISTIAN. 



must be offered, and offered in confidence. But 
the If ay and the time of their being answered, 
it is not for us to dictate. We may take any 
promise in the word of God, and with the con- 
fidence of childreii go to Him, and say^ our 
Father, hast thou hot said thus, and dost thou 
not say this to me ? Let me then remind thee, 
O thou covenant-keeping God, of these am- 
ple promises, and let me beseech thee to fulfil 
them all in thy servant ; and in thine own way 
let them be verified in my complete salvation I 



W ADVICE TO A 



LETTER VIII. 



It was not my intention to extend my re- 
marks to so great a length on the nature of 
prayer ; but I have been insensibly led along, 
by my anxiety to impress upon your mind the 
importance of the subject. By personal ex- 
perience, I have, I trust, learned its value. I 
have been able to trace every spiritual declen- 
sion to the closfet. When the enemies of my 
soul have triumphed, I could distinctly see that 
my armour had not been furbished by prayer. 
"When the sweet serenity of conscious forgive- 
ness, a calm sense of Divine favour has depart- 
ed, and the restless tumult of passion hae suc- 
ceeded, the sweet spirit, I knew full well, had 
not, with fervency, been wooed to my bosom. 

As well might we expect vegetation to spring 
from the earth without the sunshine, or the 
dew, as the Christian to unfold his graces, and 
advance in his course, without patient, perse- 
vering, and ardent prayer. The throne of 
grace must be your home, your dearest, hap- 
piest home. If unavoidably detained from your 
accustomed visits to the sweet retreat, O, 
may you feel, like the dove that fluttered anx- 



TOUNG CHl^ISTIAK. 71 

ioiuly around the ark, that, on earth, there is 
nought that is stable, on which to rest your 
weary foot. And, when you again find the 
consecrated spot, may your tears of joy, min- 
gle with those of penitence, as you throw your- 
self anew into the arms of your Father and 
your Friend. 

In my last, I spoke of praying with faith in 
the promises ; so that I have now glanced at 
the three important particulars, necessary in 
acceptable prayer. 

The second inquiry, for what you should 
pray, needs, it appears to me, but little consi- 
deration, if you have been taught of the Spirit* 
The Apostle says, "we know not what we 
should pray for as we ought," but " the Spirit 
lielpeth our infirmities." It would not, there- 
fore, become me, to enumerate the particulars 
which should form the subject matter o/ your 
prayers. If the holy Spirit has wrought in 
your soul a deep conviction of yout depravity, 
you wUl wrestle with God far its removaL 
*' Create in me a clean heart, O God, and re- 
new a right spirit within me." If you are sud- 
denly betrayed into sin, and your conscience 
feel the heavy load, you will exclaim, "O 
Lordt pardon mine iniquiiy, for it is great" If 



TS APVICB TO A 

joxxr heart be nhiggish. in duty, you wiU, oi 
course, and from necessity, pray, *^ quicken me, 
O Lord, and I will run in the ways of thy 
commandments/* If you loye the JLingdom of 
Christ, you will pray earnestly, and with faith, 
for its coming. If you feel for the perishing 
condition of sinners, you will commend them, 
with tears, to thfe mercy of your God. 

But your prayers will not be thus general. li 
you ever, as I trust you will, become a noble 
and devoted Christian ; if you mean to put 
your feet in the warm tracks of a Newell or a 
Huntington, your prayers will often be pro- 
tracted and particular. You wiU pray for bless- 
ings on your own soul, on your parents, on 
your sisters, on your neighbourhood, on the 
world. Your ardent mind, steeped in benevo- 
lence, will hold a feimiliar and holy intercourse 
with your Father in heaVen. Not an anxiety 
will you feel, but you will communicate it ; not 
a reasonabh wish will you indulge, but you 
will express it> not a known duty will you dis- 
cover, but you will prtiy for grace to performi 
it. To. enter into further particulars, would 
be unnecessary. The Christian has every day 
aew ains to confesa, new duties to perforiOf 



\aUN)0 OBR18TIAN. ^ 

nxfw temptations to encouitter; sequiiiiig, «f 
course, aew modifications of prayer and piaise. 
But one subject, let me entreat you never ^to 
forget It is the rising glory of ourlmmanuePdi 
^kingdom. Say, with David, or rather mth 
those weeping captires who were mingling 
their tears with the waters of Babylon : "If I 
forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand 
forget her cunning ; if vl do not remember theei 
let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; 
if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy." 
You live in a day of wonders. Your being, 
perhaps, has opened in the millennial^mom. It 
is possible you may live to see <rts full*orbed 
splendours. O, then, in e^Ty prayer, re- 
member Zion; remember <he heathen who sit 
in the valley and sha^fow of spiritual death. 
Take an enlarged rfew of this subject; read 
the promises wKch secure to our Redeettier 
the whole habi^hle globe ; peruse them until 
your soul is fired with the prosped;.. Then go 
to the mercy-seat, and plead for their fulfiko«n(. 
Go, bear on your heart a linking world. :I^t 
your whole soul be drawn>fqrth on this glori- 
ous subject. If it be not your lot to carry lihe 
glad tidings to the benighted, sustain, by your 
prayers, the hands and the hearts "of lilOi^f 

7 



T4 ADVXCS TO ▲ 

whose are the privilege and the glory. Say nott 
I am a poor insignificant creature ; what will 
my prayers ayiedl? Ah! ifevery Christian were 
thus to reason, what would become of our 
Zion ? Have you an interest at the throne of 
grace in your own behalf? do you hope so ? 
and, believing so, do you act accordingly? then 
have you also an interest there in behalf of a 
perishing world. That interest you must use. 
By all the prospective glories of the Messiah, 
1 beseech you to use it. By all the deep and 
inconceivable miseries of the heathen ; by the 
probability of their condemnation ; and by the 
possibility of their deliverance, I conjure you 
to use it. Whatever you forget, forget not the 
millions who are }»erishing for lack of vision. 
Forget not the self-denied missionary who has 
gone to relieve them ; forget not the societies 
which are pledged to this Loly enterprise. T he 
day is coming, when this subject will hold a 
.prominence in our supplications; when the 
prayer, " Thy kingdom come," will come gush- 
ing from the heart, and be reiterated with an 
earnestness which shall indicate its near ap- 
proach, and be prophetic of its universality. 

You see from my protracted remarks on this 
tttbjacti that I consider prayer the liie and soul 



T01TN6 CttRISTtAN. 95 

of the Christian. To the young Christian, I 
cannot too urgently press its importance. 
Prayer is the key of heaven. O, what has it 
ndt done ? By it, Elijah shut up the skies, and 
no dew nor rain descended on the guilty land. 
By it, Jacob placed a ladder between heayen 
and earth, and formed a communication for 
angels. By it, Daniel shut up the mouths of 
ferocious lions ; Sampson shook the pillars of 
Philistia's temple ; and Peter was delivered 
from prison. Prayer is a mighty weapon in 
the hands of the weakest. Use it then ; never, 
O, never, yield up this weapon. 

In my next, I shall offer a few remarks on 
the third" question, when should we pray ? 



W JkiDrwm TO A 

LETTER IX. 

I sHAtL make but a few additional obsenra- 
tioDS, my young firiend, on the subject of prayer 9 
altfaought I eonfesa, my pen would pursue the 
delightfiiil theme, through many pages more. 

The apostle commands us to '^ pray without 
oeasing/' Are we by this to understand, that 
every moment of our time is to be spent in 
prayer ? This, undoubtedly, is not his meaning. 
The import of the exhortation is, omit not thig 
important duty; be regular and punctual in 
yem* daily visits to the altar; and see to it that 
you continuaiHy preserve a prayerful frame of 
spirit. No person can plead for a more strict 
interpretation of the passage, than this. It im- 
plies all that the apostle meant to inculcate " 
and, be assured, that if you persevere in such 
a course, you will not subject yourself to the 
charge of '^casting off fear, and restraining 
prayer before God." 

The seasons of prayer are stated and occa- 
sional, ordinary and extraordinary. No Chris- 
tian can maintain a close walk with God ; none 
can keep alive the hallowed fire of the soul, 
without daily kindling it afresh at the altar. 



TOVKO CHRISTIAN. 77 

None can grow in knowledge and holiness, 
without stated and regular seasons of prayer. 
*' Give us this day our daily bread," implies as 
much the aliment of the soul, as the nourish- 
ment of the body. The one can no more live 
in health and vigour, without prayer, than the 
other without food. 

It is usual to recon^mend the morning and 
the evening, as the most suitable seasons for 
prayer. In this, I fully concur. There appears 
to be si^mething peculiarly appropriate, in thia 
arrangement of duty. 

When the darkness has passed, and &e light 
has again dawned upon the earth ; when we 
rise from our couch, and find our faculties in- 
vigorated by the^ restoring slumbers of the 
night ; when we view the beauties o{ the morn- 
ing landscape, listen to the melody of birds, 
and feel the balmy breath of nature, playing 
coolly and sweetly around us ; when praise 
and thanksgiving to God, seem inscribed upon 
every feature of a revived world : how can wc 
be silent ! how withhold the burst of rapturous 
adoration ! These scenes, I am aware, awaken 
no such feelings in the hearts of multitudes. 
They gaze on them, it is true ; but they re- 
cognize not the hand that formed them. They 



78 ADVICS TO A 

feel no thrill of gratitude, nor offer one note 
of praise. Not so with the Christian. To him 
they convey a lesson, through the eye, to the 
soul ; and lead him ^'from nature up to nature's 
God." 

How proper, then, my young friend, is the 
morning, for secret converse with your God I 
It is your privilege to reside in the country. 
You live amid nature's magnificence. The un 
obstructed arch of heaven is your canopy. For 
your eye, the forest waves, the meadows smile, 
the garden unfolds its beauties, and spring and 
summer vie in their efforts to regale yom 
senses. You are not crowded into a noisy and 
profligate city, and shut out from almost every 
thing that is pleasant to the eye, and calming 
to the soul. No, you dwell, as it were, with 
God, and among his glorious works. Let your 
first hours, Iherefore, be his. Let not sloth 
hail you to your couch, when all nature invites 
yovL to awake and join the general concert of 
praise. " Awake, psaltery and harp," must be 
your language ; " I, myself, will awake early." 
Mary found her way to the sepulchre, «re the 
day dawned; nor wept at that sepulchre in vain* 

Early devotions are all-important. ITiey are 
to, bedaYis^ they afford time to attend, without 



distraction, to the seeulat dntieB of the moni'* 
ing. As the day breaks, summon your recoil 
leetioBs, and rise with the rising light Gire 
your first hours to God. Pour out your soul 
before him in gratitude for nocturnal blessings, 
and throw 3rourself on his protection for the 
day. Be assured, this early application to his 
throne, will distil upon the soul, a peace and a 
serenity, that shall not depart ; but shall gild 
every look and action, and make the day glide 
onward smoothly and happily. You will thus 
allow yourself time, and not be hurried in yotir 
prayers. You will also be free from interrup- 
tions, and the fear of them. This is all^mpor- 
•tant to a right discharge of sacred duties. It 
4s indispensable that the mind should be free 
f^om solicitude and cares : and there is no time 
in the day, that will so secure to you that free- 
dom, as the early part of it. 

Arise so early as to allow yourself half an 
hour for the performance of your morning de- 
votions : mere, if your soul desire it. It is 
good to stipulate with yourself for half an hour* 
The devotions of many are insipid, and bur- 
densome, and unacceptable, because they have 
n» definite time allotted for their performance 
Tb/ey snatch a few mcaneDts in the mornings 



so ADTIOB TO A 

and huny through a fonn of prayer ; which, 
though for the time it may pacify the con- 
science, yet, in the end, it accumulates their 
guilt. They do not make a business of prayer. 
This is the great reason why the exercise is a 
burden. Now, avoid this, my young friend, by 
having an early hour, and always occupying 
the full time, in a constant and conscientious 
attention to your devotional duties. You will 
find by experience, that there is a great advan- 
tage in being thus systematic. It will tend 
greatly to elevate your standard of piety, and 
make you, not a lean and desultory, but a con- 
sistent and growing Christian. 

In your evening devotions, I should advise 
you to occupy, as a general rule, as much time 
as in the morning. I know that circumstances 
must be regarded ; but I would endeavour to 
secure at least half an hour in the evening. 
Let this hour not be the last before retiring ; 
because, generally, the body is too much wea- 
ried, and the mind, by S3rmpathy, too drowsy, 
to make devotion any thing but a task and a 
burden. Let it be early in the evening. If the 
hour of sunset is most convenient, let it be then. 
This was the time at which the patriarch Isaac 
was engaged iii meditation and prayer, and it 



yOUN« CKRIftTIAN. 81 

certainly is a yeiy appropriate and delightful 
hour. 

How proper and pleasant is it to sit down 
at eyeninff. and review the mercies of the d^y, 
caUim the thoughts from districting oecupa- 
tions, and then pour the whole soul into the 
tftosoia of God* How delightful to seek our 
pillow, when, having hathed anew in the foun- 
tain of InunanueFs blood, we feel a conscious- 
ness of pardon, and a hope full of immortali- 
ty I Our slumbers then are sweet and refresh* 
ijBig. No visions of <;uilt, no fearful anticipa- 
tions, distort the uncoik^cious muscles, or heave 
the troubled boBom* These are the tortures of 
guilty impenitence. They are the scourges 
of a conscience unpacified by the blood of 
atonement — ^the foreboding/s of that dreadful 
doom that awaits all who continue unreconci* 
Idd to God, by the death of his Son. 

One more letter shall close my remarks on 
this subject 



82 ADVICE TO A 



LETTER X. 



A Christian who aims at an elevated stand- 
ard of piety, will not always be satisfied with 
the morning and evening sacrifice. 

The most eminent Christians hare followed 
the example of David, who, in asserting his 
perseverance in prayer, exclaims, "morning 
and evening, and at noon, will I call upon 
thee." And is this too much ? I am persuaded, 
my young friend, that, to a soul who pants af- 
ter increasing conformity to God, it is not too 
much. Jt may not always be convenient, to 
pray three times a day; but where it is, I pro- 
mise the individual, he will be no loser by the 
exercise. The aliment of the body may be ta- 
ken too often, and in too great quantities, for 
the iKalth of the constitution : but not so that 
of the soul. There is no danger of satiety or 
repletion, here. You may drink, and drink 
again, at the waters of life ; you may banquet, 
and return again and banquet. The soul will 
thrive proportionably. The food, instead of be- 
ing loathed, will have the keener relish, and ad- 
minister increasing nourishment, until you grow 
up to the stature of the perfect, in Christ Jesus. 



TOUNa CHRISTIAN. 88 

A Christian of exalted, piety, will carry a 
prayerful frame of spirit throughout the day. 
He will not make lis stated devotions, the be- 
ginning and the ending of his religion. Such 
is the conduct of the hy3>ocrite, and the formal- 
ist But the Christian imbibes a portion of 
heaven, which he continually carries in his 
countenance, .and exhibits in his deportment. 
Though walking amid the avocations of secu- 
lar life, he still walks with God. As a matter 
of duty, he descends from his elevation, to 
perform his part in the concerns of this sublu- 
nary world; but his soul is not here. His 
higher affections are calmly ascending to God. 
The silent ejaculation, supplies his necessary 
absence from the throne of grace ; and is, if 
you will allow me the comparison, a sort of in- 
formal repast to the soul. 

The most eminent saints have been noted 
for frequent ejaculatory petitions. A temptation 
suddenly shoots across the mind — send upward 
the silent prayer for deliverance. You are 
about entering into dangerous circumstances-— 
look upward for protection. Your, feet have 
just touched the threshold of God's temple — O, 
then breathe upward for his spirit and his prc- 
•eiiee. If your soul be attuned to devotiov^ 



yon iviM live aild breathe «8 in the^lMcfetice of 
God, ttnd travel through this wilderness, ieen* 
ing on the arm of your beloved. 

In addkionto this, I would urge'the duty of 
extraordinary iand special seasons of prayer. I 
find such seasons warranted by the Scriptures, 
and their importance attested hy the expevi« 
ence of the most eminent Saints, in allagee of 
the church. There are lapsee of the soul, which 
can only be counteracted by special and extra* 
ordinary prayer. There aare temptations, which 
at times, so beset and harass the mind, as to 
call for special means. There are afilietivse 
dispensations, which require them. There are 
perplexities as to the path of duty, which they 
only can remove. Hence, if you will note 
the biography of the most eminenUy pious, 
you will find that special seasons of fasting, 
humiliation, and prayer, have been accompa- 
nied with an increase of grace, a deeper ac- 
quaintance with the heart, a more spiritual in<> 
tercourse with God, more glorious views of 
divine truth, and a surer hope of a blessed 'im^* 
mortality. 

I think I can say, without hesitation, that 
the most exalted attamments, have been made 
by eueh means. Sudi eKlraordiiii^ seasom 



tOVNO CHRISTIAN. 85 

of prayer, are peculiarly acceptable to God. It 
was such, accompanied by a sanctifying influ- 
ence, that formed the high character of Brain- 
erd, and of Martyn. 

If you desire their piety, neglect not the 
means by which they attained to it. If you ad- 
mire their character, then imitate their devo- 
tion and self-denial. There is no obstacle, that 
may not be surmounted, to hinder you even 
from outstripping them. The prize is before 
you. The race is pointed out. See, at its 
termination, a crown of glory, beaming in your 
Saviour's hands. Does it not Are your soul ? 
Does it not fill your eye ? Does it not brace 
anew your nerves ? Fix your eye on the mark 
of- the prize of your high calling. Consider all 
tile ground you have passed, as nothing, so long 
as the goal is still at a distance ; so long as you 
come short of perfection in Christ Jesus. 
• But I have one remark, before I dismiss this 
'subject. It is this. Let nothing, if possible, 
hinder you, in the performance of your regular 
devotions, from occupying your allotted season 
of prayer. When the love of God is on the 
wane, and that of the world is waxing stronger, 
a trifling excuse will satisfy the conscience for 
Aeneffleet of this all-important duty. Hay 

8 



86 ADVICE TO ▲ 

such never be your case. Such a jstate is re- 
plete with danger, and often a precursor to a 
melancholy and disgraceful fall. The soul that 
is bent on duty, and to whom prayer is a de- 
lightful privilege, will seldom be hindered from 
its performance. No trifling excuse will be 
heeded; and if necessity for a time bar up the 
sacred enclosure, the heart will sicken at the 
void, which is created by a temporary absence 
from the« hallowed spot. When that necessity 
can be removed, how will the soul leap forward 
to its dearest earthly home 1 It will seem doubly 
sweet, for the temporary hinderance. The soul 
will say, as it lays itself beneath tbe altar, O, 
blessed privilege! How long does it appear 
since I last enjoyed thee ! How delightful to lay 
my head on this dear support, and feel that I am 
again alone with my Redeemer and my friend [ 

Such will be the language of the saint, when 
debarred for a time from the throne of grace. 

Situated as you now are, you are in a mea- 
sure free from the fear of such interruptions. 
But you will soon be ushered into a new sphjere. 
You will soon find yourself surromided by 
companions, to whom you must pay the ordina-* 
ry civilities of life. Then rwill you need this 
advice; nay^ you will need the supporting hand 



TQDN6 CHRISTIAN. 87 

of God, to keep you from dishonouring your 
profession, and forgetting tie solemn vows 
you have recorded. Then if you persevere in 
the course which I have marked out, it will 
be evident that I have not written in vain, and 
that what I have written, has been attended 
with more than human efficacy. 

Little do you know, as yet, of your own 
heart ; little do you realize the seducing infiu« 
ence of the world, and the artful insinuations 
of Satan. But if you will cling to the counsel 
I have given, and commit your soul to the 
keeping of your Redeemer, those temptations 
you shall meet, immoveable as the rock that 
beats back the angry billow— you shall walk 
imhurt amid the flames— you shall be covered 
with a panoply, impervious to attack — ^you shall 
weather out the storm in safety — and at last, 
when your temptations and trials are over, you 
shall sing, eternally sing, unto Him who hath 
loved me, and washed me from my sins, in His 
own blood ; to him ^^be glory and dominion 
for ever and ever." 



ADYICS TO A 



LETTER XI. 



' YotJ will recollect^ my yonng friend, that I 
proposed to direct you to the attainment of ao 
elevated standard of pi^ty. In the course of my 
remarks, you must ever bear in mind, I am su^ 
gesting only the important means and methods 
of such attainment. Ever recollect, that with- 
out the Spirit's influence, the Christian can no 
more advance in holiness, than the sinner re- 
pent and believe ; and yet the former will be 
guUty for not advancing, and the latter for not 
complying with the demands of the gospeL 

The three grand helps towards the point at 
which you aim, are prayer, self-examination, 
and a close and diligent perusal of the scrips 
tures^ The first topic has been already dis- 
cussed. Imperfectly as it has been set forthy 
I trust you are deeply convinced of its import* 
ance ; and I shall, therefore, briefly attend to 
the secoixd ; viz« self-examination* ' 

This is a duty, as difficult as it is important. 
Every Christian acknowledges it to be so. The 
object of self-examination is, to obtain a cor- 
rect knowledge of our moral character. Before 
conversion, man is generally a stranger to him- 
self. As he comes forth from the nursery, he ' 



YOUNG CHRISTIAN. . 69 

enters upon- the reckless career of boyhood. 
His eye and ear are all attention, as one object 
after another crowds upon his view. He is full 
of interrogatories concerning the phenomena, 
both of art and of nature. He courts every 
trifle ; and whcin obtained, throws it away in 
pursuit of another. But he watches not the 
operations of his own mind. He is, indeed, 
all attention to the busy world without ; but, 
all inattention to the busy world within. And 
such will he continue to be, when boyhood 
shall give place to raaturity ; unless the Holy 
Spirit turn his eye inward on the soul. A phi- 
losopher, he may range through nature, and 
collect and classify her productions, and yet 
never sit one solitary hour in severe judgment 
on himself. Such a man is, in one sense, a 
wise man, but in another a fool. That he is a 
man of knowledge, no one acquainted with his 
attainments, can deny ; but, in my opinion, he 
is far from being a man of wisdom, in the high- 
est and noblest use of that term. 

" Knowledge and wisdom, far from being" one, 
Have oft times no connexion. Knowledge dwella 
In heads replete with thoughts of other men ; 
Wisdom in minds attentive to their own. 
Knowledge Is proud that he has learned so much, 
Wiadooi is humble that he knows no more. 

6* 



90 ADVICE TO A 

It id surprising, how few persons are in th« 
habit of attending to the operations of their 
own minds. The generality of mankind are 
so absorbed in the various pursuits of life, that 
no opportunity is allowed for serious introspec • 
tion. They live in a whirlpool of cares ; and 
to them, the deeper and more boisterous the 
vortex, the better. They are all hurry and 
bustle ; business and pleasure swallow op every 
thought ; and thus life's important hours, like 
successive couriers, chase each other into eter- 
nity. Hence you will often find these gay 
dreamers, when brought to a death-bed, taking, 
for the first time, a direct and dreadful look at 
themselves. Life has been frittered away, and 
eternity, now stares them into a consciousness 
of their ruin. . 

The Christian who is taught of the Spirit, is 
the only man who can be said to be acquainted 
with himself. Not that he can notice every 
hue of moral feeling ; nor can he comprehend 
the " mystery of iniquity" that pervades the 
heart : for it is '* deceitful above all things; who 
can know it?" But he is so much in the habit 
of noticing his moral exercises ; he so frequent- 
ly communes with his own heart, that he comes 
at length to an acquaiiftance with himsdf $ and 



YOUNG CHRISTIAN. 01 

can pronounce^ with humble confidence, on hift 
present state, and his future destiny. Such a 
character is venerable and immoveable. Chan*' 
ges may occur ; prosperity or adversity may 
come : but he walks in too high a region, to 
be unduly elated by the former, or sinfully de- 
pressed by the latter. What a calm, delightful, 
enviable summit. It is like the mountain co' 
vered with verdure, upon whose top rest the 
mild beams of glory ; whilst, in the figurative 
language of Goldsmith, the "midway storm' 
thunders and rages beneath. 

We are expressly enjoined, by the apostle^ 
to " examine ourselves" — to " know our own 
selves ;" for by so doing, we come to the 
knowledge of our true characters. If we are 
Christians, we may, and we must endeavouri 
to knoy it. Such knowledge will remove our 
fears, and add greatly to our comfort. Some, 
I am well aware, walk in darkness and in doubt, 
to the end of their journey. They see no light, 
until Heaven's glory breaks in upon the soul. 
Such, no doubt, was the case of the amiable and 
pious Cowper ; but his case was a peculiar one. 

In general, the knowledge of his personal 
salvation is attainable by the Christian. None 
should think of resting, until such assurance Uf 



9iS APVICE TO ▲ 

attained. It may not be the will of God to gire 
it, but it is his will that we should strive for it. 
If you aim at an elevated standard of piety* 
this will be your mark. 

Some persons are satisfied with just enough 
of religion, to ease the conscience and give en- 
couragement for a feeble hope. They never 
rise above this grade, nor ever manifest more 
than a sort of negative character. Self-exami- 
nation, they utterly neglect ; or, if they pretend 
to practise it, they perform the duty so seldom 
and superficially, as to depress, rather than ele^ 
vate, their own low and diminutive standard. 

Be thou not of their number. Employ every 
means to become thoroughly acquainted with 
your true character. Make religion your grand 
business. Let the soul be the all-absorbing sub- 
ject of interest. How dreadful would it be, to 
pass into eternity with fal^e hopes and mista- 
ken views ! Determine to know the worst, as 
well as the best of your case. Come to a per- 
sonal investrigation, with the spirit of an inflexi- 
ble inquisitor. Go into the secret chambers of 
the soul, and carry thither the touchstone of 
salvation, the torch of truth. 

In my i:ext, I hope to enter a little more mi- 
nutely into this subject. In the mean time, I 



T017NO CBRII^riAN. 01 

commend you to the grace of Him, who is able to 
build you up — ^to enable you to go from strength 
to strength — ^to fire your flagging zeal — arouse 
the animating hope-^nd piut within you the 
spirit of a self^denied, all-devoted Christian. 



04 ADVICE TO A 



LETTER Xn. 



The duty of self-examination, like that of 
prayer, is both stated and occasional. The con- 
scientious Christian, should not suffer a single 
day to pass, without an investigation of his 
moral character. At the close of the day, and 
when about to commit the keeping of his soul 
to Him "who never slumbereth nor sleepeth," 
he should take a deliberate and serious retros- 
pect of the past His conduct, and the motives 
which prompted it, should pass under investi- 
gation. 

I cannot, my young friend, too strongly re- 
commend to you this practice. The most emi- 
nent saints have been distinguished for it; and 
I must press upon you a similar course, if you 
would aim at an elevated standard of piety. 

There is less difficulty attending this diurnal 
investigation, than many professors imagine. 
Were long intervals to occur between the pe- 
riods of self-examination, we should, indeed, 
experience much inconvenience and perplexity 
in performing tlie duty. We should then re- 
semble the unskilful and heedless merchant, 
who, yielding to habitual negligence and hurry, 



YOUNG CHRISTIAN. 06 

defers posting his books, until he is overwhelm- 
ed with their intricacy and magnitude. But let 
the duty be daily and thoroughly performed, 
and we rise to the stkndard of the skilful and 
prudent merchant, who duly records every item 
of business ; who never closes his counting- 
house, until his balance-sheet is made up ; and 
who, by a single reference, can tell the true 
state of his accounts, and form a correct esti- 
mate of his commercial standing. 

You will find yourself aided in this work, by 
a secret journal or diary, which must be exclu- 
ded from the inspection of all, but God and 
yourself. 

If you are in the habit of thus daily inquiring 
into your motives and conduct* you will find it 
an excellent preparation for approaching a 
throne of grace. You will perceive so many 
failures in duty, and such frequent commission 
of sin, that your soul must necessarily be hum- 
bled before God. You will also perceive whe- 
ther you make any advances in knowledge and ' 
holiness, and thus discover a source of encou- 
ragement, or a stimulus to greater diligence. 
Your conscience will be rendered tender and 
faithful ; and you will thus be on the alert, 
that you be not tempted, or drawn aside from 



06 ADTICE TO A 

yotir duty. You will walk softly amid the 
thorny path, nor feel the bleeding wounds 
which are inflicted on so many careless and 
worldly-minded professors. 

Besides this daily process which I am recom- 
mending, there is one special season of self- 
examination, which you should by no means 
omit. The Apostle enjoins on every Christian, 
to examine himself before he partakes of the 
Lord's Supper. ''Let a man examine himself, 
and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of 
that cup." This is indispensable, to a profita- 
ble attendance on this interesting > and signifi- 
cant ordinance. If you are in the habit of 
daily self-examination, you will find the obser- 
vance of this special season, by no means diffi- 
cult or laborious. You will have acquired, by 
your daily introspection, so much self-know- 
ledge ; such a tact, if I may be allowed the ex- 
pression, at seizing upon evidence, and analy- 
zing feelings and motives, that, instead of pro- 
ving an unwelcome task, it will constitute a sa- 
tisfactory, comforting, and delightful duty. 

The reason why so many complain of the 
difficulty of a proper discharge of this duty, is 
obvious. I shall, in a subsequent letter, dis- 
close it more fully. 



YOVNff CHRISTIAN. 97 

Be ftssnred) my young friend, that, if erer 
you arrive at an elevated standard of piety, you 
-vrill attribute it, as much to a strict and perse- 
vering self-examination, as to any other means, 
which it is, under God, your privilege to use. 
It is through a neglect of this, that Christianity 
makes, in most of us, such a dwarfish appear- 
ance. It is for the want of this, that hypocrisy 
vaunts itself in the habiliments of piety. It is 
for the want of this, that doubts, and fears, and 
disquietude, and backslidings, are so prevalent. 
I entreat you, therefore, as you value your 
peace and your improvement, to persevere in 
the faithful discharge of this duty^ You will 
be abundantly rewarded. Faith will walk arm 
in arm with the promises ; hope, instead of a 
flickering light, will become a steady radiation 
from an unclouded sun ; love will grow to a 
flame, that *'many waters cannot quench ;" and 
zeal, founded in truth, and directed by know- 
ledge, will hold on, until death, its vigorous 
and untiring career. 

I say not, that you will at once arrive at this 
lofty elevation. Ah, no, you may have many 
a thorny path to tread, many a rugged way to 
traverse, many a difficult hill to climb. Nights 
of weeping, and days of darkness and of teiti^ 

9 



96 ADVICE TO A 

pest may intervene. £ut God will interpose 
in your behalf; he will 'Hemper the wind to 
the shorn lamb." 

Recollect, for your encouragement, that the 
farther you proceed, the easier and the more 
delightful will be the passage. As it approzi- 
mates heaven, it partakes of celestial beauty. 
Like the fine, free avenue to a noble metropo* 
lis, the proximity of this road to the heavenly 
Jerusalem, opens wider, and shows clearer, and 
almost admits the eager eye to catch the spires 
of glory, as they glitter in the light of heaven. 
Take up your cross, dear youth, and march 
forward. While you may encounter diffi- 
culties, you may also partake of many plea- 
sures ; pleasures which are as much superior 
to the sickly joys of earth, as the river of life 
is purer, than the green waters of an offensive 
and stagnant pool. 

"ThehiUofZioii yields 
A thonaand sacred sweets ; 
Before we reach the heavenly fields^ 
Or walk the golden streets." 

To me, it has ever appeared strange, that 
when so much depends on the duty of self- 
examination^ it should be so generally neg- 
lected. 



TOVNe OHBIflVIAN. 90 

We do not thus act in our temporal aflairs. 
If the claim to an estate be attended with any 
degree of doubt or embarrassment, we spare 
no pains to give it a thorough investigation. 
If the body be disordered, we are alive to every 
d3rmptom, and we watch every new aspect of 
the disease. But in respect to the soul, we are 
at little pains to substantiate its hope, by actual 
examination. We live along, as if the matter 
were settled :^ as if we had a guarantee for our 
heavenly inheritance : when, in fact, all is 
doubt and embarrass M.cnt; when, perhaps, we 
may have only " a niime to live, whilst we are 
dead." 

Let this duty, my ydung friend, be viewed by 
you as altogether indispensable. Set about it 
with diligence. Should your enemy, knowing 
its usefulness and importance, attempt to dis- 
courage you, listen not to the voice of the 
tempter. Renew your labour; call upon God to 
fix your thoughts, and to give you success. 
Persevere, even unto death, in a duty so ne- 
cessary to your safety, and essential to your 
comfort 



100 A9V101R TO A 



LETTER Xin. 



It was intimated, in my last, that I should 
pursue my remarks a little farther, upon self- 
examination. My reasons for so doing, are, 
the importance of the subject, and the general 
neglect of it with which many Christians are 
chargeable. 

Since the duty is so intimately connected 
with your hope of salvation, your advancement 
in holiness, and your general elevation of cha- 
racter ; you will bear with me a little longer, 
even though the subject should appear to be 
destitute of those incidental attractions, ^hich 
are peculiar to the ordinary accomplishments 
of life. You must first lay the solid column ; 
tihe Corinthian capital may then be superadded. 
My conscience would condemn me, were I to 
speak first of external conduct, when the piety 
of die soul is paramount, and demands the first 
and deepest consideration. Let this be obtain- 
^ and, I doubt not, your manners and deport- 
ment will take that elevated and noble charac* 
ter, which will secure to you the love of the 
virtuous, and the respect and admiration of alL 

Fixing the attention on manners and deport- 



YOVVQ CUBI8TIAN. 101 

ment, b^juirc the heart is rectified, is like pro- 
fusely adorning the exterior of a building, when 
it is all unfinished and comfortless within. You 
are allured, by the imposing aspect which it 
presents ; but upon entering, how great is your 
disappointment, to find, not only, no corres- 
pondence in the interior, but every thing cheer- 
less and forbidding. It is certainly more pleas- 
ing, to view even a homely exterior, an out- 
side that promises but little, and to perceive 
within, beauty, symmetry, and elegance. Hap- 
py will you be, if, gifted as you are, with at 
least an agreeable person, you can so irradiate 
your mind with knowledge and holiness, as to 
throw around you an additional attraction, and 
make your soul approximate to the comeliness 
of an unfallen spirit. But I have digressed, 
and must'retum. 

The difficulty of arriving at a knowledge of 
our true character, does not arise from any de- 
ficiency or obscurity in evidence, as recorded 
in the word of God ; but from the manner of 
applying that evidence to ourselves. The lia- 
bility to deception lies here. We cannot say, 
. that we have the evidence, because we may 
have spurious and hypocritical feelings, which 
our self-love may mistake for genuine Christian 

9* 



102 AOVICS TO A 

emotions. The word of God is full, clear, and 
explicit. It marks out the true disciple of Christi 
with unerring exactness. The evidence- is di-> 
rect and indirect, positiTO and negative, in ex* 
ample or embodied principle. 

The direct evidence, is that which consists 
in a record of the feelings which every Chris* 
tian must possess. The Bible is full of this* 
The indirect, is that which may be inferred^ 
from precepts and principles. The positive, is 
exhibited in all those commands which relate 
to doing the will of God. The negative, from 
example or embodied principle, is that which 
is derived from the conduct of the patriarchal 
and primitive saints. 

Thus you see the Bible is full of evidence 
relating to the character of the geiuiine follow- 
er of Christ. That evidence is clear and •ex-^ 
plicit, presented under various forms, and 
couched in the simplest phraseology. Where« 
then, Ues the difficulty of correctly ascertain- 
ing, at once, our true character ? I will tell you. 
It lies in the depravity of the human heart* 
That heart, as I have already observed, is '* de« 
ceitful above all things ;" end this is the true 
reason, why we cannot appropriate this evi* 
dencei with the certainty of its application. 



Yovvo cH&iffrtAN. 103 

But I will enter into a few particttlars, for 
your farther satisfaction, to show you that self^ 
examination is as difficult, as it is important t 
and that nothing but a long course of painful, 
persevering effort, wiU bring you to a confi- 
dence, unshaken by doubt, of your being a 
child of God, and a joint heir with Jesus Christ 
You do not wish to have a name to live, and 
still be dead. You do not desire to go into 
eternity, with a profession only. No, you wish 
not to be deceived in so momentous an affair ; 
for the world, you would not be deceived. You 
have counted th^ cost; you have surveyed the 
cross ; and you are determined to follow your 
Lord. You will not then be discouraged, when 
I inform you, that to deal with your own heart, 
in close examination, is a great and difficult 
work. But the difficulty, as I before observed, 
will diminish with diligence* 

One great reason why so little satisfaction is 
obtained in the work, is, that our investigation 
is not complete. We do not come to it with 
a determination to be thorough in its perform- 
ance. Although we acknowledge that there is 
no duty so difficult, nor any more important ; 
yet there is none, perhaps, more superficially 
performed. Although our hopes, our peace 



104 ADVICE TO A 

of mind, our growth in grace, are intimately 
connected with close self-examination; yet, 
how easily are we discouraged by obstacles 
which the enemies of our souls may interpose; 
and how hastily do we run through the duty, 
deriving no satisfaction, but only enveloping 
the mind in still deeper gloom. After one or 
two such superficial trials, some will give up 
the duty as impracticable, and live along in 
doubt, and die, perhaps, in distressing uncer- 
tainty. 

We are less thorough in this spiritual inves- 
tigation, than we should be in almost any other 
subject. No wonder, then, that we make such 
slow advances in self-knowledge ; no wonder, 
that it is generally viewed as impracticable, 
when so superficially performed. When you, 
my young friend, enter upon this duty, make, 
I entreat you, sure work with your soul ; ex- 
plore the secret motives, and analyze the eva- 
nescent feelings. If it cost years of perse- 
vering labour, ascertain, if possible, whether 
you have an inheritance on high. May God» 
by his Spirit, assist you, and make you suc- 
cessful. 



YOUNO CHRISTIAN. IQft 

LETTER XIV. 

I OBSSRVED, in my last, that we were in dan- 
ger of being superficial in the work of self-exa- 
mination. There will be a strong temptation to 
this, from our natural indolence, as well as the 
difficulties to be overcome. Hence, you will 
find few Christians, who make this duty a se- 
rious and indispensable business. A little hasty 
catechising, just before they celebrate the 
Lord's Supper, is all that is deemed necessary. 
Two or three month's may intervene, during 
which, the soul, and its momentous afiairs, are 
comparatively neglected. When again sum- 
moned to renew their vows, over the melting 
memorials of a Saviour's love, they begin to 
think of some preparation ; but one moment 
steals upon the heels of another, and the busi- 
ness is deferred, until the hour when the invi- 
ting bell is calling them to the feast. Then, all 
is agitation and hurry, when all should be calm, 
collected, and contemplative*. They leave to 
themselves, perhaps, a few moments, to extri- 
cate the soul from a tumult of cares ; and af- 
ter an inefiectual and superficial attempt at 



106 . ADVICE TO A 

self-ex(iiiiination, they go tremblingly in doubt, 
or fearlessly in cold-hearted presumption. 

Such is the character of many who profess 
to be aiming at the crown of glory. They do 
not sit in judgment on the internal man, as did 
David, when he threw open the chambers ot 
his siecret soul, and exclaimed, " Search me, O 
God, and know my heart ; try pie, and know 
my thoughts ; and see if there be any wicked 
way in me, and lead me in the way everlast- 
ing." It is mere half-way work with them. 
Conscience prejudges and condemns. To si- 
lence her clamours, it is necessary that they 
make, at least, a show of self-examination. But 
when they take up the sacred record, they find 
so little there, which can be honestly appropri- 
ated in their favour, that they are obliged, if 
they would glean any thing for their encour- 
agement, to misinterpret and misapply its 
meaning. When tjiey meet with such a Sweep- 
ing declaration as this, "If any man love the 
world, and the things that are in the world, the 
love of the Father is not in him ;" when their 
eyes glance at so discriminating a text, they 
employ a ready sophistry, to modify its seve- 
rity, or avert its application. 

There is, recollect, a strong temptation to be 



TOUNO CHRISTIAN. 107 

partial in this important work. Self-love, 
prompts us to look more eagerly for the favour- 
able, than the unfavourable . evidence ; and 
gives us a greater readiness in applying the 
former than the latter. It is an object with 
our spiritual enemies, to flatter us into a belief 
of our good estate, that we may omit our watch, 
and indulge our vain-confident expectations. 
Thousands are, by this means, led blind-folded 
down to ruin. 

The superficial Christian, seizes the most 
equivocal evidence; It will not take much to 
persuade him that all is safe. If a vast amount 
of scripture is against him, and he can yet find 
but here and there a single text, whose aspect 
in his case, is, to say the least, doubtful, how 
eagerly will he grasp it, and cast it into the fa- 
vourable scale. It is, with him, a principle, to 
be satisfied with the least possible testimony. 
He will make one text, which he supposes to 
be in his favour, neutralize a hundred others, 
which are most unequivocally against him. 
Hence you will sometimes hear professing 
Christians declare, that were it not for this one 
text, '* We know that we have passed from 
death unto life, because we love the brethren;** 
they shotild be driven to despair. 



log ADTICB TO K 

This may, indeed, be the language of a sin- 
cere disciple ; of one who walks in darkness, 
but who goes mourning over his personal de- 
ficiency. Far be it from me, to discourage such. 
This precious text was recorded by the com- 
passionate Spirit, for him ; and often, when the 
billows were high, and the prospect all dark- 
ness, it has beamed like a star of hope upon 
his trembling soul, and saved it from despair 
and death. But, when I hear it quoted by a 
thoughtless, worldly-minded professor, I ac- 
count it a sad mark against him. Is this the only 
text, tb which he can cling? Let him recollect, 
that the same apostle also said, " By this w€ 
know that we love the children of God, when 
we love God, and keep his commandments." 

The superficial professor, seems determined, 
if possible, to make the Bible speak in his fa* 
vour. He comes not to that infallible touch- 
stone, with a sincere desire to probe his heart, 
to examine the reason of his hope, and to scru- 
tinize the foundation of his confidence. He 
comes not, with a resolution to make thorough 
and impartial work ; but to make the word ot 
God, like the fabled oracles of heathenism, 
fipeak a language ambiguous and equivocal. 
Mow, my young friend, be thou of a diflerent 



YOUMG C091I0TIAN. J09 

spirit. Go into this investigation, with a reso- 
lution that you will be thorcmgh and impartial. 
Say to your Bible, I will consult thee faithfully, 
thou infallible book. I will let thy light into 
the darkest chambers of my heart. The aword 
of the Spirit shall search the system, and probe 
my wounded nature, in the tenderest part I 
will not shrink from the inquisition, but will 
«nter upon it sincerely, and persevere in it 
through life* 

10 



110 ADVICE TO A 



LETTER XV. 



The character of the superficial professor, I 
must carry along with me, in order to show 
you the importance and the happiness of aim- 
ing at a high standard of attainment. 

He is a miserable self-deceiver, who ima- 
gines that any advantage is gained, by persua- 
ding himself, contrary to evidence, that he is a 
Christian. And yet there are thousands of this 
character. Why do they not reflect on God's 
omniscience ? Why do they not consider, that 
their own good opinion of themselves, will not 
alter their true character. God looketh upon 
the heart. He strips the outward man, and 
carries his judicial sentence home upon the 
fiouL He can tear from the heart its most art- 
ful disguises, and look with an eye of infaUi- 
ble decision on its emotions. With his " fan 
in his hand," he will pass through the visible 
church, " and gather his wheat into the garner; 
but he will bum up the chaff with unquencha- 
ble fire." 

He who attends to self-examination superfi- 
cially, places too much confidence in the judg- ^ 
meat of others. Every person knows, that if 



M '"-*^. 



TOUNG CHRISTIAN. Ill 

another's opinion be coincident with our own, 
we are flattered by it. This is especially the 
case, when it respects our religious character. 
Some, wha are fearful of deception, will, I am 
well aware, neyer admit the opinion of others 
to have any weight* This is, certainly, the 
safest extreme. Such are, generally, mourning 
Christians, who are much more prone to form 
an unfavourable, than a flattering opinion, of 
their condition. But others are disposed to 
place undue reliance on the judgment of those 
who have expressed the belief that they are 
Christians. This satisfies them; especially if 
it be the judgment of those, whom they great- 
ly respect, and whose perspicacity as to moral 
character, they have been in the habit of con* 
sidering as well nigh infallible. Perhaps it is 
merely the wish of a beloved friend, or the ex- 
pression of parental hope, rather than a deli- 
berate and formal decision, upon ascertained 
evidence : still it is, often, enough to under- 
mine the duty of close self-examination, and 
induce a carelessness, an4 a confidence, awful- 
ly prophetic of deep delinquency, and melan* 
.choly backsliding. 

It will be evident to you, my young friendt 
that confidence, if it have no better foundatioii« 



im ADVICE TO A 

is nothing less thftti t)re8umption ; and that it 
may, ere long, lead to great doubt and per- 
plexity, if not to absolute despair. 

The hope of eternal life, is not to be taken 
np on slight grounds. It is a subject to be set- 
tled between God and your own soul. I would 
not despise the advice, nor reject, entirely, the 
opinion of others ; but I would be careful, not 
to trust too much to such advice and opinion* 
Since you are to stand or fall by the word of 
God, it is to that, and to Chat alone, you must 
look for testimony in your case. The advice 
and the opinion of ministers, and private Chris- 
tians, you will seek and respect ; but you will 
not regard them as infallible, nor place your 
reliance upon them. Let them neither sink you 
to despair, nor elevate you to a vain confidence. 

You know full well, that no finite being can 
pronounce with certainty on your spiritual con- 
dition. Even the holy apostles, who were un- 
der the immediate inspiration of God, were not 
endued with this prerogative. Were they not 
deceived respecting the characters of Simon 
Magus, of Demas, and of others ? How, then» 
can we trust our souls to the opinion of fallible 
man ? What reliance can we place on any thing, 
short of God, and his unerring oracleiu 



TOVNO CHRISTIAN. 118 

I dwell the longer on this topic, because I 
hare not seen the point brought out fully, in 
any of the experimental treatises which have 
fallen under my observation; and because 
there is in most persons,* a strong tendency to 
lean upon the judgment of others, rather than 
to be at the pains of a severe and strict investi- 
gation for themselves. You cannot be ignorant, 
that such a course must be unsafe, and unsatis- 
factory. How much better, to go at once to the 
Bible ? If we there find our character to be that 
of the saints who have gone before us, what joy 
and assurance will it give I We know tliat we 
are standing on a. rock — we feel that it is 
stable as eternity. But, if we lean to human 
opinion, we shall ever find our evidences equi- 
vocal, and our hope neither sure nor steadfast. 

Remember, too, my young friend, that those 
who love us, and who wish us to become Chris- 
tians, are very liable to be satisfied with the 
shadow of evidence. They grasp at the first 
hopeful appearances, and pronounce oflen a 
favourable decision, when there are not sufGi- 
cient grounds to warrant it. When you recol- 
lect this, you will receive their opinion with 
the greater hesitancy, and feel more deeply, 
the importance of settling the question over 

10^ 



114 ADVICE TO A 

your Bible ; between God and your own soul- 
Man can look only at the outside ; his limited 
vision cannot penetrate within. But God look- 
eth on the heart*; on that wandering, wayward 
heart, the seat of so many joys and sorrows, 
the abode of so much deceitfujness and impu- 
rity. He knows its character. He analyzef* 
its emotions. 

To him, therefore, carry your soul, t-i'^. 
with David, invoke his scrutiny. The- * will 
you be able to give to him that asketh ^'oa, "n 
reason of the hope that is in you, witn meek* 
ness and fear.*' Then you shall have " the 
peace of God which passe th all understanding." 
Your title to a heavenly inheritance, shall bear 
the royal signet ; a seal which none on earth 
dare question ; and which, when the gates of 
death shall be unbarred, shall give you free ac- 
cess to the royal presence, and to the templ'i 
of God'on high. Rest satisfied with nothing 
ihort of this seal — and may the Lord eiiablc 
you to persevere in seeking it. 



TOfTNO CHRlSTIASr^ 116 

LETTER* XVI. 

In prosecuting th« work of self-examination^ 
there is another danger to which you will he 
liable, and against which I would guard you — ^a 
reliance upon past experience. If you suffer this 
to have a practical influence upon you, it will 
palsy every effort, and make you to sit down in 
indolence, satisfied with present attainments^ 
when you should be pressing towards the mark; 
for the prize of your high calling. 

I mention this, because it is a very common 
fault, and one but little regarded. What can 
be pleaded in extenuation of such spiritual 
sluggishness, I cannot conceive. 

The holy Apostle, who, next to his Lord, ii^ 
the brightest examj^e which is set before us^ 
counted all his past attainments as nothing, so 
long as any interval remained between him^ 
and the perfection which is in Christ Jesus^ 
Hence he compares himself to one struggling 
in a- race, reaching forth^ and pressing towards 
the prize which was set before him. What a 
beautiful figure-^— reaching forth, pressing ttn 
wards-^mark the expressions* 



116 ADVICE TO ▲ 

If you had ever seen an Olympic race, where 
there were numerous competitors ; if you had 
ever witnessed their earnestness, as they ap- 
proached the goal — «y.ery muscle strained to 
the utmost, and the hand reaching forward to 
seize the crown — ^you would have a more im- 
pressive idea of this beautiful metaphor. May 
you, by happy experience, know its import. 
But, my young friend, I must confess, thai 
there are few, very few, of these Olympic 
strugglers, in the Christian race. Too many 
are satisfied to look on as spectators, while a 
few only, run and win the prize. Too many 
loiter in the course, or turn off into the by** 
paths of iniquity. They base their confidence 
on past experience. They seem to have set- 
tled the point once for all. They will perhaps 
admit, that, as to present evidence of Christian 
character, they have not much to offer ; but 
they refer you to the time when their evidence 
was clear and unequivocal.- •* There was a pe- 
riod," say they, "when we experienced conver- 
sion. A great change took place in our feelings, 
affections, and conduct. We can no more doubt 
that it was the work of God, than that our 
bodies are a part of His creation. Others saw 



TOVHG CHSI8TIAN. 117 

and ftcknowledf ed the change. 'Tis true, we 
do not fee] now, as we did then ; but we were 
told that this abatement of feeling, was to be 
expected ; that the ardour of the youthful con- 
vert could not last forever." Ask such vain- 
confident persons, for the evidence of their 
faith, and they refer you immediately to this 
antedated hope. . They are at no pains to in- 
quire for the present evidences of their being 
in a state of salvation. The business was 
settled years ago. Others, who will not go 
quite to this length, will secretly feed their 
hopes too much upon the past, instead of in- 
quiring into present marks of grace. It is 
a sad proof, that they are either deceived with 
false appearances, or declining from God, and 
from duty. 

I do not mean, by these remarks, to imply, 
that we are never to recur to past experience, 
for hope and consolation. I believe we are 
permitted, by the word of God, and the exam- 
ples of his saints, so to do. David, in a time 
of deep trouble, said, " I will remember thee, 
from the land of Jordan, from the Hermonites, 
and from the hill Mizar." 

But what I wish to guard you against, my 



118 AiyVICE TO A 

young friend, is placing too much confidence 
in the past, and suffering it to operate as an 
opiate to present vigilance and activity. Past 
experience is one of the devil's lures to vain 
confidence ; one of the veriest subterfuges of 
hypocrisy ; one of the most common and fatal 
grounds of self-deception. Even Paul, would 
not trust to the past, although he had been 
(Struck blind by a beatific vision of his Master, 
and introduced into His kingdom, under cir- 
cumstances so striking and peculiar. No, for- 
getting all that is past, *' he presses towards 
the mark for the prize of his high calling in 
Christ Jesus." 

These old hopes, this former experience, 
you cannot depend upon. As well might you 
think of crossing the ocean in a worm-eaten 
vessel. While the weather was mild, and the 
sea calm, you might float in apparent security ; 
but should the heavens grow dark, and the bil- 
lows begin to beat upon the vessel, you would 
fall a speedy prey to the all-devouring wave. 
The Christian, who has no better basis than 
by-gone experience to rest upon, may live on, 
amid the sunshine of life, in apparent ease 
and comfort ; but in that hour when God ta- 



YOUNG CHRISTIAN. 119 

keth away the soul, he will long for something 
more substantial to cling to, than a doubtful 
and antedated hope. 

Many are thus fatally deceived. To them, 
life seems to glide onward imdisturbed, and the 
soul is rocked asleep on the pillow of past ex- 
perience. Conscience may be so far stupified, 
as not even to arouse at the call of death. 
They may knock at heaven's gate, but they 
may also hear the dread voice within, '*I 
know you not, depart froin me, ye workers of 
iniquity." 

Such self-deceivers will not acknowledge 
the duty of daily self-examination. It is im- 
possible to rouse them to the performance of 
it. They are cased in an impervious mail. 
They have, in this past experience, an anti- 
dote to- every fear, and an apology for every 
deililiquency. O, be thou not of their number. 
Look for daily evidence of salvation. It is 
present evidences that are called for, and such 
cannot be given, without a daily, habitual, self- 
examination. In all your past experience, 
there is, to say the least, a possibility of your 
having been deceived ; it is dierefore not a suf- 
ficient ground of trust. You must be ready 



120 ADYIOE TO A 

now, ** to give to him that asketh, the reasoa 
of the hope that is within you." If you pur- 
sue the course which I have marked out, yoti 
shall never need to bring forward an old and 
antedated hope, as the only evidence of your 
faith ; but in every look, and word, and action, 
you shall make it certain to all, that you arc 
in deed and in truth, a Christian. 



TOUNO CHRISTIAN. 15H 



LETTER XVIL 



AssuKANCE of Balration, or eyen a ' well- 
grounded, uniform, and scriptural hope, is a 
blessing which is not attained by a superficial 
and infrequent self-examination. It is not ge- 
nerally enjoyed until after a series of perse- 
vering, and well applied exertions. Some- 
times, where there is a desire to be thorough 
and diligent, it is not enjoyed. It appears to be 
the will of God, that some should go weeping 
after it, even to the grave. But generally, if 
Christians are faithful, they will arrive at a con- 
firmed and satisfactory hop^ of eternal life. 

There is difficulty, I admit, in the work of 
self-examination. *'Eveu the righteous are 
scarcely saved — saved in many instances as 
by fire." The heart is so deceltftil, and the 
enemies of our soul so full of evil machina- 
tions, that we are liable to draw too favourable 
conclusions of our being in a state of salva- 
tion. There axe times too, when we seem 
afraid to uncover our bosoms to the piercing 
glance of God. Like merchants who are on 
the borders of insolvency, we shrink from 
makiiuc a thorough investigation of our ac- 



129 ADVICE TO A 

counts. We tremble at the thought of finding 
ourselyes spiritual ]bankrupts, and are almost 
willing, if I may be allowed the comparison, 
to forge evidences in our favour, and to our 
own deception. 

This is especially the character of one who 
is not habitually and daily engaged in the 
work of self-examination. There is an uncer- 
tainty and confusion about his hopes, which 
make him afraid to enter too deeply into the 
state of his circumstances. He does not open 
the Bible, and appeal to its searching truths. 
He fears that the scrutiny would sweep down 
his cherished expectations. He is, therefore, 
tempted to hunt out only those portions of 
scripture, which appear to favour his case; 
and to blind his vision to those, which would 
shake his confidence, or eradicate his hopes. 
When he would examine himself respecting 
the lore or the renunciation of sin, he is far 
from being a thorough and impartial censor. 
He can yield up some of the least-loved sinful 
habits, and can give full credit, to himself for 
the self-denial ; but the^ " right hand" and ihe 
** right eye" are not parted with. Some world- 
ly project is in view, which militates against 
too severe a standard .of religious character,; 



TOVNO CHRISTIAN. 123 

add which would be found to be inconsistent^ 
by too close an application to Bible ethics. 
Accordingly, instead of making the world 3rield 
to the claims of Christianity, he must narrow 
down Christianity to accommodate the world. 

Business, pleasure, and reputation, when 
they get the ascendency, make self-examina- 
tion an irksome and unpleasant duty. When 
a Christian professor is too eager in pursuit of 
them, he- always feels a conviction of delin- 
quency, depriving him of that free and noble 
air, which is ever the concomitant of an a|»pro- 
Ting conscience; and filling his mind with 
feeble apologies for himself, or with unjust 
censures against his superiors in piety. 

Now, can such a person come fearlessly up 
to th6 work of self-examination ? Can he take 
the Bible in his hand, and appeal to the heart- 
searching God ? Can he be a faithful inquisitor 
of the internal man ? ■■ Will he not gloss over 
his sin ? Will he not hunt for evidence to 
neutralize his guilt ? 

Such a character is satisfied with just enough 
of religion to make him respectable here, and 
afiford a vague hope of happiness hereafter. 
But, alas ! he is disappointed in both. He is 
viewed as hyjpocritical and insincere, by many 



1^ ADTICB TO A 

of his fellow men : and there is great reaMn 
to apprehend, that, when God cometh to *' make 
up his jewels," he will he found, not among 
them, hut with unbelievers, in the regions of 
despair. 

. It is by exhibiting to your view, my young 
friend, this superficial and flimsy Christianityi 
that I would warn yon against it, ' and rouse 
you to diligence in aiming at an elevated stand 
ard of piety. WfaUst there are difficulties con- 
nected with the perflpfrmaneeof Christian du- 
ties, difficulties of no common magnitude, they 
are still not insurmountable. The timid and 
the hesitating shrink and despond; but the 
true child of God knows Ihat he has enlisted 
in a warfare that cannot end but with life. 
When he puts his haad to God's covenant, 
when he gives his name to the captain of his 
salvation,' it is a deliberate and well-considered 
act. He has counted the cost. He has sur- 
veyed the enemy ; and whilst he acknowledges 
his own feebleness, he confides in that pledged 
assistance and protection, which will render him 
invincible and triumphaht. 

I hope that you have thus considered the sub* 
ject, and determined to make a thorough and 
well-disdpHned disciple. I trust, that with you. 



TOVNO CHRISTIAN. 126 

religion shall be all in all. It must be the busi- 
ness of every day ; it must be the business of 
life. 

It is a grand mistake, to suppose that the su- 
perficial Christian can possess spiritual enjoy- 
ments. They are not for him. They are for the 
laborious, the self-denied, the pains-taking 
Christian. It is the soMier who sleeps in his 
armour ; springs to his post at a word ; rushes 
into the thickest of the fight ; and deals his well- 
directed blows upon the enemy : it is he, and 
he alone, upon whom his admiring commander 
bestows^ the meed of honour, and the trophies 
of victory. 

. Be it yours to imitate him in the- spiritual 
conflict, and it shall be yours to share, like him, 
in the rewards of conqi^lst: and, even far before 
him shall you be honoured, for you shall sit at 
the King^s table, and partake of the rich provi- 
sions of his temple. Every thing urges you to 
diligence and to duty ; your honour and your 
happiness ; your safety and your reward. O 
then, forgetting the things which are behind, 
reach forth; press onward; and the prize, the 
glorious prize, shall be soon and forever yours. 

II* . 



.. .^.. jpiw.* 4 



tJt' •*. 



126 ADyiCS TO A '^ 

LETTER XYIIL 

Self-bxamin ATiON, respects both feeling and 
conduct. A difficulty occurs in ascertaining 
whe&er the former is according to the spirit, 
and the latter correspondent with the precepts 
of the Bible. I am persuaded that you are al- 
ready impressed with the importance Of the 
duty, and are resolvcfd that it shall occupy a pro- 
minent place in the daily ^xercbes of the closet. 

But, methinks I hear you inquire, in what 
v^dL^ you are to proceed; how you are to know 
that you pursue the duty to advantage ; and 
whether you are not, after all, liable to decep- 
tion? I have already forewarned you of difficul- 
ties which will appear formidable, i^nd which, 
at the very threshold of your Christian course, 
will be thrown in your way, to arrest your pro- 
gress, and frighten you from the discharge of 
duty. But, be not discouraged nor intimidated. 
Repeated efforts in prayer to God, will enable 
you to breast the opposition; and that which at 
first appeared fraught with difficulties, will be 
found, after a few incipient discouragements, 
easy and delightful. 

Satan will exert his utmost power to hinder 



TOVKG CHRISTIAN. 127 

yvvL from this all-important duty. He knows 
how much your hopes, and your adyancement 
in holiness, depend upon the faithful discharge 
of it Having, in so many other cases, succeed- 
ed in hindering its performance, he will hope in 
yours to succeed. May the grace of God ena- 
ble you to disappoint him. May you persevere, 
even amid discouragements, until the duty shall 
become to you a most precious privilege. 

When you enter upon this work, you will 
lirst look upward to heaven, in a few short pe- 
titionsi that God would grant you his holy spi- 
rit ; that he would fix your attention on the im- 
inediate duty before you; that he would keep 
you from a superficial investigation ; and ena- 
ble you to deal closely and thoroughly with 
your heart. 

We are very liable, in our retirement, to wan- 
dering thoughts ; and I doubt not, that hours 
have been wasted in the closet, in a vain attempt 
to fix the mind, while it eluded the effort, and 
sported itself in faneiful and foolish visions. 

It is important, therefore^ that we at once 
counteract this desultory state of mind,' by fer- 
yefit prayer to God. We should then, in a mea* 
sure, anticipate satan, who is always most busy 
with the children of God, when they are ihm 



128 ADVICE TO A 



/ 



nearest to duty, and are about to receive some^ 
great spiritual benefit. 

Our self-examination, I have already said, 
respects our state of feelings, and our external 
conduct Has the former partaken of the spirit 
of Christ ? Has the latter corresponded with 
his precepts ? It is no very difficult matter for 
a conscientious and reflecting individual to re- 
trace the occurrences of a single day. But, if 
the business be deferred for weeks and months, 
his sins will be multiplied and forgotten, amid 
the fluctuating scenes of life. Conscibus that 
there has been much, in both heart and life, to 
condemn, but forgetting the particulars, he is 
obliged to repent in the gross. 

But he who daily calls himself to an account, 
will, after a few trials, find the employment 
both easy and edifying. With what feelings, 
he will ask, did I awake ? Did my gratitude 
for nocturnal repose and protection, rise with 
the rising light, to Him, who is the watchman 
of Israel, and who never slumbereth nor sleep- 
eth ? Or was I, like the brute, indiflerent to the 
kindness of my heavenly Guardian ? Did I arise 
with the breath of praise on my lips, and the 
spirit of devotion in my heart ? Or were my 
thoughts scattered and desultory ? In my mom* 



YO0KO ClfRISTZAN. 12^ 

ing deyations, can I say that I enjoyed, a near 
access to God> so that I communed with him» 
even as it were, from the mercy-seat? Did I 
wrestle? Bid I agonize ? Was this the spirit, or 
were iny prayers formal and forced? Was my 
frame of mind sluggish and cold ? Were my 
petitions hurried and insincere ?. Did I really 
desire the blessings I sought ; or did I only 
mention them as a necessary part of prayer? 
Had I a deep sense of my unworthiness, and a 
full conviction of the necessity of my Media- 
tor's blood and merits ? In my petitions, was 
my soul drawn forth in solicitude for others; 
or did I confine them to^ myself ? 

Having left my closet, did I watch unto 
prayer? I besought God to keep, me from sin; 
but has my conduct, this day, been in unison 
with my prayers? I prajred for sanclification ; 
but have I detected and suppressed the first ri- 
sings of secret iniq]uity ? I entreated God for 
more light and knowledge; but have I medita- 
ted on his works, and studied his word ? I de- 
precated my easily besetting sin ; but have I 
endeavoured to avoid it ? I prayed for Zion, 
and for the salvation of the impenitent; but 
have I spoken a word of warning or exhorta- 
tion to any person this day ? Have I watched 



130 ADVICE TO A 

the leadings of Providence ? Have I advanced 
in the knowledge of God? Have I made any 
new discoveries of his glory! Have I learned 
more of the machinations of satan ; or seen 
deeper into the deceitfulness of my own heart? 
These are a few general questions, which 
may serve as a guide, to one who wishes an 
outline of daily self-examination. 



YOUNO CHRISTIAN, 131 

LETTER XIX. 

In my last communication, I instituted some 
inquiries, which, as I supposed, would be pro- 
fitably connected with a retrospect of the day. 
I am aware, my young friend, that one person 
cannot lay down rules on this subject, which 
.«hall apply precisely to the feelings and cir- 
cumstances of others. I give you, therefore, 
only a sketch, by which your4nexperience may 
possibly be benefited. 

The questions which one would wish to pro- 
pose, in taking a retrospect of the day, must of 
course v^ry, according to circumstances. 

I, who am a minister, and who have the care 
of souls, must inquire, more particularl}^ into 
my fidelity. Have I wrestled this day, for the 
souls of my dear people ? Have I improved 
every opportunity to do them good ? Have I 
preached the truth as it is in Jesus, &.c. 

But you, in inquiring into your conduct, 
must adapt those inquiries to the circiunstances 
by which you are surrounded. You have per- 
sonal and relative duties, which are peculiar. 
Parenti^l esteem and obedience, are obligatory. 
Hoiir, you should inquire^ have I conducted to- 



132 ADVICE Ta A 

wards my dear parents this day? Have I alle- 
viated any of their cares ! Have I been obedi- 
ent and affectionate ? I have sisters ; have I done 
my duty towards them, instructing ihem, and 
exhibiting an example which they might with 
safety follow? I am surrounded by companions, 
some of whom profess the same hopes as my- 
self ; but others are yet in "the gall of bittei> 
ness and the bonds of iniquity ;^' have I, so far 
as opportunity would permit, encouraged the 
former, and warned the latter ? What studies 
have I pursued, or what books perused ? What 
benefit have I derived from either ? Have I 
done any thing this day for the glory of God? 
These are some of the questions which I should 
suppose would occur to one in jowr circum- 
stances* 

If, upon- such a daily review, you find that 
you hdve advanced in holiness; that you have 
gained an advantage over your spiritual ene- 
mies; that you have profited by the means 
which a kind Providence has given for your 
improvement ; it will afford matter for praise 
and thanksgiving. It will kindle up a lively 
gratitude in your soul, and give a zest to your 
devotions. If you discover much to condemnt 
many sins and failures, as you undoubtedly 



YOUNG CHRISTIAN. 133 

wilt, it will afford subject for humiliation^ and 
prostrate the soul in penitential confession be- 
fore God. Thus, while you advance in the 
knowledge of your own heart, you will have 
all the ingredients of acceptable worship. Your 
ptayerwill be full of ^praise, and full of contri- 
tion. Your mercies will call forth the one, and 
your transgressions prompt the other. Prayer, 
with you, will then be, not a cold formality, 
but a deep spiritual intercourse with God, and 
your own heart. 

This nocturnal ordeal, will bring into view, 
and make precious, the merits and intercession 
of Jesus, your High Priest and Saviour, a re- 
view, even of a single day, must, if it be close 
. and careful, ever cover you with confusion of 
face. The sins committed^ even in that short 
period, will appear numerous. The soiil would 
sink under their heavy load, were it not for the 
encouraging promise: "If any man sin, we 
have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ 
the righteous." As sins appear numerous and ag- 
gravated, Jesus must ever appear proportiona- 
bly precious. You will cast yourself all guilty in 
his arms, and find that " though sin has abound- 
ed, grace doth much more abound." After such 
a review as I have recommended, will a new 

12 



134 ADVICE TO A 

application be made, and a new pardon suppli- 
cated, from the hand of the Saviour. He wiH 
thus be brought constantly in view, and made 
increasingly dear and delightful. 

You see, then, how many and great are the 
advantages connected with frequent and close 
self-examination. Can you, then, live without 
it a single day ? Are you not resolved, that, un- 
der all ordinary circumstances, it shall be en- 
tered upon and performed with as much punc- 
tuality, as prayer and the reading of the word 
of God ? I am persuaded, that, after what has 
been said, you will by no means omit it. I think 
you must perceive, too, that the difficultiesi 
though great, niay,by the plan which I propose, 
be all surmounted. They arise, as I have be- 
fore observed, from neglect. Days, weeks, 
and months, roll away ; and the soul, immersed 
in the busy cares of life, contracts a defilement, 
and collects a rubbish, which a momentary and 
hurried examination may render visible, but 
can never remove. 

The soul of the delinquent is neglected — 

shamefully ueglected.. He , deserves to have 

.his hope obscured, his faith weakened, his 

doubts increased. He may be left amid these 

perplexities, until he is suddenly called to a 



YQUNO CHRISTIAN. 131^ 

death-bed, and compelled to take a direct look 
at his case. It is then a fearful scene. Clouds 
and darkness curtain his dying pillow ; anguish 
insupportable heaves hiB dubious bosom. There 
is no clear sunshine upon his soul ; but he lies 
on the fluctuating wave, uncertain whether he 
shall outride the beating storm. 

Would you avoid such a scene ? O, yes, I 
know you would. Then know yourself, ere it 
arrive. Be faithfully and intimately acquainted 
with your own heart. Then shall your life be 
happy and useful ; ar.<l your death serene, per- 
haps gloriously triui^iphant. May you live the 
life, and die the death of the righteous ! 



136 ADVICE TO A 

LETlTiR XX. 

As an im]iortaiit auxiliary means of ailvan- 
ciitg in holinesff, I ^voiili recommend, in addi- 
tion to this daily self-examination, an attention 
to the same dnty, at stated and peculiar seasons : 
such, for example, as the commencement of a 
new year, the recurrence of your birth-day, 
or when about to enter upon some important 
change in life. By perusing the biography of 
those saints who have been most distinguished 
for exalted' piety, you will find that they never 
permitted such periods to pass by unobserved, 
or unimproved. 

There is something in the periodical revolu- 
tion of the seasons, which cannot fail to strike 
with seriousness a reflecting mind. A single 
day is of vast importance. When passed, it 
can never be recalled. With all its cares, its 
pleasures, and its pains, it has sunk into eter- 
nity. It has ^ne to give tidings of moral con- 
duct, which will be faithfully recorded against 
the great day of account. Who, then, but tlie 
most infatuated, ^vill dare to murder its hours 
amid festivity and mirth, when those hours arc 
so fleeting, and so pregnant with eternal re- 



Y017K6 CHRISTIAN. 137 

ftnlts? If a day is so important, a week, a month, 
or a year, proportionably increases in value ; 
and forms a period, in .which much may be 
done, either to grieve the spirit of God, and 
effect the ruin of the soul, or to promote the 
cause of our Redeemer, and secure to ourselves 
an inheritance in the kingdom of glory. 

I trust you will, at least annually, review 
your diary. As one year rolls away, and an- 
other succeeds; look back upon the past, and 
forward to the future. If you haye been daily 
in the habit of self-examination, this will be 
not a difficult, but an easy task, replete with 
spiritual benefit. As you retrace the events *of 
the year, the blessings which you have received 
will inspire you with affectionate confidence, 
and adoring gratitude ; and the evils of heart 
and of life, which have marked that period, 
will fill your soul with penitential sorrow ; and 
like David, prostrate in the dust of humilia- 
tion, you will be constrained to sing, both of 
mercy and of judgment. 

What have I done, during the past year, to 
advance the glory of my Redeemer's kingdom? 
Have I done all that my m^ans and circum- 
stances would allow? What victories have I 

pbtaiiied over myself? Is my easily besetting 

12^ 



1S8 iLDVlCfi TO A 

sin kid aside, or does it too often « master my 
strongest resolutions? Hare I a deeper and 
more intimate communion witli 6od^ than 
when the year commenced ? Are my desires 
for holiness stronger? Have I made any appa- 
rent advances towards that elevation at which 
I profess to aim? Are my devotions colder and 
more infrequent ? Do my sins oftener prevail, 
and is the world gaining on my esteem and my 
attention ? 

These, my young friend, are some of the 
questions, which the observance of such a sea-^ 
son would prompt. L%t them be seriously met, 
and sincerely answered. Let a day, if practica-* 
ble, be specially appropriated to the duty, and 
let it be accompanied by fasting and prayer. 

The time would fail me, to enumerate all the 
advantages, and exhibit the full importance of 
such periodical investigations. Enter upon 
them with diligence, and prosecute them with 
fidelity, and you will find by your own happy 
experience, that self-examination is not only 
an important, but an easy and delightful duty. 

Your experience and your careful observance 
of the past, will enable you to calculate for the 
future. Against the temptations which have 
proved most successful, you can place a dotrble 



YOUNG CHRISTIAN. 139 

guard. The circumstances in which you have 
found yourself peculiarly exposed, you can 
avoid. The means which have proved most 
efficacious for your good, and the individuals 
whose counsels have stimulated you to duty, 
will be noted : and in future, the former will 
be oftener resorted to^ and the latter drawn into 
more constant and intimate communion. 

Your birth-day ought also to be improved. I 
know that many spend that day in festivity and 
merriment. Thev deem it an occasion for 
mirth and hilarity. Herod made a royal ban- 
quet, and assembling all the wealth and beauty 
of the kingdom, celebrated his birth-day with 
music and dancing. Many with more circum* 
Bcribepl means, and on a smaller scale, imitate 
his example. But is there any thing in our 
birthrday, to demand such'' a parade of folly t 
Is it a matter of mirth and rejoicing, that an** 
other year of our short lives has forever gone ? 
Should we celebrate our own speedy career to 
God's judgment bar, with music and the dance ? 
And especially, if the soul be unreconciled to 
Ciod, should we chant a jubilee over its ap- 
proximation to hell ? 

If any have reason to rejoice, it is the Chris- 
tian* He is one year nearer his eternal and 



140 J^DVICE TO A 

happy home. But he views himself as so defi- 
cient, and his work on earth as so momentous, 
that he is far from wishing to spend his birth- 
day in festivity. With him it should be a day 
of serious examination and humiliation. Ii 
should be consecrated to God, and the prospe- 
rity of the soul. 

I hope that you will observe it in this man- 
ner, and then it will be a sort of spiritual land- 
mark, to which you can recur amid the tumultu- 
ous sea of life ; and when your days are num- 
bered on earth, you will be found to have spent 
them in " wisdom's ways, which are ways of 
pleasantness ;" and you will look back upon life, 
though with deep humility, yet without any 
heart-rending regret 



Y017NO CHRISTIAN. 141 

LETTER XXI. 

There are so maay excellent works,, on the 
preparation of the heart necessary to an ac- 
ceptable approach to the liord's Supper, that I 
shall do little more than to refer you to them. 
The only objection which I have ever felt to 
the use of such treatises, is, that by their pro- 
lixity, and by the numerous items which they 
have recommended, I have been confused, and 
sometimes discouraged, in the work of self- 
examination. If some of them were greatly 
abridged, and Ivere disencumbered of a multi- 
tude of particulars, which it is impossible to 
carry in the memory, they would, in my opi- 
nion, be far more useful. Still, my young 
friend, I would habitually consult them. They 
are written, generally, by men of the deepest 
and most fervent piety, who have not taken 
those superficial views of church communion, 
which, among many denominations, are so 
prevalent. Where they are derived, directly, 
from the clear testimony of Scripture, they 
will save you much trouble in collating the 
passages, which apply more immediately to the 
subject in hand. 



142 ADVICE TO A 

After all, the word of God is the only true 
standard : and to one who is familiar with the 
sacred volume, it will not be an irksome task 
to select the passages which he deems appli<* 
cable to the work of self-examination. For 
my own part, I have ever found it attended with 
the greatest satisfaction, to go directly to the 
fountain head. Take the Bible in your hand, 
and pore over it with an intention to sift youi 
evidences of Christian character. Accompany 
that perusal, with fervent applications to God 
for light and knowledge ; and you will experi- 
ence a degree of satisfaction, which no other 
mode can afford. 

Esteem ,the sacramental season as one of 
your most precious privileges. It is then that 
you are invited to sup at the royal banquet. 
You have a place at the King's table, and it be- 
comes you to array the soul in the beauties of 
holiness. Were you invited to the table of 
some earthly monarch, how eagerly would you 
anticipate the honour; and what solicitude 
would you feel, that yom* apparel might be ap- 
propriate, and your conduct correct ! But what 
is this honour, compared with that of sitting at 
the table of your Lord? See then that you are 
adorned with the wedding garment. Anticipate 



s'ouNo christian; ' 143 

•n audience wi4h your King, ana rush not into 
his presence witif the carelessness of one who 
goes onJy to an ordinary meal. 

Nor would I array that sacred table with ter- 
rors to your mind. I am convinced, that many 
throw around the hallowed elements, a dread 
solemnity, which makes the timid and faltering 
believer feel, that if he, if one so vile as Ae, 
should touch them, he would eat and drink 
damnation to himself, and seal forever his 
hopelessness and his ruin. It was never the 
intention of our Lord, to hold up such fearful 
views of this feast of love. There is every 
thing about it that is inviting. It is a most pa- 
thetic appeal to the fearful and troubled soul. 
It woos, in silent but eloquent terms, the weary 
and heavy laden, to come and find rest. It is 
not Sinai — but Calvary. It is not the smoke, 
or the lightning, or the thunder — no, weak 
and mourning believer, it is the uplifted cross, 
and the expiring victim, whose blood speaks 
peace from every vein. Look on those sig- 
nificant, simple memorials — ^is there any terror 
in this scene ? Is it not all peace, and love, 
and mercy ? 

The sacrament of the supper is a memorial 
of the love and compassion of Christ, a lively 



144 ADVICE TO A 

emblem of his sufTerings for sin. It is a public 
acknowledgment of our attachment to his cause. 
Having seriously and sincerely examined our- 
selves, and finding that we can humbly claim 
the characteristics of the true disciple, we may 
com,e to this /east of love, and commune with 
our Lord, and with one another, in a composed 
and humble frame of mind. If our greatest 
burden is sin, and our only ground of confi- 
dence is the Saviour, we have nothing to fear, 
but every thing to hope, from this delightful 
and affecting ordinance. Much of the profit 
of partaking of this sacrament, you will recol- 
lect, depends on your fidelity in the work of 
self-examination. If that be neglected, you hare 
no reason to look for a blessing. If it be per- 
formed in a hurried and superficial manner, 
you need not expect much enjoyment in the 
ordinance. God will be glorified in them that 
make so near an approach to the mercy-seat. 

When you approach the table, I would re- 
commend it to you, to simplify your views as 
much as possible. By endeavouring to think of 
many things, the mind becomes confused. 
Having lifted your soul to God for light and 
feeling, look on the elements, and endeavour to 
view them as the appropriate memorials of your 



YOUNG CHRISTIAN. 145 

bleeding Lord. What do you see in that broken 
bread? Is it not the emblem of the mangled 
body of the Lamb of God ? What meaneth that 
flowing wine T Is it not the emblem of his 
blood, which was shed for the remission of 
spas? And wherefore was that body broken^ 
and that blood poured forth? O, my soul, let' 
thy guilt and transgressions answer. Without 
the shedding of that blood, there had been no 
remission. What, then, can .1 render to my 
Lord, for all this dpng love ? I am speechless 
in gratitude. Here, blessed Saviour, I give 
thee all I have— this broken, contrite' heart.. 
Take it, O take it as thine own, wash it in thy 
blood, and seal it for thyself. 

13 



116 ADVICR TO ▲ 

LETTER XXII. 

On the subject of prayer and habitaal self- 
examination, I shall add no more. You recol- 
lect, that I connected with these, as of equal 
importance, a close and diligent perusal of the 
scriptures. I shall therefore occupy your at- 
tention, for a short time, on this last mentioned 
topic. 

The importance of makin]^ the word of God 
a devotional study, is evident, both from the 
testimony of that word, and the experience of 
all eminent saints who have ever lived. The 
more I study the sacred volume, the more deep- 
ly am I impressed with its intrinsic grandeur, 
and its high importance to me as an accounta- 
ble creature. Were I banished to a more lonely 
rock, than that inhabited by the Corsican exile, 
with my Bible I should never want food for the 
soul, nor a stimulant to the understanding. I 
am astonished, that men of literature, of mere 
worldly wisdom, do not more frequently drink 
at this celestial fountain. Were they once to 
sip at this clear, pure stream, they could not 
but relish it. Such a relish, however, the Spi- 
rit alone can give. 



TOUNO CHRISTIAN. 117 

It has channs, as a mere literarj production, 
which the veriest infidels have been constrained 
to acknowledge. Prejudice, not long since, 
had shut out these heavenly stores from many 
highly cultivated minds. The Bible was so 
common a book, and was so frequently found 
in the hands of the poor and the illiterate, that 
those who claimed to be learned and philoso- 
phic, took the liberty to despise it, and thus ex- 
cluded themselves from the noblest source of 
mental and moral refinement. A young man, of 
irreligious character, who was a member of a 
respectable college, on hearing one of the pro- 
fessors allude to the beautiful comparison of 
our Saviour, when enjoining confidence in the 
providence of God, '* Consider the lilies of the 
field, how they grow ; they toil not neither do 
they spin ; and yet I say unto you, that even 
Solomon, in all his glory, was not arrayed like 
one of these :" — turned to a fellow-student, 
and inquired where that striking and elegant 
language was found. On learning that it was 
found in the Bible, he was astonished. Have 
you never read your Bible? was the inquiry 
of his companion. ** My Shakspeare," said 
he, ''b all the Bible I ever read." This, I ac- 



148 ADVICE TO A 

knowledge, is an extreme case ; but there are 
many analogous to it. 

Dr. Franklin, it is said, was once in the com- 
pany of several ladies of the English nobility, 
when the conversation turned on pastoral po- 
etry, in which the ladies took a conspicuous 
part. After hearing their criticisms on various 
authors, he proposed to read the translation of 
a pastoral, for their amusement. He read, with 
a few verbal alterations, the book of Ruth. 
They were enraptured with the pastoral, and 
pronounced it the finest they had ever seen in 
any language. The doctor then gravely told 
them that he had read it from the Bible. Whe- 
ther these ladies were professed infidels, or 
had considered the scriptures beneath their 
notice, I am unable to say. I cannot even 
vouch for the truth of the anecdote. ^ am 
persuaded, however, that an occurrence of that 
nature might have happened daily, at a time 
when infidelity was in vogue, and the Bible ri- 
diculed and despised. Even in our day, how 
little attention do the sacred oracles command! 

While the shelf groans with elegant litera- 
ture, and the mind revels amid 'the flowery 
fields of Johnson, Addison, and Shakspeare, 
or the later and more fascinating groves of 



TOUNO CHRISTIAN. 140 

Sir Walter Scott; the sublimities of the Penta- 
teuch and the Prophecies; the tender, touching, 
simple narrations of Christ ; the sublime de< 
Totional strains of " Israel's king;" the wisdom 
of the wiiiest man who ever lived; are regarded 
as dry and uninteresting. I cannot allow that 
man or woman, to possess even a cultivated or 
discriminating taste, who thus judges. I have 
read Homer and Milton ; but when I compare 
their poetry to the lofly strains of David, Ha- 
bakkuk, and Isaiah, it is the flickering light of 
a taper, to the corruscations of a thunder-cloud, 
or tp the full-orbed splendours of a noon-day 
sun. I have read the pathetic story of Sterne, 
on the incarcerated criminal, and the melting 
appeal which Sir Walter puts into the mouth of 
a favourite heroine, when pleading in the royal 
presence for the life of her sister ; but they 
are tame, when compared with the struggling 
emotions of a Joseph, and the short but heart- 
rending plea of his brother Judah. 

But this comparison might be extended to 
the various departments of Bible literature. Its 
moral precepts, how concise, and yet how com* 
prehensive? Its narrations seize on the most 
prominent and striking circumstances, without 
including any extraneous or unnecessary mat- 

13* 



150 ADVICE TO A 

ter ; and throughout, from Genesis to Revela- 
tion, there is an unearthly something, which 
stamps it, as intelligence from the skies. Its 
analysis of character is wonderful. There is 
no other book on earth, in which there is so 
accurate, and full, and clear an exhibition of 
human nature. 

But why am I lauding the Bible as a literary 
composition, to one who views this as its least 
attractive feature ? Why have I digressed from 
the great point, of urging to an elevated stand- 
ard of piety ? Let us return, and view it as the 
great means of sanctification. " Sanctify them 
through thy truth," said our blessed Lotd, " thy 
word is truth." This is the charm* which so 
much attracts the pious heart. That heart is 
not insensible to jhe elegance of scriptural style, 
nor indifferent to its bold and beautiful image- 
ry ; but these are not the principal attractions. 
It is the word of God. It convinces of sin. 
It stimulates to duty. It rouses from sluggish- 
ness.* It warns against danger. It unfolds the 
character of God. It reveals the way of sal 
vation. It delineates the providence of Gcfd. It 
presents the Lamb of God slain for our trans* 
gressions^. It communicates sweet strains of 
spiritual devotion. It brings into view a bright 



YOUNG CHRISTIAN. 151 

and eternal reward. It discloses the wounds 
of our nature, and offers the healing balm. In 
short, it embodies all that a Christian, in this 
pilgrimage, can need. It is his only chart 
through this tempestuous life. In trouble, it is 
his consolation ; in prosperity, his monitor ; 
in difficulty, his guide. Amid the darkness of 
death, and while 'descending into the shadowy 
valley, it is the day-star that illuminates his 
path, makes his dying eye bright with hope, 
and cheers his soul with the prospect of im- 
mortal glory. 

Is this the book that vain and foolish minds 
undervalue and despise ? From their folly, my 
young friend, learn thou a lesson of wisdom. 
liCt your language be, 

*< May this blest volume ever lie 
Close to my heart, and near mine eye ; 
Till life's last hour my soul cngtige, 
And be my cbo0cu heritage." 



152 APVICE TO A 

LETTER XXIII. 

I WISH you never to forget, that the attain- 
ment of an elevated standard of piety, is inti- 
mately connected with an assiduous and dili- 
gent perusal of the scriptures. It is customary 
to recommend to the young Christian, various 
authors on practical piety. Such authors, I 
cordially unite in recommending ; but I fear, 
that the youthful Christian, by too great an atten- 
tion to desultory reading, has sometimes given 
less attention to the Bible, than its paramount 
importance demands. 

Christians, in recommending such, books, 
have taken it for granted, that the Bible is dili- 
gently and closely studied ; but they have taken 
too much for granted. A taste for religious 
novelties has been excited, and the precious 
word has at length become comparatively unin- 
teresting. If any book of mere human compo- 
sition, be it ever so instructive, is to command 
more of our interest and attention than the Bi- 
ble, we should, like Martyn, throw it aside, 
and reperuse the sacred volume, until we give 
it, in our hearts, its legitimate prominence and 
superiority. 



YOUNG CHRISTIAN. 163 

When young Christians become devoted to 
this religious literature, the Bible is very apt to 
be neglected. They acquire a flippancy in dis- 
cussing the superficial parts of Christianity ; 
but I insist upon it, that they do not, by such 
reading, form a sound, consistent, and deeply 
spiritual character. Far be it from jne to un- 
dervalue such reading. But I wish to impress 
upon your mind, the superiority of God's word. 
Other books of a religious character, should be 
considered as subordinate to the Bible. When 
they throw light upon the sacred volume ; when 
they drive you back to this great fountain of 
truth; when they quicken your diligence in 
studying it, and serve rather as hand-niaids, 
than as rivals ; they may be perused with pro- 
priety and with profit. But if you find that 
they draw away your interest from the word 
of God, and excite a taste for novelties, you 
must suspect them as rivals, and immediately 
give again your highest affections to that pre- 
cious book, to which they legitimately belong. 

This caution is the more needful, because the 
press', at the present day, teems with periodi- 
cals and works of fiction, which, bearing a 
slightly religious aspect, are considered as 
food substitutes for similar but irreligious 



154 ADVICE TO A 

V 

books ; and are therefore recommended to those 
whose consciences might revolt at the latter 
cast of productions. This furnishes a strong 
temptation to young Christians. I warn them 
against it. I would not circumscribe their read- 
ing entirely to the word of God. I would be 
far from proscribing any merely innocent or 
instructive book. Let them drink at the waters 
of Helicon and Parnassus. Let them be ac- 
quainted with poetry, history, and even many 
excellent works of fiction ; but I would guard 
against making this reading paramount to the 
Bible. I believe there never can be an exalted 
Christian character, where the Bible is not made 
the first, and the best, and the most interesting 
of books. That person who cannot lay aside 
any volume, however interesting, for the Bible, 
and who cannot find in the latter, a greater re- 
lish than in the former, has never attained to 
an elevated standard of piety. 

It has been said, that every thing in a mi- 
nister's studieSf should have a reference to the 
word of God. Through whatever fields of sci- 
ence, or of liten^ture, he may rove, he should 
come back with superior relish to the Bible. 
The same advice should be given to the young 
Christian. In the varied regions of philosophy 



YOUNG CHRISTIAN. 155 

and taste, he is permitted to rove ; but the Bi- 
ble should be his richest banquet. Make it a 
rule alwa3rs to prefer it. If at the hours of de- 
votion, you are strongly drawn towards some 
new and interesting religious publication ; if 
you are tempted to omit, for this, the regular 
study of the scriptures, regard it as a tempta- 
tion, and resist it accordingly. You recollect 
the resolution of the pious Martyn, to which I 
have alluded. He never would allow himself 
to peruse a book one moment, after he felt it 
gaining a preference to Ids Bible. As long as 
he could turn to his Bible with a superior re- 
lish, so long he would continue reading, ai^d 
no longer. Go thou and do likewise. If you 
commence with this resolution, you will find 
the advantages of it in your daily experience. 
The word of God will grow constantly in your 
estimation, and you will be ready to exclaim 
with David, "Ohow I love thy law; it is 
sweeter to my taste than honey, and the honey- 
comb." 

My Own experience convinces me, that the 
oftener and the more diligently you peruse the 
scriptures, the more beautiful will they appear, 
and the less relish will you have for light and 
superficial reading. Tlierc is, in an intimate 



156 AOVIC£ TO A 

acquaintance, in a daily conversation with the 
scriptures, something sanctifying, something 
ennobling. A satisfaction is felt in perusing 
them, which no human .composition can excite. 
You feel as if you were conversing with God 
and angels. You breathe a heavenly atmos- 
phere. The soul is bathed in celestial waters. 
It imbibes a sweetness and a composure, which 
shed over it unearthly attractions. 

To this fountain of light and life, let as then 
daily resort. Here is the healing inflvence. 
Here is the pool of Betliesda. Here abounds 
consolation for the afflicted. Here hope dwells 
to cheer and to guide. ^' Bind this precious vo- 
lume about your neck. Write it on the tablets 
of your heart." It will prove your shield in 
conflict, your guide in perplexity,, your solace 
in adversity. When " death shall be swallowed 
up in victory," if it have been faithfully studied 
in this life, it will aflbrd themes for heavenly 
contemplation through eternity. 



YOUNG CHRISTIAN. 157 

LETTER XXIV. 

It is a common practice, with young Chris- 
tians, to confine their attention to certain parts 
of the scriptures, to the almost entire neglect 
of the rest. They select, generally, the devo- 
tional and preceptive portions, such as the 
Evangelists, the Psalms, and some of the Epis- 
tles. This circumstance, while it favours the 
evidence of their being Christians, is also best 
calculated, perhaps, to advance their growth in 
grace. In this early stage of their progress, 
they cannot be expected to. take a comprehen- 
sive view of scriptural truth, and exhibit a ma- 
turity of knowledge on doctrinal theology. But 
there is danger that this practice 'will be too 
long continued. If so, they will ever be chil- 
dren. They cannot grow in knowledge. They 
will be feeding on milk, when they ought to 
receive the more substantial aliment. 

Permit me, therefore, my young friend, to 
caution you against undervaluing any part of 
the inspired volume. While I would rejoice 
in the fact of your having, at first, preferred 
those scriptures which are more particularly 

14 



168 ' ADVICt TO A 

devotional, I must exhort you to go on to per- 
fection. "All scripture is given by inspiration 
of God," and all is, therefore, profitable, for 
the attainment of that perfect standard, at which 
you aim. 

In these remarks, I speak from personal ex- 
perience. My attention, for a long time, was 
confined almost exclusively to the Psalms, the 
Evangelists, and a few of the plainest of the 
Epistles. These I perused and reperused, un- 
til much of them was committed to memory, 
and all were very familiar^ I do not, nor shall 
I ever, regret this. But my mistake was, in 
supposing that the historical and prophetical, 
and some of the doctrinal parts of the Bible, 
were inapplicable to my circumstances, and 
therefore had little claim on my attention. I 
fear that others have fallen into this mistake* 
I have since learned that those very scriptures, 
to which I confined my attention, were greatly 
elucidated, and beautifully explained, by other 
parts of the Bible, which I had thought too 
deep, and too inapplicable for- my reading. 

The word of God is one magnificent whole. 
There is a symmetry in all its proportions, and 
an harmonious admeasurement in all its parts. 



YOUNG CHRISTIAN. 159 

It is like a beautiful edifice, constructed on the 
finest principles of architecture. The young 
Christian may be compared to a superficial ob- 
serrer, who is enraptured with a glance of the 
finely turned arches, and the highly finished 
columns of this temple. He dwells upon these, 
as the principal attractions. The more advanced 
saint, has not only entered the vestibule, but 
has also penetrated the interior court. He has 
examined carefully the foundation, and admired 
its adamantine structure. He has surveyed its 
halls, and its galleries, and has been struck 
with the beauty of their proportions. He has 
threaded every labyrinth, and ascertained its 
direction and its utility. He has found no part 
defective; no portion superfluous. As his 
mind sweeps in the noble pile at one glance, 
he exclaims, how magnificent! how grand! 
how worthy of the architect ! 

While, therefore, my young friend, I would 
encourage you, in perusing closely those parts 
of the Bible, which appear most adapted to 
your character and circumstances, I would, at 
the same time, caution you not to neglect other 
important parts of sacred scripture. As I be- 
fore observed, by roftding the Bible as a whole, 



160 ADVICE TO A 

you will perceive much more clearly, the beauty 
of your favourite passages. The true method 
of interpreting scripture, is by comparing one 
part with another. Had I received and attend- 
ed to this hint, my knowledge of 6criJ)tural 
truth would, I am persuaded, have been much 
more extensive than it is at present. I have 
learned from happy, though late experience, 
that the historical books of tlie Old Testament, 
not only throw light on all the subsequent in- 
spired writings, but are replete with most ex- 
alted, and devotional, and soul-transporting 
sentiments. Since I began to study the scrip- 
turesin course, I have lingered on the Penta- 
teuch, as on enchanted ground. The types and 
shadows have been full of meaning. In all 
of them, Christ and Him crucified, appears 
conspicuous. 

I am convinced, of the utility of studying 
the Bible in course ; and I can assure you that 
my former desultory practice, of opening and 
reading where the eye chanced to fall, was far 
from affording equal satisfaction. I note for 
your benefit, the circumstances which prevent- 
ed my improvement in the knowledge of God's 
word, and I hope that yoi^ will carefully avoic? 



TOUNO CHRISTIAN. 161 

them. You will find a solid satisfaction in stu- 
dying the scriptures according to the mode I 
recommend. Consider it as the labour of life ; 
for be assured, that should you live to the age 
of four-score years, you will not have attained 
perfection in this study. But why should I call 
it a labouri when it is so delightful a privilege? 
It is indeed a labour, to that being who loves 
not the character, and who yields not obedi- 
ence to the law of God. But is it a labour to 
that mind which is attuned, by the Spirit's influ- 
ence, to tlie beauties of celestial truth ? Will 
not the soul expand under the developements 
of God, and of heavenly things ? 

As we learn more and more of the wisdom, 
the goodness, and the mercy of God, we shall 
the more ardently desire a conformity to these 
divine attributes. It is thus we shall grow in 
grace, and in the knowledge of God, and of our 
Saviour* In the visible creation, every thing 
is full of glory. Every thing speaks of the 
wisdom and the power of God, and invites the 
soul to ascend to its all-glorious Creator. But 
in the written word, we have God speaking to 
us without a medium, and speaking to us as to 

his children. 

14# 



162 4DVICE TO A 

Go, then, my young friend, and diligently 
listen to the holy oracles. Search the scrip- 
tures. Peruse them systematically. Make them 
your daily and nightly companions. And may 
their celestial influence be so infused into your 
soul, that you shall progressively lose the 
image of the earthly, and assume the image of 
the heavenly inhabitants. 



YOrNG CHRISTIAN. 163 

LETTER XXV. 

YoiT lecollect, my young friend, that when 
speaking on the subject of prayer^ I warned 
you against a hurried and superficial manner. 
I would repeat the same caution in respect to 
reading the word of God. There is a careless, 
superficial 'attention to the Bible, which is nei- 
ther acceptable to God, nor profitable to the 
soul. 

We should ever approach that sacred book 
with reverence. Though written by men, re- 
member that those men "spake, as they were 
tnoved by the Holy Spirit." The medium 
through which it was communicated, detracts 
not from the divinity of the matter. When we 
open the sacred volume^ we listen to the voice 
of God. It is the same voice, though unac- 
companied by those terrific circumstances, 
which issued from that awful cloud which cur- 
'tained the summit of Sinai. It is the same 
voice that was heard in such piteous lamenta- 
tions from Calvary, when our Immanuel trode 
for us the wine press of the wrath of God. 
Should we not, therefore, give a reverential at- 
tention, when Jehovah speaks ? Should not 



164 APnCE TO A 

our posture be that of the deepest humility and 
aM'^e ? 

When you take the scriptures in hand, it is 
well to let such a reflection pass your Qiind. It 
is profitable to pause a moment, and say with- 
in yourself, what a privilege do I enjoy in the 
perusal of this sacred page ? Millions of my 
fellow-beings are shut out from it. They have 
nothing but the dim and flickering light of na- 
ture. They are, therefore, degraded and besot- 
ted by ignorance and sensuality. Whereas, I 
am favoured with the clear light of revelation. 
I hold in my hand the mind and will of God 
concerning me^ Are not my obligations, theve- 
fore, proportionably great ? What account can 
I give at the judgment day, if I neglect or un- 
dervalue this precious volume? ^' O Lord, open 
thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous 
things out of tby law." Unstop mine ear, that 
I may listen, and dispose my heart to receive 
and obey. Spirit of light ! Inspirer of this 
heavenly book! be present to dissipate my 
darkness, and shed over my soul the beams of 
celestial glory. Let me not fall under the con- 
demnation of that wicked servant, who knew 
his master's will, but refused to perform it ; 
but having, by thy illuminating influence, a 



TOUNG CHRISTIAN. 165 

perfect understanding of the word, may I, 
through thy sanctifpng grace, be moulded by 
it, into the likeness and image of God. 

I take it for granted, that the study of the 
Bible, is to form a part of your daily devo- 
tions ; and it is upon such a supposition, that 
I make these remarks. Beware, I entreat you, 
of the habit of glancing over diiferent parts of 
the Bible, instead of perusing it in course, and 
with dose and diligent attention. The latter 
mode, accompanisd with the blessing of God, 
will form an elevated Christian character. The 
former, is characteristic of the worldly-minded 
and superficial professor. Depend upon it, the 
closer attention you give to the word, the more 
precious and interesting wiU it become, and 
the more rapidly will you grow in knowledge 
and holiness. The pious David, declared that 
his love for the word of God was so ardent, 
that it was his meditation day and night. I 
meditate, says he, on all thy precepts. I muse 
on the work of thy hands« - It ia this medita- 
tive spirit, which I would recommend, when 
you are perusing the scriptures. ^ 

The celebrated Dr. Scott, as we learn from 
his memoirs, was in the habit of reading the 
Bible on his knees. Whenever a difficult part 



166 ADVICE TO A 

of divine truth came under consideration^ he 
would lift his soul to God, for the illuminating 
influence of the Spirit. It was by prayer over 
the word of God, that this eminent saint formed 
a character that will stand as a bright example 
to all succeeding Christians. It was in this 
way, also, that he arrived at such a perfect 
knowledge of the scriptures, and was enabled 
to write his celebrated commentary. As yon 
will need some helps in studying the Bible, per- 
mit me here to recommend this admirable work. 
I cannot do this better, than by copying a 
brief notice from the pen of a clerical friend. 
''I have never met with a commentator, so ad- 
mirably adapted to ordinary use, as Dr. Scott. 
A& an interpreter, he is clear, sober, and judi- 
cious* He never so dwells upon one doctrine, 
as to keep others out of view, (the grand defect 
of many expositors,) but gives to each truth 
that proportion of notice which its relative im- 
portance seems to demand. The great doctrine 
of justification by faith alone, the very hinge 
on which the whole- gospel turns, and its all- 
pervading principle, Dr. Scott very clearly and 
fully unfolds, where it is specially treated of in 
holy writ. He never loses sight of it upon any 
occasion, and uniformly so handles it, ^s to 



YOUNG CHRISTIAN. 167 

beat down the pride of the pharisee on the one 
handy and expose the rottenness of the antino- 
mian on the other. But his commentary is not 
simply doctrinal ; he shows all the varied bear- 
ings of the truth upon the inner and the outer 
man. In a word, he is highly experimental 
and practical throughout. And for this part of 
his work, he appears peculiarly competent. 
Never, 'perhaps, were displayed in aiyr unin- 
spired composition, such a deep insight into 
the natural workings of the human heart, and 
80 accurate a knowledge of the exercises of a 
mind renewed by divine grace ; combined with 
such an enlarged, and at the same time minute 
acquaintance with human life, under every va- 
riety of circumstance. To write this work, 
demanded such observation of the world, united 
to such studious habits, as could very rarely 
indeed be found in the same individual. And 
the Lord seems to have led this wonderful mam 
through just the path that would qualify him 
to compose such a book.'' * 

I can add my testimony to the above. Al- 
though I had frequently heard Dr. Scott under- 
valued, as not sufficiently critical, I am now 
convinced that he has been wise in not encum- 
bering his work with useless criticism, which, 



168 ADVICE TO A 

while it might have pleased the few, would have 
been a great disadvantage to the many. It will 
be found, I believe, that his opinion on all im- 
portant points, is the correct one. He is, for 
general use, undoubtedly the best commentator 
extant. I must conclude, therefore, by advi- 
sing you to commence his work with a determi- 
nation, by the blessing of Godj^ to finish it. Pro- 
spectively, it may appear a herculean task ; but 
be assured, it is not. As you advance, you 
Will find each succeeding page, more and more 
delightful. 



T017N9 G^HISTIAN |09 



. LETTER XXVL 

I HOPE, my young friend, that you will ao 
quire a thorough acquaintance with the historic 
eal scripture^. They are intimately connected 
with the prophetical, the doctrinal, and the pre- 
ceptive pacts of the Bible. I jiave, at times, 
been made to blush for my ignorance of some 
fact, which han been alluded to, as a part of Bi- 
ble history and especially as quoted by the New 
Testament writers; not because I neglected the 
Bible, but because I confined my reading to a 
very limited portion of it. 

It is impossible to understand the prophecie8» 
without a knowledge of the altered history. It 
is equally impossible, without this knowledge, 
to comprehend the beauty and force of the gos 
pels and tlie epistles. The more thoroughly 
you study the Old, the more easily will yo^ 
.compTehend the meaning and beauty of the 
Ji^vr Testament If you will become intimately 
Kequainted with the book of Leviticus, the epis^ 
lis %Q th^ Qebrisws ifiU posft^^d chiirms vlUfh 

15 



170 ADVICS TO A 

you had never attributed to it. If you hare 
discriminated between the covenant which God 
made with Abraham, and that which He formed 
with the people of Israel, at Sinai, you will be 
prepared to estimate the force of the Apostle's 
reasoning, in the epistle to the Galatians. 
There is scarcely any part of the New Testa- 
ment, which has not some connexion with the 
Old. In the historical books, you have also 
an exhibition of x the providence of God, and 
many bright examples of patriarchal Chris* 
tianity. You cannot fail, thercffore, of being 
amply rewarded by a diligent perusal of the 
sacred history. 

In studying the doctrinal parts of the Bible, 
you will require much patience and perseve- 
rance, mingled with constant prayer for hea- 
venly illumination. There is reason to appre- 
hend, that many young Christians have vague 
and superficial notions of the doctrines, whOst 
they exhibit much of the true temper of the 
gospel. If) however, they neglect to investiy 
gate and understand the doctrines of scripturei 
they will be in danger of being led astray, by 
the seducing influence of heresy. Be well 
grounded, therefore, in the fundamental doc^ 



YOUNG CHl^ISTIAN. 171 

trines of the Bible. In making up your opt* 
nion with respect to any doctrine, avoid a rash 
and hasty conclusion. Be' deliberate, and you 
will escape the imputation of '' being carried 
about with every wind of doctrine." When a 
truth, which you have thus deliberately embra- 
ced, is called in question, be not induced by the 
apparent candour, or the plausible arguments 
of your opponent, to yield your opinion, until 
you have given it a thorough investigation. 
You may still be right, and your opponent 
wrong. Be not rash in giving up your opinion 
and adopting his» This caution is perhaps 
necessary to young Christians, who cannot, at 
^eir age, be supposed to be thoroughly indoc- 
trinated. 

There are some truths which you have re- 
ceived from education. I would advise you to 
re-examine them, by the word of God, and if 
they correspond therewith, to hold them fast^ 
as the most precious legacy which your pious 
parents have bequeathed. It will be insinuated, 
perhaps, that such opinions are the result of 
education, and are destitute of lany other founda- 
tion. Be cautious in admitting this. Search x 
the scriptures, and if you find them there, hold 



172 ADTI«C TO A 

them fast, as a ''form of soutid words." It 
they are opposed to the Bible, abandon them, 
however dear, or sanctified by parental affec- 
tion. But in yielding ^ch opinions, I would 
still say, be not rash. Investigate closely and 
candidly, ere you let them go. There is a ten- 
derness of conscience in young Christians^ 
which Satan sometimes pushes to a painful and 
distressing embarrassment. This is as much 
the case in respect to belief, as to external 
conduct. 

As an illustration of these remarks, there 
occurs to my recollection, the case of a } outh, 
who, on making a public profession of religion, 
joined, as a matter of course, the church in 
which he had been baptized, and to which his 
parents belonged. For a short time all went 
happily with him. He enjoyed the communion 
of the saints, and the ordinances of the gospel. 
The scene, however, was soon changed. His 
mind was thrown into great distress, by the 
insinuations of one, who, by his bold and dog- 
matical mode of reasoning, led him into doubts 
on a particular point of doctrine. He .was 
deeply perplexed as to the path of duty. At 
one time, the adversary would suggest the guilt 



TOUMO CHRISTIAN. 173 

of remaining a day longer in his present con- 
nexion. At another, he would insinuate that 
he had made a false profession, and therefore 
had committed the sin against the Holy Ghost. 
In this hour of anguish, he prayed most ear* 
nestly for direction . The thought occurred to 
him, that he need not be rash in altering his 
yiews. As he was comparatively a child, and 
had much to learn, God would not be dis-" 
pleased, if he took time for investigation. This 
thought gave him consolation, and he set about 
a diligent and prayerful examination of his 
Bible. The result was, a conviction of the 
truth as he had held it, and a perfectly settled 
state of mind on that point, even to the present 
time. 

I hope, therefore, my young friend, that in 
making up your doctrinal opinions, you will 
study the word of God closely and prayer- 
fully. Be careful not to rush into hasty con- 
clusions from isolated passages ; but take a 
comprehensive view of the connexion. Look 
at the Bible in all its grand and magnificent 
proportions. Be thoroughly indoctrinated, 
and you will become a growing and stable 
Christian. There will be a solidity in your 

15* 



n4 it»tttt to A 

character^ which, like ^ ibundation that Is 
well adjusted to the (mpenrtructorcf, will be, at 
oncei the evidence, bath of permanency and 
of beauty* 



V01TN6 CHRISTIAN. 1% 



LETTER XXVII. 

I woiTLD not, my yoi|ng friendj haVe yoti 
fetudy the Bible as i^ critic ; but as a Christian. 
You should endeavour to derive somfe spiritual 
nourishment from every part of scripture. In 
this, Dr. Spelt's commentary is admirably cal* 
culated to assist you. In itudyihg the histoli^ 
cal scrij^tures, you can occasionally pause and 
meditate. You can inquire, whether your mind 
distinctly comprehended the facets recorded^ 
anfl their practical bearing. In this way, your 
memory will be strengthened, and your heart, 
I trust, often afiected. 

Before I leave this subject, permit me to say 
a word or two, on the spirit with which yott 
should peruse the sacred volume. It is a spirit 
of implicit faith, and child-like docility. There 
are many parts of scripture, which, after the 
most diligent and careful investigation, will 
still appear, to short-sighted man, almost inex- 
plicable. There are many doctrines too pro- 
found for human comprehension — ^many mys- 
terious truths relating to God, to angels, and 
to heaven. God has given to man a revelation, 
which embodies the august truths of bis eter* 



176 ADVICE TO A 

nity, and of his infinite attributes ; which brings 
into view a spiritual world, and throws down 
upon us the light of the inconceivable glory ; 
and such a revelation must necessarily contain 
things to us mysterious and incomprehensible. 
It necessarily presents certain truths to be re- 
ceived on the simple testimony of God; and 
this is faith. Shall I, therefore, in perusing 
the Bible, rejett one of its doctrines, because 
it is less intelligible than another ? Am I not 
bound to receive even incomprehensible truths, 
if I find them there recorded ? Having settled 
the fact, that the Bible is inspired, I must come 
to it, as to an infallible oracle. I must feel, 
with the apostle, that although there are many 
things, which, in consequence of my infirmity, 
I can only view as through a glass darkly ; 
yet, if I am a Christian, the time is near, when 
I shall see them as clearly as I can behold a 
friend face to face. Although I must confess, 
that there are many deep truths which now I 
know but in part, yet there is a day coming, 
when I shall know them as fully, as I myself 
am known. Even the venerable apostle, ranks 
himself but as a child, in the knowledge of di- 
vine things. He is content to wait until that 



YOUNG CHRISTIAN. IT? 

knowledge shall be expanded among the btigbt 
intelligences of heaven. 

Were your father, whom you so much lovCs 
an astronomer, conversant with the motions of 
the heavenly bodies; were he to take you, 
while a child, to his observatory ; point you to 
those revolving orbs ; and tell you that he had 
measured their distances, and calculated their 
motions : would you believe him ? O yes ; he 
is your father, who would not deceive you, and 
you are his confiding child. You could not 
comprehend the fact ; but you would believe 
your father ; you would have no doubt of his 
veracity. Were he again to tell you, that, 
should your life be continued, you also would, 
in a few years, be able to make these sublime 
calculations ; your astonishment would be in- 
creased. Had not your father said it, you could 
not have believed it. But still you would con«- 
fide in your beloved parent. 

This is precisely the spirit which you must 
possess in studying the scriptures. It is your 
Father who speaks. Sometimes he speaks of 
high and mysterious things ; but remember that 
you are bound to confide in His word. When 
scepticism would harass your mind, flee to the 
word of God, and subject your understanding 



178 ADVICE 10 A 

implicitly to its diciates. When troubles assail, 
betake yourself, instantly, to this fountain of 
consolation. When doubts of your acceptance 
come over your mind like a dark and porten« 
tons cloud, here, in this blessed volume, is the 
Sim of righteousness to chase away the cloudy 
and restore you to calmness and tranquillity. 

Whilst there is a spirit abroad that would 
undervalue the plain testimony of revelation, 
and make it, like the heathen oracles of old, 
speak an ambiguous and time-serving language, 
be it your resolution to cling to the precious 
Bible, and to love even its most self-denying 
and soul-humbling doctrines. Be not ashamed 
of those views of truth; which, in the estima- 
tion of vain and proud man, are peculiar only 
to vulgar minds. The Bible, you will recol 
lect, was written equally for the vulgar and the 
refined. The poor claim it as their most pre- 
cious legacy. What though there be in it some 
mysterious and inexplicable doctrines ; is it 
not the part of faith, to sit meekly at the Sa- 
viour's feet, and receive implicitly the words 
which drop from his lips ? 

Compassed about as we are with infirmities; 
dependent as we are for the least ray of heaven- 
ly comfort ; with intellectual pride on the one 



YOUNG CHRISTIAN. 179 

hand, and deep-rooted and sinful prejudices on 
the other ; now wandering from God and duty, 
and now returning disappointed and dejected ; 
let us sink into the deepest self-abasement. Let 
us bow with the spirit of children, to the sim- 
ple truth as it is in Jesus : lee us implore the 
Divine Spirit to guide us through this benight- 
ed desert ; and let us look forward by faith to 
the period when we shall emerge from our 
darkness, into unclouded and eternal day 



180 ADVICE TO A 

LETTER XXVm. 

By this time, my young friend, you perceit a 
that religion is the business of life ; a momen- 
tous work, which will task every faculty to the 
utmost. To make a profession in the visible 
church, is one thing ; but to evince, by a pro- 
gressive improvement in knowledge and holi- 
ness, our connexion with the church invisible, 
is another. When I look around and behold 
so many youth gathered within the church, by 
the sanctifying influence of the numerous and 
powerful revivals of religion, my soul exults 
in the prospective glories of our Zion. These, 
methinks, are the generations who are to urge 
forward the causae of Christ, and who may be 
permitted to chant the jubilee of Millenial 
glory. 

I am anxious, that the rising generation of 
Christians should assume a more elevated 
standard of* piety and ^ction, than that which 
has characterized their predecessors ; and that 
primitive holiness, and magnanimity, and self- 
denial, should once more appear, as the earnest 
and pledge of that glorious consummation, 
when holiness shall be inscribe!^ even on the 



VQUNO CHRISTIAN. 181 

bells of the horses. I confess, however, that 
I have my misgivings. I have seen some, who 
but lately gave auspicious promise of this high 
and noble character, sinking down to the dead 
level of ordinary professors, taking the hue 
and character of those around them, and ap- 
pearing contented with just so much religion 
as will render them agreeable to all, without 
incurring the censure of any. How unworthy 
of a great and noble character ! I would never 
lay my hand upon the sacred covenant, or I 
would lay along with it my hearty my full, free, 
undivided heart. 

The gospel of Christ admits of no compro- 
mise. It demands oig: all. If it required less, 
it would be unworthy of its great author and 
finisher. I rejoice that it requires all. This ia 
its glory. When we are brought to yield to 
its claims, and give up all, then, and not till 
then, will it throw around us its arms of mercy. 
And what is our all ? What do we give, when 
we give our all ? A polluted soul, that might 
justly be cast into hell ; a body, the miserable 
companion of thf^t soul, and groaning under 
the dire effects of disobedience and guilt. Our 
all consists^ at last, in nothing more than a pol- 
luted and guilty mature. 

16 



18^ ADVICE TO A 

What a wonder is it, that God will accept 
such an offering ! What a miracle of mercy, 
that raises us up from our pollution, bathes us 
in the laver of regeneration, and clothes us in 
the white linen of the saints ! And do we talk 
about self-denial ? do we say, how hard to give 
up all ? I am ashamed to use such language ; 
ashamed to hear it used. What did Christ give 
up for us? Let that question blot out *' self- 
denial," from the Christianas vocabulary. When 
you think the gospel makes severe requisitions, 
by requiring all, go up to Mount Calvary, and 
weep over such suggestions. See the blood of 
your Immanuel so freely gushing from a heart 
that never exercised toWards you any emotion 
but love ; love unspeakable — love unsought — 
and love for the guilty. Go hide your head 
in shame and penitence, at such a thought. It 
is a glorious privilege, my young friend, to 
giAre up all to Christ. The soul that feels the 
constraining influence of his love, asks not how 
little may be given, consistently with obtaining 
the heavenly reward ; asks not for the lowest 
standard of discipleship ; it burns with an ar- 
dent desire to devote all, and to aim at perfect 
'^conformity to his death." 

It ia melancholy, to behold so many satisfied 



YOVN<j» CHRISTIAN. 183 

with a name in the church, and a seat at the 
sacramental board. This appears to make up 
the sum of their religion. Others go one step 
farther, and observe some decent regard to 
what may be termed the experimental part ol 
religion ; but aim not at that elevated standard 
which it is their privilege to attain. They live 
in doubt, and they often die in darkness. They 
enjoy neit^ier religious consolations, nor the 
peace which the world giveth. All this is in 
consequence of that miserable, half-way, com- 
promising spirit, which seeks to perform the 
service, and enjoy the approbation, of two 
masters. 

Let me entreat you to make a noble surren- 
der in this cause. The world has hitherto been 
the master, and you must acknowledge, that 
you have rendered a full and faithful service ; 
but shall you yield a less free and faithful devo- 
tion to Christ ? Which is the more worthy of 
your regard ? Which has the greater claims 
on your affections ? Which offers the fullest re- 
ward ? Determine by the grace of God, that 
you vriW forsake all and follow Christ ; do not, 
like Peter, follow him afar off, but, like Mary, 
sit at his feet ; like the beloved disciple, rest 
upon his bosom. 



184 ADVICE TO A 

Vou will perceive from my communications 
ihus far, that there is work enough to do ; that 
there is some struggling for the prize ; that the 
kingdom of heaven is to be taken by violence ; 
that you are not to sit down and idly imagine 
that now you have joined the church, there re- 
maineth no more for you to do ; that you are 
to be carried along, as it were, by a sort of in- 
visible influence to heaven, without any extra- 
ordinary exertions of your own. Determine, 
that if others act on the principles of the spi- 
ritual sluggard, you will leave them, and march 
forward towards the elevation of Christian 
character, which the Bible plainly marks out 
as your duty and your privilege. Onward, is 
the daily watchword of the faithful soldier of 
the cross. He sleeps not at his post. He hears 
the first note of alarm, and prepares for the 
conflict. He loves his k.ing, and obedience is 
a pleasure, rather than a duty. Many a bright 
example still shines in your view. A Brainerd^ 
a Martyn, a Graham, and a Newell, have left 
the light of their glorious career still lingering 
on earth. iPlant your feet in their tracks, and 
if you cannot equal,, at least make a near ap* 
proximation to them. Dread the thought of 
being any thing less than they were ; and re- 



Tomve oBRisTiAN 186 

member that it is possible even to surpass 
them. 

O may you aim high, iu contending for the 
prize of your high calling I May you go from 
•trength to strength, from victory to victory, 
from one attainment to another, until you shaU 
•tend, a glorious example on earth ; until you 
shall inherit the highest rewards of the blessed 
in heaven I 

16» 



186 Al^TICS TO A 



LETTER XXIX. 

Ti^E duties which I havB heen urging n|M>ii 
you, as important in forming an elevated stand* 
ard of piety, are those especially which relate 
to God, and your own soul. Social obligations, 
and the relatiye duties of life, I hare not con- 
sidered. They are not first in importance. 
Besides, if you give heed to the advice which 
I have presented in these sheets ; if you per- 
severe in the path which I have marked out ; 
if you give the diligence in prayer, in self- 
examination, and the study of the Bible, which 
I have urged ; you will, most certainly, not be 
a delinquent, in the various social and domes- 
tic duties of life. 

The course recommended, if faithfully pur- 
sued, will have a controlling influence upon 
your intercourse with others. It will put every 
thing in its proper place, and give every duty 
its legitimate prominency and attention. It 
will make you the obedient child, the belovea 
sister, the diligent scholar, and the amiable 
and intelligent companion. It will render yon 



YOUNG CHRUTIAN. 187 

in every respect, lovely and interesting. It is 
under this impression, that I hare given to this 
subject a protracted consideration, and that I 
have said so little about your general deport- 
ment. I have endeavoured first to erect the 
5olid column ; the Corinthian, capital can be 
easily superadded. 

I might have added something more, on the 
importance of Christian biograph}!^ as a means 
of stimulating the young Christian ; but I take 
it for granted, that you are already familiar 
wittf mc^t of the popular works of that kind, 
which are now so much read, and so justly ad- 
mired. The memoirs of Brainerd, Pierce, 
Martyn,and Scott; the lives of Mr«. Graham, 
Ramsay, Newell, and Hjantington, cannot be 
read too often, nor copied too closely. You 
will find it highly useful, in your daily retire- 
ment, to hold converse with soi^e of these ex- 
alted saints. It will furnish a humbling view 
of your own comparative sluggishness ; and 
arouse you to emulate their noble self-denial 
and devotion. Next to your Bible, may they 
be your most intimate and beloved compa 
nlons. 

But ah i how small a number of such cha* 



188 AUVICJS TO A 

racters have ever lired to grace this fallen 
world ! *' Like angel Tisiters, they have been 
few and far between." They have shot athwart 
our world, to evidence to scoffers and infidels^ 
the genuine beauty of Christianity, and to ex- 
hibit for the imitation of tlieir brethren, that 
high and noble character to which human na- 
ture, degraded as it is, can, by the spirit and 
grace of God, be elevated. When I read of 
their self-denial ; their entire consecration of 
all to the service of Christ; their agonizing 
prayers, which were offered less for themselves 
than for the perishing souls around them ; their 
enlarged benevolence, which was satisfied with 
nothing short of blessing a world; when I con- 
sider their patience in suffering; their cheer- 
fulness under repeated and severe afflictions ; 
their composure and triumph in death ; I view 
them ad possessing a character^ which nought 
but a superhuman power can confer; far, 
very far, transcending the brightest models of. 
Grecian or of Roman virtue* They scarcely 
seem to belong to pur species ; and, if fancy 
were permitted to decide* we should almost 
say, that in them the glory and brightness of 
some seraph was displayed. 



YOI^NO CHRISTIAN. 189 

Bnt still, my young friend, *Uhey were bone ■ 
of our bone, and flesh of our flesh." They pos- 
licssed, in comnion with us, the same sickly, sin- 
ful nature. They made no pretensions to su- 
periority. Nay, they considered their own 
characters as vile, in the eyes of Him who 
*' cannot look upon sin.'* If they possessed 
an elevation of character above us, they seem* 
ed not to know it. Tliey were, while shining 
out with angel virtue, all meekness and humi- 
lity. These are the characters, which, though 
undervalued by the world, make their silent pro-* 
gress through life, indifferent to the honours 
and the pleasures, which inferior and sorcKd 
minds are struggling to obtain. These are the 
characters, which, while they walk on the 
earth, converse with the skies — ^hold commu- 
nion — ^intimate, deep, delightful communion, 
with Heaven. Their souls daily disentangling 
themselves from the bonds of sensuality, sever- 
ing their willing affections from the dross and 
corruption of Qarth, rise to a similitude witK 
God ; and ere they leave their earthly abode, 
appear to imbibe a purity and a perfection, 
which are a sort of earnest of their quick tran« 
•ition to glory. 



i90 Apyics TO ▲ 

But my pen is unable to render a juBl tri- 
bute to characters so bright and magnificent. 
The simple narrative will speak a stronger 
eulogy 

These are the characters which I wish you 
to copy. They are the only happy characters^ 
There is a delightful, and yet pitiable contrast, 
between them and that cold-hearted, hali*de- 
voted, earthly-minded race of professors, who, 
I verily believe, are among the most miserable 
beings on earth. They are a disgrace to the 
Christian church ; a standing scandal upon re* 
ligion; a grief to the pious; a laughing- 
stock to the world. Over their worldly-mind- 
edness, their niggardly charities, their hollow 
professions, thousands stumble into perdition. 
Avoid this character, as you regard the peace 
of your own soul, the prosperity of the church, 
the advancement of Christ's &ingdom, and 
your final salvation. 

Remember that there is a day comings whea 
the precious will be separated from the vile ; 
when the master shall walk through ^e Chris- 
tian church, and "shall gather the wheat into 
his garner, and burn up the ehaff with un- 
quenchable fire." Be not, my young friend* 



Y01IK& CHBI8TIAN. 101 

satisfied with groyelling yiews, or low attaiit- 
ments. Aim high, even at perfection; for 
you know that a greater than man hath sa^d, 
**he je perfect, as your Father in heaven is 
perfect." 



IM APVICE TO A 



CX)NCLUSION. 



I GANWOT b«iie?e, my young friend» that &e 
'serious cautions, solemn warnings, and earnest 
appeals, which I have made, are to be entirely 
lost I flatter myself, that when the hand 
which penned, and the heart which prompted 
them, are silent in the grave ; she, for whose 
instruction they were given, will exhibit all 
that maturity of knowledge, all that purity of 
character, all that holy elevation of purpose 
and of action, which together constitute the 
fulness of Christian perfection. But if, after 
all, you should make a compromise with the 
world, and be willing to settle down upon that 
low and unworthy standard, too common 
among our churches ; if a few years should 
find you foremost in pleasure and in fashion, 
and undistinguished from the noisy, vain, and 
trifling crowd ; methinks your conscience wtll 
have been rapidly seared, and your heart quick 
ly steeled to a sense of your duty. 

But I am persuaded better things of you, 
though I thus speak. Still, I know more, than 
you can at present, of the deceitfulness of the 
heartt thf subtle insinuations of Satan, and the 



TOUNO CHRISTIAN. 193 

powerftl kttractions which the world presents 
to a warm, youthful imagination. Secluded as 
you now are, you can form but a faint concep- 
tion, of the power of worldly seductions. Per- 
haps you are ready to conclude, that ypur heart 
is impregnable to all their assaults. This, be 
assured, is a great mistake. Think not that 
your mountain stands strong. If you indulge 
this thought, you will most assuredly fall ; you 
will be obliged to weep over the disgrace which 
you will have brought upon religion ; you will, 
perhaps, be constrained to bewail the ruin of 
some soul, who may have been emboldened in 
sin, through your carelessness or inadvertency. 
You have a dangerous road to travel. You 
cannot be too vigilant ; you cannot offer too 
many prayers for guidance and protection. 
Your armour cannot be too bright, nor your 
eye too circumspect. 

Remember what I have already said, that de- 
clension begins at the closet. Watch there, 
for its first appearance. There, be ready to 
discover and to correct it. Prayer is your 
strong hold. In every encounter with your 
adversaries, draw upon the strength of heaven. 
In every dark, distressful hour, cast an eye ujj- 
ward to God. When the world displays ita 

17 



194 ADVICE TO A 

fascinations, and woos you away to its arms, 
God, and God alone, is the "strength of your 
heart." When afflictions come, and the soul 
is made sad and desolate, where then shall you 
look, but to Him who heareth the mourner's 
cry ? Prayer has ever been powerful and effi- 
cient. It has wiped away the tear of the peni- 
tent, and lighted up the gleam of hope. It has 
broken the stout sinews of rebellion, and trans- 
formed the lion to the lamb. 

In the work of self-examination, be close 
and thorough ; be habitual and persevering. 
Let a nice discrimination run through your in- 
vestigations. Remember your aim. It is high ; 
it is the elevated character. Deal faithfully 
then with your own soul. Arraign it at a diur- 
nal tribunal, and judge it, severely judge it, 
from the law of God. Anticipate the great 
and final account. It will then not burst upon 
you unprepared. You will go calmly forward 
to the bar of God, and unhesitatingly open 
your bosom, conscious of forgiveness, to his 
keen inspection. 

Let the word of God dwell in your heart. 
Study its sacred pages with prayerful diligence, 
and bow to its doctrim^s with implicit faith. 



YOUNG CHRISTIAN. 196 

Be it the man of your counsel ; the guide of 
your belief; the foundation of your hope. 

In short, take to yourself the whole armour 
of God ; the shield of faith, by which you may 
quench the fiery darts of Satan ; the helmet 
of salvation, to adorn and defend your head ; 
the breast-plate of righteousness, to cover your 
bosom from the shafts of calumny or of envy ; 
the sword of the Spirit, whose keen edge will 
make you resolute and fearless in the attack, 
powerful and irresistible in the defence. Thus 
arrayed, look upward, and press onward. God 
is yaur strength ; and when He nerves the 
arm, though it be the arm of the weakest be- 
liever, that arm is irresistible. Lay not aside 
your weapons, while one foe within is unsub- 
dued, or one enemy without unconquered. 
But life is short. The time is at hand, when 
you shall have a full and free discharge. The 
crown of glory glitters in prospect. After a few 
more days of fidelity to your King, that crown 
shall be placed upon your brow. 

When death comes, he will prove your last 
enemy. A^ he falls beneath your triumphant 
struggle, you shall hear the notes of victory, 
bursting from ten thousand angels on your 
dying ear. Then your work is donee Then 



19d ADVICE TO A YOUNG CHRISTIAN. 

youx warfare is. over. On yonder heavpnly 
plainst you shall receive . a golden harp, and 
learn celestial ipusic. You shall sound that 
name by which you conquered ; and in your 
eternal song, chant the praise of Him, who 
sitteth upon the throne, and of the Lamb for- 
ever. The trials of life will be remeqibered 
no more, or if remembered, will serve a^ new 
themes of praise and thanksgiving. 

What a consummation! Who would not 
struggle a few short days, to inherit so rich a 
reward — to wear forever so bright a diadem ? 



^ 



I 



/ 





