LIBRARY 

OF THE 

Theological Seminary, 

PRINCETON, N. J. 

__ , Ti"— ^2 

Case' BX 9225 .P38 P38 1877 

Shelf- 



Book 



All for Christ 



A DONATION 



7ht. 






Hfcnbcb 






All for Christ: 

A SKETCH 



OF 



THE LIFE AND LABORS 



OF THE 



REV. CHARLES H. PAYSON. 



EDITED BY HIS BROTHER. 




TENIIO ET TENEOR. 



AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

I5O NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK. 



DEDICATION. 



TO THE DEAR FATHERLESS CHILDREN, 

CHARLIE, bARAH, BESSIE, EDDIE, AND MAY, 

THIS VOLUME 
IS AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED. 



PREFACE. 



This little book, as will readily be seen, is not the 
work of any one hand. It is a mosaic of varied tributes 
to the memory of a good and brave man, which have 
been collected from many sides, and testify to the 
esteem and admiration with which he was regarded by 
all who knew him. His friends and associates, co-labor- 
ers in the field of New York city missions and brethren 
in the ministry, the members of his own and of his 
father's family, and some who only knew him casually, 
have joined to make this picture of his life ; and however 
imperfect it may appear, it is hoped that it may not be 
without some good results of cheer, and comfort, and 
instruction. 

I confess to feelings of great reluctance at the thought 
of undertaking even to edit a memorial of my brother's 
life, well knowing that my love for him might make me 
partial. But Providential events and the judgment of 
friends constrained me to forego these scruples, and to 
attempt a work which has been delightful just in pro- 
portion as it has proved laborious ; and I can but indulge 
the hope that the intimacy of those fraternal relations in 
which for many years he acted towards me as a father 



4 PREFACE. 

towards his son, may have conduced to some apprecia- 
tive views of his work, which might not have been se- 
cured from a different point of observation. 

Due credit has been given in the book itself so far 
as practicable to those who by letter or otherwise have 
kindly contributed to its material. But it is proper to 
state here that the reminiscences of my brother's early 
home and education have been mainly furnished by his 
college classmate and lifelong friend, the Rev. C. D. Hel- 
mer, D. D., of Brooklyn, and that in the editorial work I 
have been greatly assisted by the Rev. Geo. L. Prentiss, 
D. D., formerly pastor of the Church of the Covenant in 
this city, and now Professor in the Union Theological 
Seminary. Dr. Prentiss was for many years familiar with 
my brother's labors, was warmly attached to him, and 
has taken the deepest interest in the preparation of this 
memorial. To these gentlemen my thanks are specially 
due. g. s. p. 

Inwood-on-Hudson, 

New York City, Nov., 1877. 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I. 

Early Life and Education PAGE 7 

CHAPTER II. 

Letters from Abroad 33 

CHAPTER III. 
Field of Labor - 65 

CHAPTER IV. 
Methods and Means. A. Various 91 

CHAPTER V. 
Methods and Means. B. Systematic Beneficence 119 

CHAPTER VI. 
Army Life and Travels in the East - 145 

CHAPTER VII. 
The Old and the New - - 160 

CHAPTER VIII. 
Home Life and Personal Characteristics 1S3 

CHAPTER IX. 
The Last Days - 213 

APPENDIX. 

Note A 253 

Note B 259 

Note C 266 

i\ole L> 272 



When comes the hour, which now I may not know, 
When from this changing world my soul must go, 
Will my life's plans be broken ? Truly, no. 

God placed me here ; I chose not place or name, 
To do his work, his business, be my aim, 
Through every day, in all the plans I frame. 

My one great aim in which all others blend, 

To which my work, my pleasures, pastimes tend, 

Be to fill well the time my God may send. 

Then when he calls, wherever I may be, 
Doing the common work he gives to me, 
At books, or prayer, abroad, on land or sea, 

My soul will not be stricken with dismay ; 

A home and treasure have I far away, 

Whither my Lord will guide me on that day. 

• 
My real life unbroken passes on, 

Working in shadow till the night is gone, 

Rising to higher service with the dawn. 

I hold a mystic thread within my hand, 
My little plans imbraided strand in strand, 
Anchored far onward in the unknown land. 

What time mine eye is single, full of light, 

'T is plain and palpable, and ever bright, 

A guide to lead me through this earthly night. 

I see its glow away where dim wings shiver, 
Above the shadows of death's gloomy river, 
And on beyond within the vast for ever. persie vere. 



ALL FOR CHRIST. 



CHAPTER I. 

EARLY LIFE AND EDUCATION. 

Charles Henry Payson, whose early death is so 
widely and tenderly lamented, deserves a more perma- 
nent recognition than that of a transient obituary notice. 
From the merely human point of view, we should say 
that Mr. Payson's decease was untimely, for his career 
was ended in the very prime of his physical and mental 
powers, and in the midst of most abundant usefulness. 
But the memory of those who have illustrated the teach- 
ings and the spirit of Jesus is gold in the treasury of the 
saints on earth. In heaven the names of such are imper- 
ishable, and radiant with a lustre of glory that nothing 
will ever dim. And among those who still live to work 
and pray and hope for the regeneration of mankind, 
these names remain as sacred possessions and stimula- 
ting examples. 

Mr. Payson was born in Leominster, Mass., Septem- 
ber 28, 183 1. He was the eldest child of Rev. Phillips 
and Elizabeth Boutelle Payson, inheriting thus a name 



S ALL FOR CHRIST. 

eminent among the most honored Christian families of 
New England, and fragrant with associations of devout 
piety and holy zeal. The father of Phillips Payson, the 
Rev. Seth Payson, D. D., was for many years pastor of 
the Congregational church of Rindge, N. H. His eldest 
son, Edward, became a successful and distinguished min- 
ister in Portland, Me., where he died at the early age of 
forty-four years, leaving behind him a reputation for saint- 
liness and devotion to the Lord's work which for half a 
century has been most fondly cherished by Christians 
everywhere. 

Phillips, a younger brother of Edward, was born in 
Rindge, N. H., August n, 1795, and died in Fayetteville, 
N. Y., February 16, 1856. Having prepared for Dart- 
mouth College, ill-health prevented him from pursuing 
the course of study ; but he was graduated in due course 
at the Theological Seminary in Andover, Mass., 1820. 
Never robust, his whole life became a struggle with the 
obstacles and limitations of physical infirmity. 

He became pastor first of the " Calvinistic church" 
of Leominster, Mass., which grew rapidly under his min- 
istrations. But the failure of his health compelled him 
to quit the field after several years of very successful 
ministry. His name is fragrant there to-day with some 
of the most hallowed and tenderly-cherished associations 
which cluster around the early history of that church. 

He was afterward settled in Hadley, Mass. ; then 
again in North Lyme, Conn. ; and finally in Harpersfield, 
N. Y. But finding himself physically unable to perform 
the arduous duties of the pastoral office, he abandoned 



EARLY LIFE AND EDUCATION. 9 

the active work of the ministry, and became a teacher in 
Ames, N. Y., until compelled at last to give up all labor 
requiring mental or physical exertion. The last part of 
his life was devoted to the education of his children. 

It is much to be regretted that none of his private let- 
ters remain which might serve to throw a light upon his 
character, or to reveal the holy influence which he exerted 
in his family. That influence was very great, especially 
upon his eldest son, who to the very end of life cherished 
and revered the memory of his father as an inspiration. 
Even while dying he was overheard to say, " It may be 
I shall meet father and mother and Jesus to-day." 

Phillips Payson was a holy man, deeply and tenderly 
beloved by those who knew him best in the best years of 
his life. The late Dr. Todd of Pittsfield once said of 
him, that when he was settled in Leominster "he was 
the John of their association." By the several churches 
of his charge his name is still remembered with affection. 
In the family-life, his fondness for his children, his devo- 
tion to their good, his perfect consecration to the Divine 
will, and above all his cheerful and unfaltering trust in 
God, made his presence felt as a simple benediction. His 
patience was complete. His faith never seemed to falter 
even in the darkest hours. It made his daily life a hymn 
of praise and prayer, so that, as one of his children rev- 
erently said, "his face seemed often lighted with glory." 
His strongest desire for his children was that they might 
be faithful followers of Christ, and his one great prayer 
for them, " Lord, that they all may be thine !" He saw 
the fulfilment of this desire in the conversion of the 



io ALL FOR CHRLST. 

youngest members of his family only a few weeks before 
his death, and on his return from their first communion 
together, said, " Lord, now lettest thou thy servant de- 
part in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation." 
" How exhilarating and transporting the forethought," he 
writes to one of his children, " that (as we have often 
prayed) we as an entire family shall at last be gathered 
around the throne." And his last words seem but the 
echo of his life, " I die assured of heaven." 

It is needless to say that the influence of such a man 
upon his family was very great. Not only was it a con- 
trolling influence — for a single word or look from him was 
the certain "end of strife" — but it was a most beneficent 
and inspiring one. It made religion honorable in their 
eyes. Such steadfast faith and true obedience to God 
were seen to be the only ends of life worth living for. 
And far above all gold and treasures which this world 
can give, his children prize the legacy of Christian exam- 
ple and Christian education and Christian principles left 
them by this sainted father. 

Charles, the subject of this sketch, was the eldest of 
the family. He inherited the high intellectual and large 
moral and spiritual qualities of this cultured Christian 
ancestry. He was in the line of the gospel ministry, by 
birth, by the faith and prayers and training of his parents, 
and by all the most potent influences that streamed upon 
his young mind and flowed around his early life. 

The moulding influence of a mother's character upon 
her son has always been recognized, and Charles Payson 
was fortunate in having a mother whose piety and intel- 



EARL Y LIFE AND ED UCATION. 1 1 

ligence were remarkable. She belonged to the class of 
holy women who, like Hannah, devote their children to 
the Lord from the very beginning of their existence. In 
her private diary, still a rich legacy in the possession of 
her children, is recorded this prayer of her heart at the 
time of her marriage : 

Oh, deny me the necessaries of life rather than take the Holy Spirit 
from me! Without his illumination all will be to me a dreary waste; 
every Christian grace will become languid, and I shall see and do nothing 
for the salvation of sinners. 

If any mother ever realized the responsibility of 
maternity, surely Mrs. Payson did. Her soul yearned 
for the moral and spiritual welfare of her children ; and 
through them she hoped to glorify God in the salvation 
of mankind. And the fact that all her children early 
gave themselves to the service of God, that the three 
sons all entered the gospel ministry, and that one of the 
daughters became a foreign missionary in China, are 
notable evidences that God hears the prayers of faithful 
parents who trust his grace for themselves and for their 
offspring. 

At the risk of intruding upon the sanctity of private 
records which this devout mother probably never dreamed 
would see the broad light of public print, it is deemed 
desirable to make some brief extracts from her diary, 
touching this very important matter of consecrating chil- 
dren to the Lord. Of September 28, 1831, she writes : 

This is an eventful day. A young immortal, a dear and lovely son, 
was committed to our charge. I hope I receive it as a blessing from the 
King of heaven. Never did I know before the responsibility of such a 
pledge. May I have grace to dedicate this child daily to God, feeling it 
not my own, but lent me for a few days, to pray for and instruct in the 



12 ALL FOR CHRIST. 

ways of religion. Oh that its life may be spared, and may it now be sanc- 
tified, even now ; that its first moral acts may be those of conformity to the 
requirements of the gospel. How solemn the thought that this child must 
live for ever, either in heaven or in the darkness and misery of the finally 
impenitent. And if this future destiny of my child hangs, as I believe it 
does, very much on me, how ought I to tremble lest I fail of discharging 
my duty. Oh my Heavenly Father, save me from the doom of an unfaith- 
ful mother ! 

Again, some years later, she says : 

March 31st was a memorable day. God in mercy gave us a daugh- 
ter, whom we received as from his hand, and I hope we have consecrated 
her to the Lord as long as she lives. I think I can see the hand of God in 
all his dealings, and feel more than ever an ardent desire to train all our 
children for the Lord. 

After the birth of her next child she writes : 

Another little son was given us. What a weight of responsibility 
now rests upon me. Five children to feed, to clothe, to educate, and pray 
for. Surely it is a great work. May it be the great business of my life 
to train them up for God. Had I nothing else to do, this would be 
enough. 

How pleasant are the duties of a mother when we feel that we are 
laboring for God. . . . May our little ones be sheltered under the wings 
of the Almighty, preserved amid every temptation, and after having spent 
their lives for God, be received with their dear parents to the abodes of 
the blessed. 

1S4S, Sept. Charles left for Amherst College. Oh that God will 
throw around him those arms which keep all His children safe. For some 
weeks he has hoped that he has given himself to God." 

Dec. We are happy to learn from his letters that he has publicly pro- 
fessed Christ. He is now about seventeen years old, and it is our ardent 
and united prayer that God will by rich grace prepare this son for the 
ministry. " Knowledge is power ;" and oh that all his powers may be con- 
secrated to the immediate service of God. 

Thus fervently prayed Charles Payson's mother for 
her son; and as the years passed away, and he became 
more and more conscious of his own mental and moral 
bent, the work of preaching the gospel grew in his deep- 
est thoughts, sympathies, and desires, to be the divine 



EARL J ' LIFE AND ED UCA TION. 1 3 

mission for him among men. He possessed rare abili- 
ties for business, and would hardly have failed to become 
successful in almost any secular calling. But a nature 
so derived in genealogy, and a boyhood so saturated with 
the stimulating and purifying influences of genuine piety, 
hears with quick perception the call of the Master, " Go 
ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every 
creature." 

Some reminiscences of his boyhood are furnished by 
a sister, who was perhaps as intimately associated with 
him as any playmate of his youth. In reply to a letter 
in which some reference was made to a proposed me- 
morial of his life, she writes : 

As a child I remember our dear brother to have been generous, 
warm-hearted, and truthful. There was nothing of sullenness or obsti- 
nacy in his disposition. Ardent and impulsive in his temperament, his 
faults were only those which are common to such natures, almost wholly 
on the surface, and such as parents and friends are ever most ready to 
forgive and forget. 

He was a very good child in the main, but not at all one of the pious 
little boys of whom we sometimes read, who delight to sit with folded 
hands and meditate, while their companions are at play. He was a genu- 
ine boy, had a ringing voice and hearty laugh, was thoroughly wide-awake, 
and as full of enthusiasm and energy in his sports, as he was, in after- 
years, when engaged in work for his Master. A relative seeing him 
threading his way, when a lad, about the streets of New York, at a time 
when he was an entire stranger to the city, remarked that he never saw a 
boy like Charlie Payson. Let him drop from whatever height you chose, 
he always came down on his feet. 

Though exceedingly fond of play, he read with avidity all sorts of 
books, had a good memory for what he read, and was quick at his lessons. 
His affectionate nature prompted him to be particularly fond of pets, and 
there were always several about the house which were his especial prop- 
erty. There were doves, and rabbits, a pet lamb, the horse which he took 
pride in caring for, and the little dog, which was his loved companion 
from childhood till he became a man. 

2 



i 4 ALL FOR CIIRLST. 

His naturally fine tastes led him to delight in flowers, and the house- 
plants which frequently adorned the windows of the family sitting-room 
when Charles was a youth, all belonged to him, and were by him most 
attentively cared for. 

I recall one incident of his boyhood which shows that he had, even 
then, a tender spot in his heart for the poor and forlorn, and, as a child, 
was like St. Paui's ideal bishop, "given to hospitality." All the other mem- 
bers of the family having left home for the day, Charlie, the boy often or 
eleven years, remained by himself in charge of the house. About mid- 
day, two colored women, tired and footsore with walking many a weary 
mile, stopped at the door asking permission to sit and rest, hoping, doubt- 
less, to obtain also a morsel of food. But the kind-hearted boy put them 
off with no morsel. Spreading the cloth, he treated them as though they 
were "angels unawares," placing on the table every delicacy the house 
afforded ; and of this banquet the hungry travellers partook to their 
hearts' or rather stomachs' content. The mother of the youthful host 
returning at evening was much surprised, and probably equally annoyed, 
to see what inroads had been made upon her cakes and jellies and more 
substantial viands, by the lavish hospitality of her liberal-hearted little son. 

At sixteen years of age Charles had completed his 
preparatory studies under the tuition of his father, at 
that time principal of the academy at Ames, New York. 
The ancient and established idea in New England of a 
thorough education for the gospel ministry, controlled 
his father's plans for his children ; and Charles saw be- 
fore him the plain and open course of a youth devoted 
to the work of preaching the gospel. 

He had not, however, up to this time, made a public 
confession of faith in Christ. A Christian lad in spirit 
and desire and aim, he still hesitated to take what seem- 
ed to him a most solemn and important step. His native 
sincerity and conscientiousness prevented him from any 
sudden or ill-advised entrance upon an avowed religious 
career. 

In this state of mind and feeling he left his delightful 



EARL Y L IPE AND ED CCA Tl ON 1 5 

home, and entered Amherst College in 1848, where he 
was graduated with his class in 1852. A new and inspi- 
ring career was now opening before him. The duties, 
the pleasures, the responsibilities of college-life, all be- 
gan to stimulate afresh his energies and awaken his 
latent powers. Thrown upon his own resources and 
among companions brought together from all parts of 
the land, his natural disposition to do well whatever he 
undertook, was quickened into intense activity. One of 
his classmates speaking of him at that early period says : 
" On entering college he seemed to feel that he was en- 
joying great privileges which he must greatly improve." 

How all these new surroundings affected his thoughts 
and desires, becomes evident from his fidelity to duty as 
a student. He was always in his place, and did his work 
with scrupulous care and tireless industry. 

A letter written to his " Dear father, mother, all," at 
the beginning of his second year at Amherst, furnishes 
abundant testimony to the fact that he made good use of 
all his time and opportunities. The boy had already 
grown to be a man. And so far from having been divert- 
ed by these new experiences from his religious desires 
and aims, as sometimes happens with young men in 
college, he had evidently been developing in spiritual 
character. 

In the letter just referred to he writes : 

I was very sorry to learn so grievous a report of things at home. To 
hear that one and another of those whom I so well knew were snatched 

away, and especially the death of dear , was certainly sufficient to 

make any one pause and think of his own condition. The night I received 
your letter I could not but reflect on the one that I spent with him a short 



1 6 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

time before I left. I could almost see the Angel of Death standing over 
us, hesitating which of us he should take. God has seen fit that he should 
be taken and I left, for what purpose He alone knows. Oh, pray for me 
that I may be kept in that straight and narrow road that leads to eternal 
life. It sometimes seems as though I could willingly leave this world of 
darkness and sorrow and soar away to the mansions of bliss. But there 
is one blessed consolation, that the more toils and sorrows we endure, 
being faithful to the end, the brighter will be our crown, and the more 
perfect our enjoyment in the world to come. 

These are not the words of a dreamy, sentimental 
young man, for he was not at all of such a disposition, 
but of one intensely earnest to do the work of life, and 
deeply imbued with the spirit of religion. And they 
correspond strikingly to a remark made by a classmate 
more than twenty-five years afterward in speaking of 
impressions received from young Payson at this early 
stage of his college course : " There was a certain sad 
and subdued tone in his early life in college, as if some 
deep sorrow had recently passed over him or his. This 
had entirely passed away before we graduated." 

The following letters were written by his mother 

shortly after he left for college : 

Dear Charlie: The adage "Out of sight out of mind," I find is 
not true in respect to you and your mother's undying love. On the con- 
trary, your absence increases my interest and affection. While I can 
rejoice in the belief that you are a child of principle and piety, still, our 
wicked hearts are so deceitful and you are so constantly exposed to various 
temptations, I think often and much about you, lest you may yield f o some 
sins peculiar to a student's life. How many are overtaken by pride and 
envy and jealousy, and various passions, and led by these to grieve the 
Holy Spirit. Try and live nearer to God by faith and prayer than any of 
your friends or family-circle ; "to our own Master we stand or fall." .... 
That you may be humble and distinguished as a man of prayer and genu- 
ine piety, is the most ardent prayer of your dear father and mother 

We shall be happy to hear from you soon after receiving this. Give much 
love to Henry, and accept a large share from every member of the family. 
From your dear MOTHER. 



EARL Y LIFE AND ED UCA TION. i 7 

Ames, June 12, 184CJ. 

Dear Charlie : 1 was much pleased that you could take a trip east 
during your vacation, and hope you are now enjoying health, and what is 
more, the felt presence of God. Let not your studies divert your mind 
from prayer and other religious duties. Look well into your own heart, 
and while you look at sin in all its odiousness, at the same moment flee 
by faith to the Saviour. . . . 

Whatever trials we meet in this life, may we have grace to look 
away from them all and say, Our Father — my own covenant God and 
Father — will befriend, and take care, faithful care of me and mine. I 
was never able to confide in God and trust all with him as I have been 
during the past nine or ten months. For the most part — perhaps I ought 
to say daily — I feel to cast all at the feet of Jesus, having the joy of call- 
ing him mine, with unswerving confidence that, while we as parents, have 
entered into an everlasting covenant with God, his promise stands secure 
that he will be a God to us, and our dear children. In all your studies 
set God before your thoughts, and have no other motive but a desire to 
honor him ; and then you will have a peace and a joy language fails to 
express. 

We are almost counting the days before you return. May we be 
permitted again to meet and enjoy the unbroken family circle, and honor 
God far more than ever in our lives. 

With very much love, MOTHER. 

Ames, July — , 1849. 
My Dear Child: Feel not solitary and alone; trust your covenant 
God, and he will provide for all your wants and lead you to feel that his 
watchful care will guide and protect you till you shall be enabled to say 
like Jacob, "The Lord is in this place, dwelling with me in my room and 
by the way, and J. knew it not." The dream of Jacob is delightful for con- 
templation. To see God by living faith, to feel that he is about us, pro- 
viding for all our wants and fitting us for a mansion in heaven, ought to 
reconcile us to every trial here below. May God ever attend you by a 
retinue of angels, ministering to you at all times, and restraining you from 
sin. May you drink largely from the fountain of living waters and be en- 
abled to do much for God during this vacation, and show to all around you 
that you have the spirit of Christ. 

Thus prays your affectionate mother, 

E. B. PAYSON. 

During his first college year he had been brought to 
such a stage of religious experience that he publicly 



iS ALL FOR CHRLST. 

avowed his saving faith in Christ, and united with the 
College church. Speaking of this in a letter to his pa- 
rents he writes: "The next Sabbath after I received 
your letter I joined the church in college. Long had I 
hesitated, doubting whether I was a child of God or no, 
now hoping and believing, and again cast down and 
desponding." 

This statement of inner life only discloses that con- 
scientiousness which always characterized him, and the 
lofty ideal of the Christian character towards which he 
continually looked, and which he ever strove to realize. 
Others differently constituted would have experienced no 
such alternations of hope and fear. 

Continuing to speak of the same matter he goes on 
to say, that he had an interview with President Hitch- 
cock, who had encouraged him to make a public confes- 
sion of his faith, and had stimulated his desire to do so 
by the fact that those who defer this duty after being 
converted, are liable to lose their interest in religion. 
And furthermore, the same wise adviser admonished him 
that not a few thus never became avowed Christians at 
all. But, on the other hand, by uniting with the church, 
doubts and difficulties were sure to be removed. 

"This with other reasons," he proceeds to say, "in- 
duced me to join. And although I have some dark days 
yet, it seems as though I could say from my heart, ' The 
Lord is my portion, what want can I know ?' " 

Abundant and positive are the testimonies to his 
piety and manliness, given by those associated with him 
in his student life. One classmate says : " He always 



EARL i ' LIFE AND ED UCA TION. 1 9 

exhibited a decided Christian spirit and principle, and 
we always knew where to find him when a moral point 
was at stake. I can recall no incident which reflected 
aught against his Christian integrity during the whole 
course of college discipline." And this testimony of his 
classmate is confirmed by the records of the institution, 
which declare that his deportment while there was 
perfect. 

These facts remind us of the Scripture, " Against such 
there is no law!' Discipline was not for him who was 
thoroughly controlled in desire and purpose by the word 
of God. So steadily from the outset did the current of 
his life flow toward the kingdom of God, whose interests 
and righteousness he supremely loved and sought to 
attain. 

It would seem to be no slight element in making up 
an estimate of any man, that his associates should bear 
witness to such uniform Christian character and conduct 
in the midst of temptations that lead astray so many 
young men, who, going forth to the experiences of life 
from excellent homes, fail to return with unsullied man- 
hood. 

While, then, faithful in all his duties as a student, 
performing conscientiously the work assigned him by his 
instructors, Mr. Payson never forgot that he was to ren- 
der himself useful as a servant of the Saviour of the 
world. The cultivation of his intellect was only a means 
to an end. His studies were to prepare him to accom- 
plish the utmost for the good of man and the glory of 
God. His knowledge was to be an instrument employed 



20 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

in saving others. Never did he suffer personal culture 
to stand in the way of usefulness. His was not an ambi- 
tion to merely excel others in the ranks of college honors. 
He was too zealous a disciple of Christ to yield to such 
a temptation. And hence, while his standing as a scholar 
was good, he was better known as one of the active 
Christians in his class. 

A classmate writes : 

I remember Charles H. Payson in college most for his conscientious 
adherence to what he deemed to be right. In the class prayer-meetings 
his prayers were very earnest, penitential, tender, and evidently the out- 
goings of a soul used to communion with God. He was always at the 
meeting and always in the spirit of it. So of other religious exercises. 
The religious element was highly developed in him. He was one of those 
few among the students who used to go out to teach in Sunday-school and 
hold prayer-meetings in adjoining towns. 

Another also writes of him : 

A man of great sweetness of spirit and of deep religious experience ; 
a shining example of the devout, consistent Christian. 

And yet another classmate recollects him in the fol- 
lowing description : 

His literary productions always showed evidence of thought, and of 
his studious endeavor to make each performance better than its prede- 
cessor. This honesty of purpose was characteristic of all he did and said, 
and entered into every exercise, whether in the recitation room, the Liter- 
ary Society, or the meetings of his class. And by it he attained a good 
position among his fellows. . . . 

Through not possessing those positive characteristics that cause 
one always to run against the angles of another and hasten to encounter 
opposition in those who do not agree with him, yet he never stood in an 
equivocal position, but on each question which might arise among his 
fellows it was known where he would stand even before his opinion was 
asked for. . . . His aim always was to be right, and he was sure to err if 
at all on the right side. 



EARL Y LIFE AND ED UCA TION. 2 1 

These testimonies from the best witnesses, so clear 
and harmonious, present a distinct outline of the charac- 
ter and career of Mr. Payson during his life as a student 
at Amherst. From the intimacies of a close friendship ( 
enjoyed by a few personal friends, abundant evidence 
might be brought of his unusually ardent affection, his 
peculiarly warm sympathy, and unselfish devotion. 
Whatever he had, or could do, was always at the dis- 
posal of his friends. Self-forgetful, he was abundant in 
all kindly offices to others. Warm-hearted and impul- 
sive, he counted nothing too costly for a sacrifice, in the 
interests of a genuine friendship. 

At the same time, thrown much upon his own re- 
sources for support, he developed self-reliance, and dis- 
played that thrift, energy, and industry, which charac- 
terized him throughout life. The eldest of a large family 
of children, he relieved his parents as far as possible 
from all care of himself ; and in later years, when father 
and mother had gone to the joys of heaven, he as elder 
brother took their place in affectionate concern and aid 
for his brothers and sisters. 

And thus, during these four important years of stu- 
dent life, making the most of his opportunities, he pre- 
pared himself to enter upon the work of the Lord in the 
Christian ministry. After graduating with honors in 
1852, he spent some time in teaching, in order to obtain 
means for completing his studies in the Theological 
Seminary. Almost immediately he became principal of 
the academy at Pompey, New York, and the same quali- 
ties of character which he had already displayed in col- 



22 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

lege were brought into even fuller exercise in this new 
and responsible position. 

Here is the testimony of an eye-witness and of a 
Christian man who has himself since done a noble work 
in the ministry : 

Mr. Charles H. Payson came to Pompey Academy fresh from col- 
lege, and full of the enthusiasm which always characterized him. He 
could do nothing by halves. He put new life into the old Academy, 
which, with the entire community, was beginning to feel the drain of large 
communities on the great thoroughfares of travel. He threw himself 
earnestly into the work of the church, and made himself felt as a man of 
society, the Christian scholar, and the enthusiastic Christian. He and 
his entire family were nothing if they were not Christian. 

I was then entering my last year of preparatory study with Amherst 
college in view. It was a happy thing to be thrown in with one of such 
glowing temperament and Christian life, the impression of which has 
never left me, and I think never will. 

And I am certain he will be remembered in the long line of worthy 
principals in this honored school of central New York, as among the most 
successful, and in his ardent Christian devotion perhaps without a peer. 

Persons of cooler temperament and age sometimes thought him a 
little extravagant in statement and manner, and sometimes spoke apolo- 
getically, willing to make allowance for inexperience. But the sober ver- 
dict of our time sets its crown on religious enthusiasm when it flames up 
in a sound mind well versed in the Scriptures, and takes side with the 
man who sets things moving, so it be towards some wholesome end. 
Principal Payson stands approved in both these respects. Long will he 
be remembered in old Pompey. 

Having passed nearly two years in teaching, Mr. 
Payson devoted his time for a few months to the Insu- 
rance business. In this as in every employment he un- 
dertook, his genial manners, tact, and energy, rendered 
him especially efficient. He was so prospered financially 
during those few months that some of his business 
friends were led to remark that if he should devote him- 
self to business rather than to the ministry, he might in 



EARL Y LIFE AND ED UCA T10N. 2 3 

a few years attain to affluence. And the company with 
which he was engaged offered him a liberal salary if he 
would remain. 

But he was not to be diverted from his chosen work. 
In the fall of 1854 he entered Union Theological Semi- 
nary in New York. At last he found himself directly 
engaged in those special studies by which he was to be 
prepared for his chosen work in life. To this had he 
long been looking forward. And now that the time had 
come, he seemed to gather up all his energies to do with 
utmost zeal and fidelity what these three years of final 
training laid upon him in duty and privilege. If the 
opportunities of college seemed to him great, these were 
even greater. Studies most congenial, most inspiring, 
now absorbed his attention. 

And yet here, as always, his desires and aims were 
of the most practical sort. Not to be a scholar in spec- 
ulative theology or simply learned in the lore of scien- 
tific religion, but to fit himself most completely to be a 
worker in the pastoral office, was his solemn purpose. 
What he longed to do was the work of Christ in saving 
mankind. All his knowledge, all his discipline and cul- 
ture, was only so much of preparation for that final 
object. 

He could not therefore be content with the duties of 
• the lecture-room and the labors of routine studies, but 
sought all opportunities to make himself useful in Chris- 
tian work. A teacher by nature, he turned instinctively 
and sympathetically towards Sunday-school instruction. 
He heartily believed in the theory of evangelizing the 



2i ALL FOR CLLRLST. 

world through the religious training of the children. And 
although while a theological student he did not discover 
the Lord's purpose concerning him in this special work, 
he was nevertheless being prepared for it by divine influ- 
ence and guidance. 

The following communication from one of the teach- 
ers in his first Sunday-school may serve to illustrate this 
fact : 

Dear Sir: Having learned that you were about to publish a 
memoir of the Rev. C. H. Payson, I have felt that it would be a privilege as 
well as a duty to send you some account of his first work in this city, 
believing that very few, if any, of his personal friends know how well that 
work was done and how much was accomplished. I have neither dates 
nor statistics, but only some precious memories, which it will be a pleasure 
for me to recall. 

Not long after his entering the Theological Seminary of this city, 
he was invited, through Mr. Pardee, to take charge of a feeble Sabbath- 
school connected with the Bethesda Baptist Church, meeting then in 
Chrystie near Delancey street. It was soon apparent to that little band of 
teachers, that God, in his providence, had sent them no ordinary man for 
their superintendent. His singleness of purpose, his entire consecration, 
and his warm, loving sympathy, won all hearts to himself. He began his 
work in earnest ; he visited from house to house in that locality, and soon, 
where there had been but a handful, there was a roomful of attentive, 
interested scholars. 

As I look back to those days, I ask myself wherein was the secret ? 
Why did those scholars attend so regularly and become so interested ? 
There were no prizes offered nor entertainments given, by which to 
attract them. No! These were not necessary. There was a stronger 
attraction than such things could offer. The children were drawn by the 
magnet of love. I believe that the smallest child felt that the superin- 
tendent loved him, and sought by all possible means to do him good. 

But an earnest Christian like Mr. Payson could not be satisfied with 
merely a large and interested school. He longed for something more ; 
for the salvation of the scholars he labored and prayed. Well do I re- 
member one Saturday night, at our teachers' meeting, how he poured out 
his soul in earnest desire that salvation might come to the school. 

The language he used has passed from my memory, but the impres- 
sions of that evening will never be effaced. I went from that meeting 



EARLY LIFE AND EDUCATION. . 25 

with the assurance that there was a special blessing in store for our school ; 
for God never gives such earnest desires for the outpouring of his Spirit 
to disappoint us, but rather he gives them because he means to bless. 

Therefore it was no surprise to me, the next morning, to feel the 
holy hush upon the school during its opening exercises. And when du- 
ring the session I glanced across the room and saw a class of young girls 
with their teacher in tears, I knew what it meant. The Holy Spirit had 
come; -in answer to prayer, and touched the hearts of those who had hith- 
erto been indifferent to the claims of the gospel. 

I need not dwell upon that day. From that hour began one of the 
most quiet, yet sweetest works of grace I ever witnessed. Not only was 
every member of the class referred to brought to Christ, but other schol- 
ars, and some of the teachers, came out upon the Lord's side. Some of 
these have passed on to glory, but many still remain, and bear living tes- 
timony to the genuineness of the profession then made. 

It was not enough for Mr. Payson that those under his care should 
be converted, but having been the means of leading them to Christ, he 
sought to train them for Christian usefulness. For this purpose he estab- 
lished a children's meeting, where the young converts were encouraged 
to speak of their joys and temptations, and where, as one who was privi- 
leged to attend those meetings has said to me, " he became a young con- 
vert with them, entering with ready sympathy into all their experiences, 
and thus seeking to lead them to a more and more confiding trust in Jesus 
as their friend and Saviour." 

But this sketch would be incomplete did I fail to speak of Mr. Pay- 
son's peculiar fitness for visiting the sick and the poor. In this depart- 
ment of labor he was especially blessed. I recall his visits to a widow 
whom he found in an upper room of a tenement-house, without relatives, 
and entirely dependent upon charity. The comfort and blessing that his 
ministrations were to that sick woman cannot be told here, but shall be 
told there, where the reward will be given for the cup of cold water. 

One day while visiting for Sunday-school scholars, he found in a 
rear house in Forsyth street a little lame boy, a confirmed invalid. He 
could not attend Sunday-school; and one might have supposed that, amid 
the pressure of other duties, the lame boy might have been passed by. 
But no ; often did Mr. Payson find time to cheer that humble home by 
his presence. It was not too small a service for him to carry Sunday- 
school papers to lame Johnny; and when he went to Germany, he made 
arrangements to ha^e little Johnny visited. 

Another incident is recalled of a little infant-class scholar whom he 
brought every morning to Sunday-school. She sickened and died, but 
feft him the assurance, as he often expressed it, that she would be among 
the first to meet him in heaven. 

3 



26 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

These incidents may seem trivial to some, but I refer to them be- 
cause they illustrate that trait so prominent in Mr. Payson's character, 
that no service, where he could speak a word for the Master, or let in a 
single ray of sunshine into an otherwise darkened life, was in his estima- 
tion small. I have reason to believe that the joy and blessing which he 
had in his labors in that school, had much to do with his decision to de- 
vote his life to the Mission work. That school long since disbanded. 
Scholars and teachers are scattered, but the work still remains. There 
are those who to-day can testify that there was an impulse given their 
Christian life then that is still felt. And thus began the life-work of one 
of whom we may now say, " He rests from his labors, and his works do 
follow him." 

Later in his seminary course Mr. Payson was en- 
gaged in work in a mission school connected with the 
Rev. Dr. Potts' church-. A gentleman associated with 
him at that time speaks of this work as follows : 

If I remember aright he came to us in the fall of 1856. The mis- 
sion school was then located in the Thirteenth street public school build- 
ing, near Sixth avenue. It was very small in numbers and but feebly sus- 
tained. A number of the young people of the church came to the rescue, 
and having districted the neighborhood, thoroughly canvassed it for schol- 
ars, who soon began to pour in from all directions, and Mr. Payson's ser- 
vices were then secured while he was still a student at Union Theological 
Seminary. He was full of zeal and enthusiasm, and entered with all his 
heart into the work, endearing himself to all around him, and making 
many warm friends. He interested himself very greatly in the half-grown 
boys in the neighborhood, and organized a boys' meeting for debating and 
mutual improvement. . . . He had great influence over this class of boys, 
and attracted them to him by his kind and cordial manner and his sin- 
cere interest in their welfare. 

On the completion of his studies at the seminary he severed for a 
time his connection with our school and sailed for Germany. . . . His pur- 
pose was to perfect himself in the German language, with a view lo labor 
ing among the German population of our city 

On his return from Europe, in September, 1858, he found us in our 
new building on Sixth avenue, near Tenth street, and very soon after was 
engaged as a missionary and superintendent of the school. Having lost 
none of his zeal or enthusiasm during his long absence, he now went to 
work in deep earnest, devoting his whole time to the interests of the mis- 
sion, and soon gathering around him a good congregation, composed 



EARL Y LIFE AND ED UCA TIOAT. 2 7 

chiefly of the parents of the scholars. He held a Sabbath evening ser- 
vice and a weekly prayer-meeting, and for a time a daily union prayer- 
meeting which was largely attended. How often I have gone with him 
to the dingy garret or the dark cellar-home of some wretched family, seek- 
ing for scholars or bringing comfort and aid to them in their misery. His 
warm and sympathizing heart was always open to their sorrows, and he 
was constantly devising plans for their relief and comfort. For years 
after he left us many of these people would find delight in talking to mi. 
of the dear Mr. Payson who used to visit them and do them so much 
good. I have many letters from the older scholars, written at that time, 
in which they speak of him in terms of affectionate regard, and of his en- 
thusiasm and aid in their hours of darkness and doubt. 

Another feature of his work was the establishment of several meet- 
ings for prayer in the homes of the people. These he styled "Neighbor- 
hood Prayer-meetings." They were very successful and largely attended. 
Mr. Payson took great interest in them, and gathered around him a large 
number of helpers, who would distribute themselves each week among 
these several meetings, Mr. Payson always attending one or another of 
them. This plan of holding prayer-meetings in the homes of the people 
has been adopted in many other missions, but I think the idea originated 
with him. They were kept up for several years after he left us, and re- 
sulted in much good. 

In recalling these facts I have been carried back to those days of 
pleasant intercourse with Mr. Payson and work together for the Master. 
He had a noble corps of helpers around him, men and women of devoted 
piety and earnest zeal, some of them afterwards devoting their lives to the 
ministry or to the work of foreign missions. Some, no doubt, have al- 
ready greeted him on that distant shore, where I trust we shall all reas- 
semble some day 

I met Mr. Payson on last Christmas day, and enjoyed a most de- 
lightful talk with him about old times. It seemed to give him much pleas- 
ure to hear about the old scholars and of what had become of them. 
Very truly yours? E. McJ. 

An article from Mr. Pay son's own pen, recently pub- 
lished in the " American Messenger," describes a scene 
which occurred at this very time. 

One Saturday afternoon I was seeking scholars for my Sabbath - 
school in the city of New York. My search had been comparatively with- 
out success. I was wearisomely climbing the narrow staircases of a dirty 
tenement-house, when at last I came to a door on the upper story. A 



2 S ALL FOR CHRLST. 

cheerful " Come in " greeted my rather hopeless knock. I opened the 
door, and knew I was entering a Christian home. There is a wonder- 
ful difference between that labored cleanliness which says, " Take care ; 
no strangers wanted here," and the comfortable neatness of Christian 
hospitality which says, " Come in and rest." It was not the flowers in 
the windows, nor the simple pictures on the wall, nor the neat rag-carpet, 
nor the white coverlet of the bed which filled the alcove opening out of 
the little sittingroom, which gave me this idea, but the kindly look which 
shone out from the face of that cheerful-looking old woman beautifying 
all her surroundings. I felt at home at once, and often repeated the visit 
which gave me ever some new lesson in Christian life and experience. 

Little by little I learned her past history. Once she had lived in 
easy circumstances, and rejoicing in the love of her husband and five chil- 
dren. One by one they died. One by one creature comforts had to be 
given up, till at last, broken down by incurable disease, and forsaken by 
all who naturally should have cared for her, she became utterly dependent. 
In this hour of trial she was enabled to look to God alone and ask of him 
the aid she could find nowhere else. Her disease prevented her leaving 
her little room to supply any need, however imperative. Only when her 
house was burned, if my memory serves me, did she leave her room for 
thirty-eight long years. And yet all this time she lived alone. For rent, 
clothing, fuel, food, and medicine, she had no one but God to depend 
upon. And to him she went, with all the trusting simplicity of a child to 
a parent, and was never disappointed. 

I well remember one occasion when my own faith was greatly tried 
in her behalf. For some two years it was my privilege to pay her rent 
from the funds of the church with which I was then connected. Unex- 
pectedly one Saturday afternoon, instead of the money, I was obliged to 
inform her that the allowance had been cut off. I knew that Monday the 
rent came due, and being unable myself to meet the necessity, was full of 
trouble in her behalf. I expected, as a matter of course, to see my trou- 
ble reflected in the face usually so full of peace and comfort. Imagine 
my amazement when, with a cheerful smile, she said, " No matter ; it is all 
right ;" and changing the subject, went on as if this matter was not of the 
least consequence to herself. But I could not rest, knowing as I did that 
she had nothing in hand to meet this claim. So I brought it up again, 
and asked her how she could be so composed with this new and unex- 
pected trouble resting upon her. What should we do? Then came her 
never-to-be-forgotten answer : " Do you suppose that the good Father, 
who took care of me for eighteen years before this help ever came, is go- 
ing to leave me now ? Don't trouble yourself one moment about it, for I 
know my rent will be forthcoming just as soon as I really need it." So it 
proved, and her unwavering faith was triumphantly vindicated then, and 



EARL Y LIFE AND EDUCATION. 29 

thousands of times besides, before God called her to himself. By death 
or removal one set of Christian helpers after another passed away ; but 
God was the same unchanging Friend all the way through. On him she 
leaned in prayerful trust ever, and he never failed her. 

Hundreds have enjoyed the little meetings held in her room every 
Sunday afternoon, and often on weekday evenings besides. Many an un- 
converted soul has there found Christ, but more feeble Christians have 
been so strengthened through that poor woman's faith, that her memory 
will be precious to them for ever. 

About a year after he entered the seminary he writes 
to one of his sisters as follows : 

My Dear Sister : I wrote you last just before I left Cleveland. I 
have had some very bad news since I returned. My dear chum Benjamin 
was very ill with the typhus-fever when I came to New York, and yester- 
day, as we hear, the dear, good fellow breathed his last. It sometimes 
seems strange that God should remove one so talented, so nearly ready 
to stand up and speak in his holy name. I have often wondered the last 
two days why it was that the angel of death, as he looked into our room 
last winter, chose Benjamin and left me. How truly Young says, "Death 
loves a shining mark." May I not hope that our Father has some good 
work for me, since thus he spares me ? I found my room occupied by a 

Mr. J of the Junior class on my arrival here. I think we shall get 

along very pleasantly, as he is a pleasant, agreeable fellow. We have 
things nearly righted now ; have purchased a very pretty carpet. 

My happiest day was when I visited the Sabhath-school again. All 
the scholars acted as though they were beside themselves. The boys 
stamped, and all over the room it was, " Mr. Payson has come, Mr. Payson 
has come !" And such bright, hearty, welcome smiles ! Oh, they brought 
a very balm to my troubled, weary heart ! I went into the room where 
the infant class were assembled. We sang two or three old pieces, or 
rather tried to. . . . The little ones stared at me as though they could n't 
see enough. One of the sweetest of the little band came at last and gave 
me her fan, a tiny little baby fan, and then went back and wondered what 
more she could do. After five minutes' deliberation she came again, and 
put up the very prettiest little mouth for me to kiss. As a climax, little 
Allie said, " Mr. Payson, we 've had a little sister at our house since you 
went away." Ah, such prattling innocence ! Would this world held more 
of it. 

The death of his father in February, 1856, to which 
some expressions in the last letter are attributable, threw 



3 o ALL FOR CHRLST. 

a great weight of responsibility upon him, not only in the 
administration of the estate, but in the care of his wid- 
owed mother and younger brothers and sisters. Refer- 
ring to some of these things, he writes, partly upon the 
half sheets accompanying the examination papers of the 
Theological Seminary : 

My Dear Sister : You know not what a source of pleasure it is at 
last to grasp my pen and wing a few words of love to my " pet sis." I feel 
I fairly deserve to be disowned ; but if you will give me another try, I will 
promise to write you within three days of the receipt of each letter from 
you. Just look over the other side and see what one week furnished 
me in the way of work. And that was but a tithe ; for who shall enumer- 
ate the cares that appertain to me as to sisters and brothers, Sabbath- 
schools and day-schools, lessons and teachers, debts and credits, and above 
all, the care of souls in my Sunday-school. 

Yesterday my last great burden was removed. I received a check 
for the money due us from the insurance company. . . . Without it I can 
hardly imagine how we could have gone along at all. . . . We shall go 
home the first part of July, I suppose. You must make your calculations 
to go home at the same time. I will write you more definitely before we 
leave. 

And now, my dear sister, how is it with you ? Are you fighting the 
good fight ? Does heaven seem brighter ? Does Christ grow precious ? 
At times I want to go ; but then, oh how I want to labor for souls — to do 
something for him. Love Christ, so that you will LIVE him, and your 
example will be a sermon that no adversary can gainsay or resist. Pray 
for me, and do write me soon. I am longing for a sight of my dear " little 
sis." May God give me the sweet privilege soon. 

Your ever-loving CHARLIE. 

While he was in the seminary Mr. Payson became 
deeply interested in Home Missions. Gradually there 
was formed in his mind the purpose to devote himself to 
missionary work on the frontiers of the great West of 
our country. The moral destitution of large regions, 
sparsely populated by families that had gone thither from 
Eastern states, awakened his sympathy and roused his 



EARL Y LIFE AND ED UCA TION. 3 1 

zeal. With a holy enthusiasm he anticipated a life devo- 
ted to his countrymen in new communities, where the 
institutions of society and religion were to be founded 
and built up. Like Paul, he preferred not to build on 
another man's foundations. 

With these desires and expectations Mr. Payson pros- 
ecuted his theological studies. A spirit so earnest and 
aims so practical would not permit him to lose his reli- 
gious fervor in the colder atmosphere of mere scientific 
dogmatism. The grand and stimulating topics of study 
that make up the curriculum of a theological student, did 
not abate his devotion nor steal from him the spirit and 
power of fervent prayer. 

The devotional exercises of the class and the semi- 
nary found in him a faithful and zealous supporter. 
Always ardent in his desire for scholarship and to excel 
in every exercise, he still lived in an atmosphere of spir- 
itual warmth, that kept him in fullest sympathy with all 
earnest and active Christians. 

In the spring of 1857 Mr. Payson was graduated with 
his class, holding a high position in their confidence and 
esteem. To those more particularly intimate with him, 
it was evident that he possessed qualifications and abili- 
ties for great usefulness. 

But he sought, in accordance with all his controlling 
ideas, to avail himself of every opportunity to enlarge his 
acquaintance with mankind ; and, consequently, having 
formed with one of his classmates a plan of study and 
travel in Europe, he sailed from New York a few days 
after leaving the seminary. 



32 ALL FOR CLLRLST. 

To an ardent and energetic nature like his, such an 
opportunity became extremely stimulating ; and he de- 
clared many a time afterward that the months thus devo- 
ted had been among the most delightful and profitable of 
his whole student life. Whether among the old cities of 
Europe, with their marvels of art and wealth and historic 
interest, or in the midst of the glories of Alpine summits 
or the charms of southern landscapes, he found ever 
something that could be appropriated to the fund from 
which to draw for future usefulness. After spending the 
summer at Heidelberg, he was matriculated in the Uni- 
versity of Berlin in the autumn, and devoted himself to 
the lectures of Professors Twesten and Nitsch, men emi- 
nent for learning and piety. 

Thus passed the year of university life, in the midst 
of scenes and associations novel and interesting, espe- 
cially to a young man from the New World. 

The following season was devoted to travel through 
Germany, Austria, Italy, Switzerland, and France. The 
results of that visit upon the character and mental resour- 
ces of the faithful pastor in New York for many years 
afterward were of no little consequence. They rendered 
him more cosmopolitan in his ideas and sympathies, fur- 
nished him inexhaustible stores of illustration in inter- 
preting the truths of the gospel, and added moral weight 
to his opinions and utterances. And through all his 
after life he found in these pleasant memories a rest and 
refreshment for which he was ever grateful. 



LETTERS FROM ABROAD. 33 

CHAPTER II. 

LETTERS FROM ABROAD. 

Most of the letters contained in this chapter are of 
a general nature, and sufficiently explain themselves. 
Some of them are descriptive, and some, in part at 
least, are personal ; but all will be found interesting in 
so far as they serve to throw light on Mr. Payson's char- 
acter. The letters descriptive of foreign travel might 
have been multiplied, but the limits of this little book 
forbid. 

Of the first two, the gentleman who furnished the 
account of Mr. Payson's work in Sixth avenue writes as 
follows : 

I have greatly valued these two letters, and now enclose them for 
your perusal. You are at liberty to make such use of them as may be 
desirable. They are strongly characteristic of him at that time, showing 
his deep and earnest piety, his warm friendship, and his love for souls. 
I have always felt deeply indebted to him for those timely counsels, and 
would be glad if their reproduction would aid in lighting the pathway of 
some others as they did mine. 

The letters referred to are given herewith, and to the 
second of them, it may be remarked, this little volume is 
indebted for its title. 

Heidelberg, Aug. 17, 1857. 

My Dear Friend: In Charley L 's last letter he was speaking 

of his pleasant visits to your dear home. This, of course, carried me back 
to my own unexpected and therefore all the more delightful acquaintance 
with you and yours at " Home," and the promise I made to write you 
from the "Fatherland." Where can I so well fulfil that promise as here 
in beautiful Heidelberg? Here, if anywhere, old associations will revive, 



34 ALL FOR CLIRLST. 

and in its quiet valleys, its retired and shady paths, must come up visions 
of the far-off home and the friends left behind. How pleasant among 
such thoughts are the recollections of our much-loved Sabbath-school, and 
the happy hours we spent together ! How strangely true that those labors 
which cost us most of toil and sacrifice are those to which we can look 
back with the greatest pleasure. The cost was paid in weariness, but the 
memory of them is the fragrance of heaven, cheering us in the hours of 
weakness ; yes, and they shall tune our harps, I trust, to a nobler song of 
thanksgiving in a better world. 

I am sure, my dear friend, that you as well as I look forward to that land 
with the highest anticipations. How often have I thought you were even 
as the " young ruler," almost in the kingdom. I know that nothing could 
induce you to give up the hope of heaven, and trust that ere this you huve 
decided the great point, and resolved to be Christ's, and his alone, both 
in this world and that to come. How often did the words quiver on my 
lips. How often would I have entreated you to accept the Best of Friends, 
one whom I had proved and never found wanting ; but, coward that I was, 

I feared it might be an unpleasant subject. Forgive me, my dear E , 

that I loved you so little, and remember that no news would so cheer my 
heart as to learn from you that the great question was settled, and you 
were happy. I used to think I was happy ; but I assure you that one 
hour with my Redeemer, one hour of calm communion and unwavering 
faith, is better than any pleasure earth ever gave me. Think not, my 
dear friend, that with religion you sacrifice happiness. Look at our dear 

Mrs. E ; yes, go and ask her when she was happier — in the days long 

gone by, when earth seemed to heap its every blessing upon her ; or now, 
when stripped of almost all, with health impaired, she loves the religion 
she once only professed. And her experience is that of the world. The 
pleasures that earth gives are far more in the anticipation than the reality; 
and then the bitter days that ever remain and mar the recollections of 
even our happiest hours ! But I will not weary you with thoughts that 
you have heard from your cradle. You know what joy you can have — the 
prize is before you. Oh come, and bring happiness to your friends ; yea, 
even to that angel sister who has gone a little before. I wish you would 

write and tell me (why should you not, E ?) that you have ceased the 

unequal conflict, and are Christ's for ever. . . . Give my best regards to 

all your family, especially your brother F , and remember that so far 

away one heart beats warm for you with good wishes and earnest prayers. 
As to myself, my health is excellent ; my happiness is more than pen and 
paper can express. The hours and moments are filled to overflow with 
new sights and joys. Yet amid all I long to be at home and work again. 
Remember me, though we meet not as of old, and make happy 

Your friend, C. H. PAYSON. 



LETTERS FROM ABROAD. 35 

Rome, April, 1S58. 

My Dear, Dear E : Words cannot express the emotions that 

thrilled my heart as I read your precious, precious letter. It was only this 
morning that I was encouraging myself to still wait and pray for you by 
those words of Jesus in Matt. 21 : 21, 22, especially the last verse : "And 
all things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive." 
God be thanked that you are at last safe ; yes, safe, for if you have truly 
given yourself up, Satan himself can never draw you away. Does it not 
now seem strange that you waited so long, and strove so hard to do what 
was so very easy in the end ? Ah, if men were not so proud, the way to 
heaven would not be so strait. But we insist on doing all ourselves, and 
thus are never nearer the end desired — nearer, did I say ? rather, every 
day farther and farther away from that meek, humble, childlike faith that 
Jesus so much loved. 

And now, my friend, life is before you with new ends and aims. The 
question, I see, is, " How shall I spend it ?" I can tell you in a few words, 
only three : All for Christ. It is a delightful thought to me, and one 
that I presume you have heard me express, that here in this world, where 
I have to an extent control of myself, and can seek what I will, I can honor 
Christ more than in heaven. There I shall desire only to praise him; but 
here, where fame, riches, and honors entice, where we are surrounded by 
a great cloud of witnesses, angels, men, and devils — honor and glory be to 
God, who hath promised us the victory in our Lord Jesus Christ. You 
ask me for advice. My dear E , I hope I have been a Christian sev- 
eral years, and as the result of my experience, learned by many a sore 
trial, I can only say, Live for Christ. Don't do as I did at first, seek for 
praise and happiness, and put Jesus in the background ; but make his 
glory and the advancement of his cause the end. Yes, if you seek riches, 
seek them for him ; if you travel, do it to his honor ; if you become learn- 
ed, let it be that you may serve him more ; thus keep your eye always 
fixed on him, and then pass all these side issues, these things of earth, 
between you and him. If they hide him from you, put away the accursed 
thing. If not, use them to his glory, and be ever in the light of his coun- 
tenance. Oh the heaven on earth a man may live if Jesus is all and in all ! 

I wonder if you feel as weak and feeble as I did when I hoped I be- 
came a Christian. It was as though I was a child just beginning to walk. 
. When alone, my feet would totter beneath me, my prayers were so feeble. 
But when with older Christians, at the prayer-meeting or at church, it was 
as though a stronger arm sustained me, and I could walk when I leaned 
on those that loved and sympathized with me. What a strange thing this 
fellowship of Christian hearts is. I feel it as I write you to-night. I loved 
you when I wrote you before, and talked with great freedom, yet I must 
confess not without fear that you might take offence at my freedom. But 



36 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

now how changed! That "perfect love which casteth out all fear" has 
bound us together by new ties, even those that eternity, I trust, cannot 
sever. Let me mention an exercise in which I have found peculiar delight, 
and which I hope you too may find profitable. It is this: beginning with 
Genesis, trace out the account of every prayer, and the answer ; consider 
the circumstances under which these prayers were made, the great variety 
of blessings desired, and the readiness with which God responded. I am 
sure it will encourage you to pray as never before, and convince you that 
" our Father " thinks of us, and loves us in all our cares and sorrows, how- 
ever insignificant they may seem to us. Clouds, so dark and black as to 
hide heaven itself, will yet overshadow your path. Let me entreat you, 
then, to pray. Never, no never, turn from your Saviour, and you will 
always find that the darkest cloud is only a veil that, being removed, shall 
reveal glories never before imagined. 

You ask me if I like Europe. Yes, I do ; but I love America, free, 
happy America, far better; and I long to be at home and at work. Since 
I heard the glorious news from America, I must say I have been home- 
sick, and I almost envy you who are in the midst of God's wondrous work- 
ings. My whole heart is with you, and though surrounded by all the 
pomp and display of Holy Week, and treading the dust of ancient Rome, 
I would that it were right for me to leave to-morrow for home and the 
work I so long to be engaged in. But duty bids me stay, and till the first 
of September I must still be a wanderer. I do hope that you and all my 
dear friends will remember me at the throne of grace, and entreat God to 
fit me for that great work which I so much fear, yet so earnestly desire to 

enter upon. I trust that when you write me again I shall hear that F 

too is following in your steps. I have great hopes for him, and can but 
believe that he too shall find the path to eternal life. Remember me to 
him most affectionately, as well as to your family. I often remember with 
pleasure my visit to your island home. Write me at Paris, (poste restante,) 
as I am now moving about. My paper is only too small. I wish to write 
a hundred things, but must stop. Good- by. 

Your friend, C. H. PAYSON. 

Heidelberg, Aug. 29, 1857. 

Dear Ones at Home : . . . Need I tell you how grateful I am to 
"our Father" that he has so kindly watched over and guided everything 
to such prosperous results ? It is perfectly astonishing that I ever doubt 
when I see how constantly he is providing for us all. Each day I find 
occasion to reproach myself for want of faith towards my best Friend. 

And so E is off for college. . . . My dear brother, accept the 

advice which was given me as I entered Amherst : " Take care first of your 
soul, then of your health, and lastly of your studies." Make your motto, 



LETTERS FROM ABROAD. 37 

"Not what I am, but what I am to be in Christ." Aim high, so shall 
your arrow higher reach. Heaven is higher than earth. My brother, set 
the mark there. ... In my last, I believe, I had not reached Heidelberg, 
and now I am about to leave it. Never did a spot become so dear in so 
short a time. Let me describe it, and you will not wonder that I love it. 
You approach it from Mauheim and the Rhine across a perfectly level 
plain some twelve miles wide. Suddenly from that perfect level spring up 
two towering peaks, (at least for this country,) the Heilenberg and Geis- 
berg, covered to their very summit with foliage of the richest green. Here 
are beautiful vineyards loaded with their luscious burdens. Between these 
peaks, on the banks of the classic Neckar, sits Heidelberg, the queen of 
the Rhineland. Around her the guardian Odenwald clasps his leafy arms, 
as if to guard her from all harm, and shut her out from the common herd. 
One long street stretches up the valley side by side with the petulant 
stream along which noble men have walked. In its university, venerable 
in history, Melancthon and Bucer studied. Luther slept here on his jour- 
ney to that conflict at Worms which he made immortal. 

Behind it, on the Jettenbuhl, stands the castle, its glory and pride. 
On this was lavished the wealth of princes for six centuries. Stern war, 
and more cruel time, yes. and the thunderbolts of heaven itself, have con- 
spired to make it a ruin. You climb the steep ascent, and pass the long 
entrance to the gate and hall, from whose huge, broken windows are seen 
beautiful views of Heidelberg and the valley, as of pictures in glorious 
frames. Above is the broad stone terrace, on one side of which rises the 
carved facade of St. Udalrich's chapel. In front of you, and to the right 
of the chapel, stands half of another tower, with walls iwenty-one feet 
thick, and so solid that a staircase has been dug through its very heart 
without affecting it. Behind it are numerous towers and wings, enclosing 
an irregular courtyard. The eastern facade, fronting on the court, is 
peculiarly beautiful. In the niches between the windows are three rows 
of most grac ful Italian figures. The first is composed of heroes and war- 
riors, who seem to be keeping knightly watch over the fair beings that 
occupy the second tier. Two statues on the summit are especially beau- 
tiful. They stand out against the sky so airy and lifelike, that when the 
evening sunlight strikes them, one seems covering his eyes with his hand, 
while he delights his soul with the glorious Rhine valley spread out before 
him. You pass through the court; you look with awe on that rough, jag- 
ged portcullis that seems as if ready to fall at any moment, should the 
warden sound his horn. And remember, it has stood there since 1355! 
Passing the drawbridge, you come into the most beautiful grove, through 
which wind the shadiest paths, leading in every direction, and bringing 
you continually upon new views that thrill you with excitement. Far 
away, behind and above the castle, rises the KOnigstuhl, or king's seat. 

4 



38 ALL FOR CHRIST. 

You can imagine something of the care and expense lavished on this pride 
of the " Fatherland," when I tell you that it takes some two hours to mount 
to the summit of this mountain, and yet paths and roads wind around its 
leafy groves to the very crown itself. 

But perhaps you weary of the reality of stone and trees and long for 
a little romance. Enter then one of those dark winding vaults that leads 
you know not where. Pick your way cautiously with your cane — careful! 
careful ! For aught you know a precipice yawns before your very feet. 
A damp sepulchral air surrounds you. Your companion declares that 
you approach the " Spirit vault." Darker and yet darker grows the pas- 
sage. Now comes a winding staircase with rough uneven steps. It is 
the entrance to the Spirit hall ! Now, close your eyes and walk six times 
around the vault; then, you are told, will the ghost be revealed! I tried 
it, and I must say that I was prepared for almost anything when I got 
through, but not for that which did appear, a large hall with huge windows 
(broken) opening right out into the midst of the Castle Park! Another 
similar passage leads you down to a vault in which is placed the old Hei- 
delberg Tun, a huge barrel, so large that people dance on the top of it, 
and which contains eight hundred hogsheads, or 283,200 bottles of wine. 
It was built in 1751, and has been three times filled. It is 36 feet long 
and 24 high. In front of it stands a wooden statue of the famous dwarf of 
the castle, the jester, who always drank his 15 bottles of wine before sleep- 
ing. (No wonder they needed huge tuns !) You form little idea from 
this poor description of this ivy-covered, tree-embowered Feudal temple, 
of its beauty or its vastness. But this is not all that makes Heidelberg 
delightful. Two or three times a week skilful musicians go up into the 
castle garden and there discourse music almost divine ! . . . Then it is 
that the city pours forth its wealth and beauty, and old, and young flock to 
the castle. Tables are scattered here and there through the groves, and you 
continually meet families sitting around them, and discussing their wine, 
beer, and other refreshments, while they listen to the sweetest music. But 
I must lead you across the valley and give you a nearer view of the Ilei- 
ligenberg (Holy Mountain). Upon its highest peak you will see a ruin — 
the angle of the wall of the convent St. Stephenas. ... In front of this and 
nearer the city you find another ruin yet more remarkable, for it is nothing 
more nor less than the foundation of an old temple to Mercury, and a 
short distance in the rear is found an old vault where the Sibyl is said to 
have given her responses. . . . Here some years ago were the headquarters 
of a miserable set of fanatics called Flagellators, who were accustomed 
to go through the streets half-dressed and beating themselves most cruelly 
with sticks and straps. Hundreds of them made pilgrimages to this moun- 
tain, styled by their leaders "Abraham's Mountain," but the world at last 
became weary of them and their fanaticism and they passed away. 



LETTERS FROM ABROAD. 39 

At last an old man made this peak his home. All up and down the 
valley he went, bringing joy to the weary and sorrowful. In good deeds 
he spent his life, and when he died his life had been so stamped upon the 
hearts of his fellow-men that his mountain home became sacred, and for 
his sake they ever after called it the " Holy Mountain." 

Is it not strange that a poor, unpretending man has given name to a 
peak upon which the heathen have raised their temples, the proud Roman 
his fortress and noble families their monasteries? Such is the beautiful 
peak on which I look as I raise my eyes from my paper. . . . 

I hope you are not weary, for there are other spots of which I want 
to tell you. Some two miles up the valley is a most beautiful little nook, 
shaded by luxuriant forest-trees, through which a lovely stream wends its 
way to the Neckar. Here once lived the enchantress Jetta, who prophesied 
centuries ago that this Palatinate should become famous, and who met 
with a sad death. She was torn in pieces by a wolf ! Ever since the spring 
has been known as the Wolf's Brunnen. Here is a pleasant little hotel, 
and, if you wish, one of the maids will show you a pleasing sight By 
ringing a bell she calls from the brook and reservoir large numbers of the 
finest brook trout to the shore, where they eat crumbs from her hand. I 
never saw larger trout, nor such numbers. 

Just opposite the Wolf's Brunnen stands a beautifully-situated old 
monastery or convent, now a water-cure establishment. Back of this, along 
the edge of the mountain towards Heidelberg, runs a charming little path 
called the " Gute ICostemveg" or the " Path of good peeps," which well de- 
serves the name, for at intervals, vistas have been cut through the branch- 
es and now the city, now the castle, and then the Neckar, and the Wolf's 
Brunnen or Konigstuhl appear, a beautiful picture framed with the rich 
green of the overhanging boughs. I certainly never saw more beautiful 
views than some of these little vistas furnished. 

Such is Heidelberg, or rather part of it. When T return I hope to 
have some engravings that will convey a better idea of its loveliness than 
my poor pen-sketches. One never feels the emptiness of words as when 
he endeavors to describe that which fills his soul. Then indeed we realize 
that we have that stirring and moving within us that is worthy of a nobler 
and more exalted life. 

Berlin, Oct. 23, 1S57. 

My Dear L : Early Monday morning, Aug. 31, we found our way 

to the depot at Heidelberg and soon were off for Frankfort and Berlin. 
The railroad passes through the level Rhine valley that stretches from 
the Odemvald six or eight miles to the Rhine. So we swept swiftly along 
through luxuriant fields of grain and orchards loaded with fruit, while on 
our right rose the far-famed Odenwald, on whose every peak — and they 



4 o ALL FOR CHRIST. 

are many, was set some castle old and gray and hallowed with ancient 
story. We passed churches built by Charlemagne, and turrets where the 
flags of the Crusaders often waved. . . . The scenery is perfectly chaotic 
from this window, the forest-robed hills of the Odenwald rolling and 
tumbling over and upon each other like a school of porpoises, in marked 
contrast to that rich and level plain that stretches far away in the oppo- 
site direction. We hurried through Darmstadt .... to Frankfort. . . . 
The gem of the gallery here was a picture of Huss' trial, by Lessing. . . , 
We went to the Kaisersaal or Emperors' Hall where some forty-five Ger- 
man emperors have celebrated their coronations. . . . The walls of the 
room were covered with portraits of these emperors finely painted, and 
it is said they are mostly correct likenesses. . . . 

The Jews were very numerous in Frankfort, and live in streets whose 
like for filth and stench I have never seen. The houses are very high, and 
almost meet far above your head across the narrow street. They appa- 
rently are crowded from garret to cellar ; and such display of old clothes 
and books, rusty, worn-out kitchen furniture of every imaginable descrip- 
tion, and in the most dilapidated condition, I never before have seen. 

The geniuses that presided over these tempting displays of merchan- 
dise were worthy of their position — either old men of the toothless, hat- 
less, shirtless order, or hags who looked as though they could, with their 
wiry, bony fingers, make shillings of sixpences without the least effort. 
Yet in these vile streets have vast fortunes been made, and at the head of 
the street stands the countinghouse of Rothschild himself. He is truly a 
money king 

After speaking of Dannecker's beautiful statue of 
Ariadne and of their visit at Marburg, he says : 

At noon we were in Cassel — and the rain. Cassel has some very 
fine buildings, and, according to Murray, the infallible, the largest square 
in Germany. In the centre of the park stands a statue at which I could, 
without many compunctions, have hurled a stone, for it was that of Fred- 
erick William, elector of Hesse Cassel, who hired 12,000 of his people to 
fight, in the Revolution, against America. These, as you well know, were 
the Hessians of whom we read so much in the New Jersey battles — Mon- 
mouth, etc. He received twenty-two millions of dollars for them from 
England, which he expended in beautifying his city and embellishing the 
far-famed gardens of William's Hill or Wilhemshohe. 

You must permit me to take you up that splendid allee of lime-trees 
that reaches from Cassel to the " Palace of the Garden," a distance of 
more than three miles. Here is a fine palace, but you must not stop. 
The water is admitted this afternoon, (it is a "fest^ day,) and the crowd, 



LE TTERS FR OM ABR OAD. 4 1 

hurrying up the hill, admonish us that we must be quickening our steps. 
Up we go through the most delightfully-shaded paths bordered by flowers 
of every hue and form, till suddenly we come upon a beautiful sight. 
Through a splendid vista of trees you see a lofty temple crowning the 
summit of the ridge. A huge copper statue of Hercules makes the tem- 
ple a pedestal. You can judge of its size when you learn that eight per- 
sons can stand in the club at one time, and the whole statue is 31 feet 
high. From the temple you descend to the spot we occupy by two stair- 
cases of 900 steps each, between which are the most beautiful little basins 
succeeding each other in regular steps from top to bottom. But hark ! a 
shout ! and the water springs, far above, with a mighty leap, into the air, 
as if exulting in its freedom. Quickly the basin is filled, and then one 
little stream after another carefully, quietly reaches down to the next ba- 
sin, and then, as if the timid water-sprites were frightened, as quickly, qui- 
etly withdraw their silvery arms. But soon the rollicking, flashing nymphs 
come rolling and tumbling down on the sparkling flood, and in a few mo- 
ments it seems as though one could mount from top to bottom on steps of 
glittering silver. It was a splendid sight, most truly; but the crowd are 
hurrying down the hill, and we must away, too, for soon there will be an- 
other water-scene. Yes, and here it is ! See ! how it gushes forth from the 
roots of those noble old limes and comes pouring down over rocks covered 
with velvet cushions of the greenest moss. You think it must sweep the 
crowd at the base away ; but no, channels safe and sound are provided, 
and the waters foam and bubble around, vainly striving to burst their 
rocky bounds. A little below is the grand fountain, the highest in Eu- 
rope. We are just in time, and beyond those beautiful swans the waters 
begin to burst forth, a water volcano in the midst of that crystal sea. Up, 
up, up they go, each proud sprite stretching higher, higher, higher, till at 
last toppling, balancing, they fall; and oh, how spitefully, even angrily, 
they bury themselves, those flashing darts of silver spray 

Continuing the account of this journey, he speaks of 
Eisenach and its " quaint old houses that looked as hon- 
est and contented as though nothing newer or better had 
ever been built," and then of Wartburg and "the emo- 
tions which thrilled him as he climbed that famous hill 
which, 237 years ago, Luther, in the hands of his captors, 
climbed." 

The portal of Luther's Patmos is reached First they led us 

into a chamber where the armor of famous old characters, such as Cardi- 

* 



42 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

nal of Bourbon, Pope Julius II., etc., was gathered. One was made of 
braided steel, and covered the whole body. Another was of brass and shone 
like gold. There was a sword four and a half or five feet long and very 
heavy. Hence we passed into a beautiful room, which has just been com- 
pletely refitted, where was held a famous contest of the Minnesingers in 
1207. If I am not mistaken, a picture in the Dusseldorf gallery repre- 
sents the exciting scene. On the walls were beautiful frescoes. . . . From 
the windows of this hall there is a most enchanting view, where hill and 
forest and shaded valley mingle in wild, simple, unpretending beauty. 
Wartburg (wooded mountain) was so called by its first owner, who in one 
of his hunting excursions came with his companions suddenly upon the 
brow of the hill, and struck with the beauty of the scene before him, ex- 
claimed, " This is Wartburg, and here is my home." Thence we passed 
through a narrow hall to the chapel where Luther was wont to preach to 
the inhabitants of the castle. It is a small room, but beautifully fitted up. 
I think, however, I would rather have seen the old wooden pulpit of Lu- 
ther than the velvet-faced affair that has usurped its place. On the sides of 
the hall I mentioned are several fine frescoes representing the ancient lord 
of the castle starting for the Crusades, and also the glorious triumph of 
his return. Here, too, were sketched the leading events in the life of the 
noble St. Elizabeth of Thuringia, whose home was also in this famous cas- 
tle. Among them the most striking, perhaps, was that representing the 
loaves in her apron turning into flowers. You remember the legend, I 
presume. Her husband was very penurious and cruel, and seeing her one 
morning going to the gate with well-filled apron for the poor, he demand- 
ed what she carried. " Flowers," she answered. Not believing her, he 
rudely tore her grasp away, when, strange to say, flowers instead of loaves 
fell to the ground. 

But I must pass the other rooms to take you to Wartburg's greatest 
glory, Luther's room. This, I 'm glad to say, is just as "Knight George " 
(Luther's name here) left it. It is very small, 18 by 12 feet, and the rough 
boards and cobwebbed timbers appear on every side. There is the same 
old stove, his copper wash-basin, his table too, on which was written, in 
addition to many other excellent things, his glorious translation of the Bi- 
ble ; and that huge old chest in which was contained his wardrobe. The 
window was as quaint as the rest of the room. The panes were very 
small and thick, and looked like the bottoms of broken bottles more than 
anything else I can think of. The table is banded with iron, that it may 
not suffer the fate of chair and bedstead, which have been carried away 
in bits by visitors ! There is also the hole, the last sign of Luther's conflict 
with the devil, when he hurled the inkstand at his head and smashed it 
against the wall. Relic-hunters have dug every sign of it away, and left a 
huge hole in the plaster! But time is up and I must tear myself away ... 



LETTERS FROM ABROAD. 43 

A few minutes more and we are in Erfurt. Erfurt is a quiet old 
town of some 27,000 inhabitants, not more than half what it once contained. 
It has some fine buildings in it, but for the most part the streets are crook- 
ed and narrow enough. To us there was but one point of interest — Lu- 
ther's cell in the old Augustine convent. It is no longer a convent, but 
has been changed into an orphan asylum, and as we approached the door 
we heard the sweet voices of children chanting the songs of praise where 
monks once told their beads and went through monotonous litanies. Is 
not this old building truly a type of the Reformation ? That humble monk 
breathed a new spirit into crumbling, fallen Christendom, and now there 
is but one convent to be found where once they were counted by scores, 
and the once despised Luther honors this building by bestowing on it his 
name. (It is called Martin's Asylum.) We were taken up stairs and 
through a long hall, once the chapel of the monastery, lined with pictures 
of men active in the Reformation. From it opened, among others, that 
narrow, low-ceiled cell where Luther the Catholic was changed into Luther 
the man. It is a little room, only 12 by 12, that once held so much. The 
furniture is the same that Luther once used, and I wrote from the same 
inkstand that he used while here. The wall was written all over with ex- 
tracts from the Bible made by Luther himself when a student of that long, 
forgotten book, which he by chance had found in ransacking the convent 
library. He had arranged the texts under various heads, as justification, 
condemnation, sanctification. I was struck with one passage that occu- 
pied a prominent place: " Now the fruits of the Spirit are these, love, joy, 
peace," etc. They breathed the spirit of true reform. The wall where he 
wrote has been repapered and the verses copied upon it in a neat, plain 
hand. Erfurt and its narrow cell, it seems to me, tell more of Luther's 
greatness than any other point in his history. At Wittenberg, Wart- 
burg, Worms, etc., he was surrounded by friends. He was opposed by 
bitter enemies. He had committed himself. He must go forward ox per- 
ish. But here there was nothing of the kind to incite. Everything tended 
in the opposite direction; and yet year after year he struggled to learn the 
truth, and patiently, secretly toiled till the appointed time had come. May 
we, my dear sisters, learn the lesson, and ever working, ever faithful, wait 
God's time to bring the fruits. Those only are worthy of high position 
who know how to be equal to their low estate. 

Pray excuse my many, many mistakes, for I have written in great 
haste and amid many interruptions. Good-by, and that God may ever 
bless you is the earnest prayer of your absent, but ever loving 

CHARLIE. 

My dear Mother : . . . . God has indeed " provided wonderfully 
for you all," and I feel that he is doing it that I may the more contentedly 



44 ALL FOR CHRIST. 

remain in Europe my appointed time If at any time my presence 

is necessary, send for me, and I will return immediately G is 

my greatest anxiety just now. I do hope he is diligent and faithful. Do 

see that he is regular in his study-hours They have a fine school at 

L , and though you should remain but a few weeks, it is much better 

that he should be at work. If you really want, my dear brother, to enjoy 
your visit, you must do your duty first. Remember one thing, never put 
off till to-morrow what you can learn to-day. To-day is all we own ; "to- 
morrow" never comes; therefore never say, " I will do this or that next 
year," if you can do it now. When you have time you must read Long- 
fellow's " Kavanagh," not for the story only, but the lessons he will teach. 
See how the poor schoolmaster was ever planning, planning great things, 
but at the end of life was no nearer the end desired than at the beginning. 
Especially remember these lines, so beautiful, with which he closes: 

" Stay, stay the present instant, 
Imprint the marks of wisdom on its wings; 
Oh, let it not e'ude thy grasp ; but, like 
The good old patriarch upon record, 
Hold the fleet angel fast until he bless thee." 

I am very glad, dear mother, that you have concluded to visit the 
East. I hope you will remember me most affectionately to all my dear 
friends there. Where is Uncle Thomas? I do wish he would write me 
if he is not too busy. I am sure he would have many words of good coun- 
sel to one just commencing the race which he has run so long and well. . . . 

But I must tell you of my present home and pleasures. We have 
been here in Berlin seven weeks, and on the whole have enjoyed it very 
much. It cannot compare with beautiful Heidelberg, for it stands in the 
midst of a great sandy plain, watered by the sluggish, filthy Spree, a river 
by name, a sewer in reality. The streets are broad and quite clean, but 
the foul exhalations from the sewers, that assail you at almost every step, 
are only excelled by those of Cologne, far-famed as the foulest city of Eu- 
rope, or at least of Germany. Still, a man can accustom himself to al- 
most anything, and I can now endure even Berlin gutters with scarcely a 
wince. 

As C wished to be at the meeting of the Evangelical Alliance, we 

hurried to Berlin rather earlier than I wished ; but I have been amply re- 
paid in attending the exercises of a meeting the like of which I never ex- 
pect to see on earth. There were some fourteen hundred regular mem- 
bers ; nine hundred or so from Central Europe, one hundred and sixty- 
nine from England, thirty or so from our own land, three each from Asia, 
Africa, and Australia; while Italy, Spain, France, Russia, and Sweden, 
were not wanting in delegates. Many of Germany's most distinguished 
men were present. England's noble son, Sir Culling Eardley, a prince in 



LETTERS FROM ABROAD. 45 

good deeds, was here, and with him not a few of England's learned and 
brave and good. 

But the man whom I most rejoiced to see was the far-famed author of 
the History of the Reformation — D'Aubigne, from Geneva. He is a tall, 
fine-looking man, fifty-five years of age, I should think, with heavy eye- 
brows, that give something of sternness to his noble face ; but when you 
hear him pouring forth his polished, pithy sentences from an overflowing 
heart, you feel that you are in the presence of a man who truly loves his 
God and his fellow-men. He occupied a prominent position throughout 
the exercises, and his remarks were always listened to with the utmost 
attention and respect. 

The exercises of the first day I can never forget. There were gath- 
ered representatives from Christ's kingdom throughout the world, and 
though their languages differed, one heart and one spirit seemed to per- 
vade the whole assembly. No matter whether the prayer or the speech 
were in English, French, or German, there were ever the same kindling 
eye and glowing face that betoken a feeling heart. Never can I forget 
the speech of a young German, a missionary from Australia. It was near 
the close of the exercises, and the speakers had been limited to five min- 
utes each. His heart was full to overflowing, and he knew not how to 
crowd himself within such narrow limits. His words came forth in a per- 
fect torrent while he described the greetings, so earnest, so heartfelt, that 
fellow-laborers — bishops, pastors, and churches — had sent to Berlin from 
the antipodes. But these were only the beginning. At each island on his 
journey home he received fresh messages ; others must send words of en- 
couragement and love. China, even, through her missionaries, he repre- 
sented ; and as he closed his thrilling speech every heart felt, "Millennial 
days are drawing nigh." Already they come from the East and from the 
West, the North and the South, to the great feast of the Lord, and the isl- 
ands of the sea stretch out their hands unto the Lord. I was right glad 
to see our new American ambassador stand up as a delegate from the 
United States to honor her and the cause of Christianity. He is a Meth- 
odist, and has been an exhorter ; was governor of Indiana three times, 
and is reported a most excellent and active Christian. 

At the close of these exercises we received an invitation (for I had 
also become a member) to visit the king at Potsdam. Potsdam, by-the- 
way, is the favorite residence of the king, and is distant by the cars three- 
quarters of an hour, or about eighteen miles. Since you have never seen 
a king, I will try in my poor way to describe the trip and the ceremonies. 
We left Berlin about two o'clock, p. M., in cars furnished by his Majesty. 
There were four long trains filled with some twelve hundred guests. We 
were hurried through the level, sandy plain, and in a few minutes had the 
pleasure of gazing on the forests and hills of a beautiful, undulating coun- 



46 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

try. Soon (he spires of Potsdam, a city of some forty thousand inhabi- 
tants, appeared. But the palace where we were to meet the king was two 
miles beyond ; so we continued our journey to Wild Park. Presently the 
broad allee leading to the palace was thronged by the hundreds of expec- 
tant guests, all straining their eyes to catch a glimpse of the royal dwell- 
ing, and soon it came in sight, a huge brick building faced with pilasters 
of granite and sandstone, and crowned with statues innumerable. The 
grounds around were in beautiful order, and many a fine walk was flanked 
by noble orange-trees laden with luscious fruit. (By-the-way, this palace 
was built by Frederick the Great, and cost $6,000,000.) 

We first entered a hall, one side of which was lined with wines and 
ice-creams of every flavor and hue, and in abundance truly regal. But we 
passed immediately into the adjoining room, being allowed for the present 
only to feast our eyes. This hall furnished a treat of another kind. It 
was an immense room, whose walls were lined with gems, minerals, and 
shells. The pillars, which were scattered up and down, were of the same 
rich materials, interspersed with blocks of marble. The floors were of 
polished oak set in diamond blocks, and polished so smoothly that one 
had to keep his feet under due subjection, or run the risk of finding them 
higher than his head. Thence we passed into an adjoining suite of rooms 
opening one after another, the walls of which were lined with pictures 
whose beauty was only rivalled by the splendid landscapes revealed 
through the large windows opening on the magnificent lawn and park in 
front of the palace. Here were spread tables loaded with every luxury in 
the way of fruits, confectionaries, ice-creams, wines, etc. You would have 
been amused to see the eagerness, curiosity, and pleasure, which appeared 
on every face almost ; and as I saw the terrible onslaught made on the 
choicest viands, I was almost afraid the king would have occasion to 
repeat the remark of the famous Brown of New York, who, having pro- 
vided an immense quantity of oysters for a ministers' party, comforted 
the astonished host by assuring him that "them religious eats awful." 

Never shall I forget the expressive countenance of one good German 
minister who, with mouth, hands, and eyes, full to overflowing, exclaimed, 
" Es ist alles fur wis /" " It is all for us !" giving the us an emphasis 
which meant something when you considered the vast size of those capa- 
cious pockets that already were loaded with "something for the children." 

But the feasting at last was over, and every one obeyed the summons 
to repair to the front of the palace. At the extreme right of the long steps 
which stretch the whole length of the palace, were placed the Americans, 
next the English, then the French, Hollanders, etc., by nationalities alpha- 
betically arranged. Thus a huge semicircle was formed in front of the 
principal entrance where the king was to appear. Here we waited for 
some time, and for fear that some might yet be unsatisfied, the most deli- 



LETTERS FROM ABROAD. 47 

cious ices were freely served by the ready servants. Soon the sound of 
wheels was heard through the shady avenue, and presently a liveried cou- 
rier on a splendid white horse announced the presence of his majesty, who 
followed in a fine carriage drawn by six horses, guided by three drivers, 
one for each span. These coachmen rode not on the box, as with us, 
but each on one of the horses which he drove. The queen also accompa- 
nied him. Another carriage with six horses followed, containing a count 
and his lady, the lord chamberlain, I believe, while two or three carriages 
with maids of honor brought up the rear. They entered the palace, and 
in a few moments the king presented himself at the great central door in 
the midst of the vast assembly. Every head was uncovered, and shouts 
of welcome and honor rose from hundreds of warm and loving hearts. 
The king is a pleasant-looking old gentleman of sixty-three years of age, 
bald, with side-whiskers, and rather a reddL h face. He was dressed in 
soldier costume, and wore the heavy brazen and golden helmet which is 
the distinguishing badge of the Prussian army. After being introduced 
to the committee, he descended the steps and was addressed by some del- 
egate from each nation as he passed around within the circle of guests ; 
and after each speech the more distinguished delegates were introduced 
to him. I observed that he was very cordial in his greetings to our noble 
missionaries, Dr. Dwight of Constantinople, and Dr. King of Athens, who 
were fortunately present. The king is a noble, consistent Christian, and 
has done not a little for Dr. Dwight and others in Turkey. He also car- 
ried out the plan of this Alliance in the face of the most determined oppo- 
sition. The queen soon after also appeared and was greeted by several of 
the most distinguished guests. She is lame, but bears herself with much 
grace, and draws every heart to her by the pleasant, motherly smi^e that 
rests on her noble face. 

Some two hours elapsed before the king had completed the circuit. 
As he ascended the steps the whole audience burst forth into Luther's 
noble hymn, " The Lord is our shade ar.d our defence." The king re- 
mained standing uncovered while it was being sung, with his wife and 
court around him. Immediately the court preacher, the famous Dr. Krum- 
macher, pronounced the benediction on his Royal Majesty and his house, 
and they departed in the same style in which they came, to Sans Souci, his 
favorite palace, some two miles from the New Palace. 

Pleased with all they had seen and heard, the mighty assembly re- 
turned to the cars and Berlin. I wanted to tell you much more about this 
interesting meeting, which continued some ten days, but my room is all 
exhausted. 

May God watch over ard b'ess you all is the earnest prayer of your 
absent CHARLIE. 



48 ALL FOR CLLRLST. 

My dear Sisters way down in old Mississippi : . . . . Your last letters 
were charming. I have read and reread them and think them better than 
printed letters by far. The description of your ride was worthy of Dickens 
in his palmiest days, both for novelty and raciness of style. I can truly 
rejoice that you have been so favored as to be together. I shall feel 
much easier in regard to you in case of sickness. Every day it seems to 
me that I could not enough praise God for his kindness and love to us 
all ; but when I remember how rich he is and good and kind, I only won- 
der that I ever did distrust him. Ah ! I wish my faith were always as 
strong as it is at times ; then I should always be contented and happy. . . 
Keep up good courage, my dear sisters. Trust in our Father in heaven and 
you shall never want any good thing. Pray often for your wandering brother 
that he may indeed be fitted for that great, great work to which he hopes 
he has been called. Ah ! I feel at times so weak and afraid ! and were 
there not so much to do, so much need of workmen, would be only too 
glad to play the Jonah and escape to Tarshish. . . . You speak of that 
glorious work in America. Yes, we heard of it for the first time in Rome, 
and spite of all the attractions, I have been homesick ever since. Oh, I 
long to be at work ! Pray earnestly, my precious sisters, that I may be 
prepared for the labor before me in soul and body. . . . Many thanks for 
all your words of love. Kind remembrances to all that are so kind to 
you. Good-by. CHARLIE. 

TO HIS BROTHER IN YALE COLLEGE. 

I was glad to see your chum and through him to learn more definite- 
ly of college interest in religion, and of your own special interest. I hope 
and pray that it may be a baptism of the Spirit that shall give you larger 
and nobler views of life than you have ever had before. Work for Jesus, 
for there is nothing in the wide world one moment to compare with it. 

My dear Sisters: I am just on the point of leaving Berlin, yet, if I 
recollect aright, I have said little or nothing of my home for the last eight 
months. Berlin is a city that never made itself. Standing in the midst 
of a great sandy plain, it offered no attractions to the manufacturer and 
few to the agriculturist, nor can the sluggish, little Spree, that serves as a 
receptacle for all Berlin's filth, ever become very famous for its commerce. 
In fact Berlin is a hothouse plant, that was forced to grow whether it 
wou'd or not. 

When Frederick the Great came to the throne he would have a huge 
city in Prussia, a rival of London and Paris. He therefore opened new 
and broad streets in every direction, and told the people that they must 
fill them with houses. Many buildings were built at the expense of the 
government, which were known as Free houses, and furnished rent free 



LETTERS FROM ABROAD. 49 

in times of peace, though they paid proportionally high taxes in times 
of war. Under his skilful management Berlin rapidly increased in popu- 
lation until it now contains 500,000 inhabitants. The streets are generally 
broad and well paved but there is a sameness about the architecture that 
is exceedingly monotonous. There being but little stone in the neighbor- 
hood, the houses are built of brick, and almost without exception, stuccoed 
the same, tiresome, slate color. In order to occupy as much room as 
possible, they are stretched along the streets, while their height seems 
quite insignificant. The public buildings are much the same. Even the 
palace itself reveals the same melancholy hue, except where here and 
there, large pieces of the wall plaster have pealed off, suggesting the ass 
concealed beneath the lion's skin. The palace is a huge building, two or 
three times the size of the Metropolitan Hotel. It stands at the head of 
the famous " Unter den Linden" and commands a view of its whole 
length and of the beautiful Brandenburg gate through which the street is 
entered. 

We visited the Palace the other day, and I must say, that, consider- 
ing the sums of money that have been spent, it is rather a tasteless affair. 
There were immense sofas, covered with gold and silver brocade at fabu- 
lous prices, and mirrors whose frames were solid silver, which the guide 
informed us, 'were made by Berlin artists!' while the expression of his 
countenance indicated that we should call them very fine ; but in con- 
science I could not, and I must conclude, from the specimens that have 
come under my eye that Germany must yield the palm in this line to the 
French. There were some chandeliers here that were truly magnificent, 
consisting of quartz crystals that shone and glittered in the sun like dia- 
monds. One from London I think, consists of 700,000 crystals and has 
eighty-eighty lights. The floors are of oak, tessellated, and so smooLh 
that you are not allowed to wear boots, but must slide around in huge 
slippers furnished at the door. The ceiling of one of the rooms was fine. 
It was so frescoed that the centre was apparently a tent-like canopy of 
blue silk, while, in the corners beautiful scenes revealed themselves be- 
neath its pendant folds. In the Throne hall were some most beautiful 
specimens of plate that have been purchased or presented to the royal 
house in days gone by. One piece, by Cellini, is of gold, covered with 
the most beautiful graving, and figures in relief. 

The White room, so called, has just been redecorated at an expense 
of $100,000, and contains eighteen statues of the eighteen electors of 
Brandenburg, from whom Prussia's royal house descended, also beau- 
tiful frescoes representing the different provinces of the kingdom. At 
both ends are galleries splendidly fitted up, while, between the stairs 
that rise upon each side, are two fountains with tropical flowers surround- 
ing them in the greatest abundance. From the windows, I think you 

5 



50 ALL FOR CLLRLST. 

have the most beautiful views in Berlin. . . . The museums are the pride 
of Berlin, and they are certainly most beautiful. The Old Museum has a 
fine colonnade in front ; beneath which are, by all odds, the best frescoes 
I ever saw. . . . There is one thing that would strike you singularly on 
entering Berlin : two fine churches with a large theatre between them. 
They are all noble buildings and produce a fine effect. By the way, 
theatres, operas, and concerts, are all the rage here Sunday evenings ; 
indeed, the Sabbath is the great gala day, and the streets and parks are 
crowded with people dressed in their best. 

And now I must leave the buildings, too famous and grand to be de- 
scribed by word of mouth, and tell you some of the peculiarities of the place 
itself. In the first place, you would be struck by the crowd of soldiers 
that throng the streets and monopolize the honors of private and civil life. 
Prussia, you know, has no such natural protections or barriers, as Italy, 
France, and Spain, find in mountains, rivers, and oceans; so it must rear 
as it were mountains of flesh and blood, and thus ward off the dangers 
that threaten it on every side from powerful rivals. Think of a nation of 
16.000,000 having a standing army of 250,000 able-bodied men that can be 
increased at any moment to 500,000, and you have some idea of the terrible 
burden Prussia has to bear. If great honor and attention were not r.aid 
to those that enter the military service, the people would not endure it. 
As it is, a pair of epaulettes is a passport to favor and sunshine, and the 
multitudes readily catch at the tempting bait. But even so, it is not a willing 
service, for every man must be a soldier, at least three years, and a slave's 
life it is. The common soldier must, each day, go on parade, and then 
he is marched up and down by a corporal, singly, or with two or three in 
company, till he can accomplish all the maneuvres perfectly. These cor- 
porals are little tyrants. They call the privates all sorts of foul names, 
pull their ears, hold them by the nose, while they perform difficult feats, 
and if the poor soldier makes a wry face even, or dares to speak, put him 
in jail for twenty-four hours. 

Such are the men that hold Prussia down. Slaves themselves, they 
make slaves of others. They stand on every corner, they hold watch day 
and night, they fill huge barracks in every part of the city, they know your 
going out and coming in; like the frogs of Egypt, they swarm on every side, 
and, should the people endeavor again as in '48 to rebel, they would only 
too sorely feel the yoke that galls their necks. From the hour an infant 
enters the world till, an old man, he sleeps in the churchyard, those Argus 
eyes are ever upon him. Does a parent wish his child baptized ? he must 
ask the permission of the police. Is the child not baptized within six 
months of birth ? he must pay a fine. Does a young man wish to marry 
or go into business ? he must have passed a certain examination, gone 
through nobody knows how many a tedious form, and, having at last ob- 



LETTERS ER OM ABR OAD. 5 1 

tained his license, rest (?) in the comfortable assurance that at any mo- 
ment his newly-acquired rights may be taken away, should his conduct 
be in the least suspicious. No rank or condition is free ; the clergy them- 
selves are appointed by government ; and there is on every side, evidence 
that the authorities think every man a traitor and a villain, and will 
deal with him accordingly. Better, ay, far better, to have riots from time 
to time, and suffer the inconveniences that we must in America, and yet 
allow every man to feel that he \sfree and hottest till he has proved him- 
self otherwise, than to live under such a government. 

With a vast military organization like this, we have, of course, some 
grand displays. I well remember the splendid music that wakened me 
ev^ry morning, as six regiments with their bands passed beneath my 
window to parade. As one moved, so moved a thousand soldiers, while 
from their serried arms wave after wave of glittering light flashed upon the 
dazzled sight. Perhaps the finest scene I have witnessed was an artillery 
and cavalry review in September. Some twenty or thirty thousand soldiers 
were present. They were drawn up in battle array — two grand divisions 
opposite each other, at a distance of some two or three miles. Indeed, 
they formed our horizon, and we could but just discern them from the trees 
by the glittering helmets and swords that flashed defiance beneath the 
burning sun. Presently that long dark line began to move; now slowly, 
now more rapidly, till at last it fairly flew, like some swift thunder-cloud, 
upon the foe awaiting it. Suddenly the flying artillery poured its terrible 
volleys upon the glittering host ; thick smoke curled above their heads — a 
canopy to hide the dire conflict from heaven ! Broken, scattered by the 
murderous volleys, whose fury they could not endure, like some huge wave 
that vainly pours its floods upon an adamantine cliff, they recoiled to form 
their ranks anew, and again to renew the assault. So in alternate waves 
they swept across the plains, coming ever nearer and nearer, till at last we 
were enveloped in the very dust and smoke of the battle itself : cannon 
were flying hither and thither, while horsemen, on furiously galloping 
steeds, threatened our lives at every moment. At last order from confu- 
sion came ; from that disordered, entangled mass gleamed out a noble 
host in long array, while music burst forth in strains of victory, triumph, 
and peace. This pageant is a sham fight, at which the king and queen, 
with the royal party of distinguished guests, lent their presence, and 
vied with each other in the splendor and beauty of their dress and equi- 
page. 

I have visited the New Museum since writing the above. It is a noble 
monument that the king is rearing to perpetuate his fame. It is not yet 
complete, but already there is enough to show how grand it will be when 
finished. The building is beautiful in itself ; but it is only the shrine to 
contain the immortal productions of a Kaulbach — frescoes which, for con- 



52 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

ception, grandeur, and beauty, are perfect wonders of art. In the centre 
of the building is the grand hall of entrance, with a broad, magnificent 
staircase, lined on either side by copies of the Elgin marbles from Athens, 
mounting up a hundred feet to the very roof, through the liquid clearness 
of whose glassy covering the light streams down upon those wonderful fres- 
coes, each of which must be some twenty-five feet long and twenty feet 
high. The first represents the Tower of Babel and the dispersion of the 
nations. It is perhaps the best of the whole. Kaulbach has the wonder- 
ful power of making interesting detached groups unite in one grand and 
striking whole. In the upper part of the picture the hosts of heaven sur- 
round the Lamb as he stretches his hand in wrath over the ruin crumbling 
beneath. In the centre, on one of the terraces of the temple, sits the 
proud king, his idols crumbling around him. Fire bursts from the censer 
at his very feet, while on either side his former parasites and flatterers are 
deriding him. Fierce determination sits on his brow, and while from the 
walls, crashing and falling on every side, terror-stricken groups are esca- 
ping, he will not move. On the right, meanwhile, the nations are going 
forth, and their different pursuits are indicated by their banners, arms, or 
other insignia. Just beneath them a crowd is pursuing tbe poor architect 
'of the temple, who, fallen to the ground, wraps his mantle about his face, 
which is the very picture of agony, and dies amid the shower of stones and 
bricks coming from every side. In the foreground is Monotheism, repre- 
sented by a noble patriarch, surrounded by his beautiful family, riding 
upon a huge wagon drawn by the noblest oxen ever painted. The sheep 
and goats follow on either side, nibbling the grass or sporting around ; 
while on the gentle oxen two beautiful children ride, playing with each 
other as they eat most luscious grapes. Just imagine the contrast between 
this magnificent foreground and the terror and dismay on every side, and 
you form a slight idea of this wonderful creation. I have described one. 
Please imagine five other pictures of like size and grandeur, representing 
the Destruction of Jerusalem, the Battle of the Huns, the Crusades, 
Greece, and one not yet complete, and you Lave some idea of Kaulbach 
and the entrance hall to the New Museum. I have never seen its like. I 
hope you may some time have the pleasure I enjoyed yesterday. But I 
must close my most unsatisfactory description, and ask you to wait for me 
at Rome. 

Upon leaving Berlin, the party passed through Dres- 
den towards Vienna, and their visit to the famous gallery 
of paintings at Dresden and the " Green Room " of the 
kingdom of Saxony is described in his next letter with 



LETTERS FROM ABROAD. 53 

great vivacity. But we must pass these by and hasten 
southward. 

Our railroad followed the Elbe, which, soon after leaving Dresden, 
locks itself in among the rocky cliffs of the so-called Saxon Switzerland. 
Here is to be found the finest scenery of Germany. ... It is very pecu- 
liar, owing to the fact that, while a large part of the country is sandstone, 
which you know is soft, and quickly yields to aqueous agencies, there are 
basaltic cliffs continually occurring, too stubborn in their nature to be 
easily washed away. Thus there are deep gorges, or isolated peaks like 
Konigstein, which have no high land within several hundred feet. This 
Konigstein is Saxony's pride — her Gibraltar. It is fortified, and almost 
the only fortress in Europe that never was taken. You will not wonder at 
its strength when I tell you that it is surrounded by a precipice from one 
to three hundred feet high, and that the only ingress is through a gallery 
cut in the living rock, with drawbridges so arranged that when removed it 
is impossible for man to reach the fortress. There is a well six hundred 
feet deep within, and here are stores enough to last for years. There are 
fields and cattle, and even a forest on this rugged peak. In the Thirty 
Years' war it was the only place not taken. Napoleon himself found it 
impregnable. 

The scenery grew wilder and wilder as we drew nearer to the land of 
Bohemia, and there was a certain firmness of character attaching itself to 
those old hills that must have rendered it a fitting home for the warlike 
tribes of mountain Asia who settled here — of Huss and Ziska, with their 
fierce followers, and of the fierce Libussa and her maiden warriors, who 
in earlier times held sway in " Boehm." At last we struck the Moldau 
and its broader plains, and in a little time Prague with its many spires and 
towers glittered beneath the setting sun. It was truly a splendid sight as 
we rolled over that long bridge. The river with its islands and bridges ; 
the crowded Jews' quarter on our left, bounded by gardens and factories ; 
and on the right the palaces of Bohemian princes, formed a beautiful pic- 
ture. 

How strange it seems to stand within the walls where Huss lived, to 
see on every side tokens and traces of the man who centuries ago ignited 
a train which brought ruin and desolation to Prague's proud towers, which 
drove thirty thousand of Prague's forty thousand students away from her 
famous old university, and ended, I was about to say, with his death and 
the peace after the Hussite war; but no! it is still felt; it shakes the 
world even now, and will till the end of time. Here, too, is the famous 
bridge, fourteen hundred feet long, and ornamented every twenty feet 
with groups of the quaintest statuary, where in the Thirty Years' war the 



54 ALL FOR CILRLST. 

university students withstood the Swedes for fourteen weeks, and thus 
saved Prague from its enemies. 

After describing the various objects of interest in 
this city, he says : 

In searching for the old synagogue we were separated from each other, 

and when I next met II and F , some four hours after, they told 

me of a rather odd experience. They had penetrated into a narrow, 
crooked street, and at last stumbled upon the old house where IIuss once 
lived. They found it was now occupied as a restaurant, and being some- 
what hungry, concluded to take dinner on the spot. They examined the 
card, and called for what they supposed was roast beef. The meat came. 
\t looked very inviting ; but they were both struck with its peculiar sweet- 
ish flavor, and when nearly through eating, on examining the paper more 
closely, found they had been eating roast horse ! Imagine their feelings ! 

H smoked most vigorously the whole afternoon, and F ate apples, 

candy, and I know not what, to keep his dinner down. Even now an allu- 
sion to the subject gives rise to certain peculiar nervous affections, better 
imagined than described. . . . 

Tired and cold and hungry, we entered Vienna, the capital of Austria, 
and its pride and glory. It was splendidly lighted, and as we passed to 
our hotel, all was bright as noonday. I liked Vienna very much. There 
is a life and bustle about the streets that reminds me of New York more 
than any place I have seen in Europe. The shop-windows are very fine 
indeed. They fairly glitter with jewelry, silks, fine pictures, etc. The 
streets in the old town, where the nobility and royalty have their residen- 
ces, are very narrow, and as the carriages with their spirited horses go 
dashing by, you are in peril of life and limb, as there are no sidewalks. 
The streets are very clean indeed, and the contrast to New York in this 
respect (as you can bear testimony, L ) is considerable. 

The church of St. Stephen is a beautiful specimen of Gothic archi- 
tecture. The spire is very tall and of fine proportions. It is built en- 
tirely of stone, and with its graceful little turrets, produces a grand effect. 
We mounted up through the long, winding staircase till we came to the 
huge bell, that was cast from cannon taken from the Turks at their mem- 
orable siege of Vienna. It is perfectly immense — twelve and a half feet 
high, twelve feet in diameter, one foot thick, and some forty feet in cir- 
cumference ! It weighs four hundred tons, and is rung only on special 
occasions. The view from the spire is very fine. The old city lies at your 
feet, surrounded by the Glacis with its gardens and fine carriage drives ; 
and the new city, with barracks, churches, theatres, palaces, and magazines, 



LETTERS FROM ABROAD. 55 

stretches its arms on every s'de around. The Prater, some three or four 
miles square, is a vast park, filled with magnificent trees and drives. . . . 

But perhaps the most unique sight of all was the vault of the Church 
of the Capuchins. Here are arranged side by side the splendid sarcopha- 
gi of some seventy of the imperial house of Hapsburgh. Most of them 
are of bronze, but a few are of massive silver. That of Maria Theresa is 
the finest. It is oblong, some ten or twelve feet high, with breadth and 
length in proportion, covered with fine reliefs representing important 
events in her history, while two effigies (of her husband and herself) repose 
on the upper surface. Her sixteen children lie around her. Here, too, is 
bnried Maria Louise, Napoleon's wife, as well as his son, who died at the 
age of twenty-one, loved and esteemed by all who knew him. 

We visited on the Sabbath the Greek church, where they still worship 
according to the ancient ritual. The singing, or rather chanting, was pecu- 
liar, and very beautiful, far more so than the Roman-catholic ; but I can- 
not now stop to describe it. We also visited the mineralogical museum in 
the palace. It contains some of the finest specimens in the world. The 
collection of precious stones was very complete and beautiful, as well as 
that of meteors, which is one of the largest in the world. Some of these 
stones were picked up while yet warm from the sky. 

We were struck with the plainness of the royal equipages, church- 
es, etc. Nowhere did we find the least effort to make display. We have 
been most happily disappointed in Austria. We expected to be con- 
tinually annoyed as to our passports and baggage. So far from this being 
the case, a man can now travel from one end of Austria to the other with- 
out showing his passport at all ; and from all I could see and learn, Aus- 
tria is at present ahead of Prussia in all that regards the liberty of the 
suojects. 

We left Vienna, the city of palaces and parks, with regrets, and turned 
our faces still southward. The country was beautiful. . . . 

But our most surprising experience was just before us — nothing less 
than crossing the Julian Alps by railroad. . . . This work has been for a 
long time in progress, and was not completed till last year. The highest 
elevation attained is some three thousand feet, and the inclination in places 
seems almost as great as that of a house roof. It was absolutely frightful 
to see a train descending one of these grades. You can imagine some of 
the difficulties they had to contend with in building this road, when I tell 
you it cost $7,500,000 to build twenty-five miles. On common roads in 
America, the same distance of road would have been built for $400,000. 
It seemed so strange to go winding, twisting along up the banks of a tor- 
rent, now on this side, and a half hour hence on the opposite bank a hun- 
dred fe;t higher. The scenery, too, was absolutely grand. Mountains cov- 
ered with snow surrounded us on every side, and with every turn some 



56 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

new scene of wildest beauty burst upon us. Near the summit we passed 
a peak which seemed to spring unsupported from the valley below, so 
wholly was it disconnected from the surrounding peaks. Its summit was 
covered with the ruins of a castle, once the key of this whole country, but 
now completely shattered and uninhabited, the result of lightning. 

How beautifully, too, that street, with its neat little cottages and facto- 
ries, wound around the base through the narrow pass, (you could not call 
it a valley,) while through the gigantic frame of towering peaks you looked 
out over the beautiful plain and glittering spires of Gloggnitz. In a mo- 
ment this scene was snatched from our eyes, and we were whirling at full 
speed through a tunnel one mile long. It took some five minutes to pass 
through, and we counted one hundred and thirty-four gas lights with which 
it is lighted. A factory was built way up here just to supply it with gas. 
The language, too, was completely changed, and the peasants' gibberish we 
strove in vain to understand. Their vests were quite peculiar, being orna- 
mented with large round brass buttons, such as soldiers sometimes wear 
with us, as thick as they could stand down the whole front. 

At one of the stations we had rather an amusing scene. A perfect 
crowd of the aborigines took possession of our car, and among them a 
laughing, jolly, old woman, loaded with basket and kettle, which took up 
nearly the whole of the passage. Scarcely had we started before she 
uncovered her kettle, revealing amid the fumes of charcoal a dish of 
snaky-looking, steaming sausages, which she was ready to dispose of to 
the highest bidder. She had scarcely all prepared, before the scene 
changed. Unluckily for her, but most fortunately for our eyes, the con- 
ductor entered at this moment, and the way her sausage-kettle went out of 
the door was a caution to all meat-pedlers. The conductor was very 
indignant, and we all supposed he had thrown the kettle overboard. To 
our great amusement we saw him, some fifteen minutes after, busily 
devouring its contents on the platform just outside the door. 

With such scenes within, and the ever-changing grandeur without, the 
hours did not seem long, although we rode twelve hours to-day and some 
thirteen yesterday. It seemed so strange crossing the Drave and the 
Save, those famous old rivers in Roman history, along whose rocky banks 
the legions so o.'ten penetrated into the barbarous regions of the North. 
I could scarcely realize that I was so far away from home, amid scenes 
wrapped around with all the mist of boyhood days and studies. The Save 
valley is peculiarly wild and beautiful ; the precipitous cliffs spring up 
from the very shore of the stream, and the bright, blue, clear waters foam 
and rage against them. Rafts formed of hogsheads, and freighted with 
gayly-dressed peasants, added not a little to the picturesque character of 
the scene. 

As we approached Trieste, the country grew fearfully barren. The 



LETTERS FROM ABROAD. 57 

peaks were desolate. Not a tree, scarcely a bit of moss, served to cover 
the nakedness of the rocks; but, finally, the last tunnel was passed, and 
as old Sol dipped behind the Atlantic wave, lighting up those snow-capped 
peaks with that beautiful rosy tint which painters love, we comn.enced the 
steep descent to the blue Adriatic and Trieste. At eight o'clock we rest- 
ed our weary limbs in the busy mart of Austria, with its broad and finely- 
paved streets, and its harbor filled with sailing craft. I was surprised to 
find Trieste so busy and thriving. It is now, it seems, the tenth city in 
the world in its commerce. Indeed, every step of our way convinces us of 
the increasing greatness of Austria, and I leave this country with very dif- 
ferent feelings from those with which I entered it. Oh, we are so narrow- 
minded and prejudiced ; and, as we move about the world, we every day learn 
that everywhere there are bad and good, beautiful and homely, just and 
unjust, tyrants and oppressed, if we will only look calmly and candidly 
around us. . . . You must excuse the look of these sheets, as I have writ- 
ten with all kinds of ink, in all sorts of places, and with all manner of 
feelings. CHARLIE. 

Paris, June, 1S5S. 

My Dear Friends: .... In my last I was just entering Naples cov- 
ered with the classic dust of the Campagna and the Falernian hills. Na- 
ples was all and more than I had imagined. It has nearly 500,000 inhabi- 
tants, and there was a bustle and excitement about it that took me quite 
by surprise ; the carmen and sailors, too, are very noisy, and the cracking 

whip and rattling wheel warn you that things move in Naples We 

concluded to visit Virgil's tomb. It is on the side of a limestone cliff that 
projects over the road on one side and into the sea on the other, and di- 
rectly opposite old Vesuvius itself. Think of it! this lovely spot, looking 
out over the most lovely bay in the world, was the spot wdiere Virgil lived, 
where he wrote a large part of the /Eneid, and where, having completed 
his immortal poem, he laid him down to sleep, for he can never die. His 
tomb is a large square building, with windows and a door. It is almost 
completely covered with ivy. Above it waves a laurel which Petrarch is 
said to have planted. That was a strange place to me ; every hill and tree 
and island, the sea itself, the very wind, told me of the great poet. Then 
behind was the Cumean promontory, and Lake Avernus with its dark 
groves, yes, and the Sibyl's Cave. There was Misenum. Far away be- 
yond the horizon were Scylla and Charybdis. But I must stop, or I will 
say foolish things. This is a place sacred in itself, sacred as a Mecca 
whither thousands of the great and good have for centuries made pilgri- 
mages. 

The next morning early we were away by railroad for the burning 
mount The crater itself is the centre of a steep truncated cone 



58 ALL FOR CLIRLST. 

which it has formed on the snmmit of the mountain ridge The as- 
cent is quite rugged, the mountain sides are covered with a huge stream 
cf cold, rough, jagged lava. It looks like a stream of thick, black tar that 
has dried and cracked in thousands of forms under the burning sun. We 
came at last to the steep itself. First we tried to ascend in the sand, but 
really one step up was two back, and we concluded to take to the rough 
lava again. Here, almost on all-fours, you could clamber up perhaps a 
hundred steps, and then sit down and rest. How ladies ever walk up there 
I can hardly imagine. Most, I presume, are carried up in a chair, (as I 
saw one fat old priest ascend,) and pay for their ride from five dollars to 
ten dollars, according to their skill in making a bargain. 

The sight that presented itself as we reached the top was entirely un- 
expected. A large, rough plain appeared, with cracks running through it 
in every direction, from which smoke and sulphurous steam poured forth, 
while the rock itself was so hot that you could not stand, much less sit, for 
a moment. We felt that we were truly walking on a fiery sea as we hur- 
ried on to get a nearer view of the great crater about a quarter of a mile 
distant. Clouds of smoke were rolling from the horrid pit, and ever and 
anon, with dreadful groans and thundering noise, a torrent would be 
thrown far up into the sky. 

Two or three of us went down to the brink itself ; but while we were 
there one of these eruptions took place. I stood it very well till, looking 
up above my head, I saw the air filled with red-hot lava directly over me. 
I think I never did move more rapidly, for, almost before I knew, I had 
jumped down and was on the other side twenty feet away. F , un- 
conscious of danger, remained, and one of the pieces struck his shawl and 
burnt it quite badly. We dipped a few coin in the lava as souvenirs, and 
then beat a hasty retreat from this raging heat. 

If the ascent had been difficult, we were rewarded for our toil by the 
descent. We now took to the sand, and leaping and bounding along like 
so many wild horses, fairly plunged down the steep. In five minutes I 
was at the bottom of this cone, that three-quarters of an hour's hard work 
had scarcely sufficed to ascend 

The next morning we concluded on a trip to Pompeii, Salerno, and 
Psestum. 

Pompeii has not its like on the face of the earth. Buried beneath a 
shower of moist ashes, every object retained its original position and 
shape, being hermetically sealed up about the time of Christ — to astonish 
the world of the nineteenth century. So many feet was it buried that its 
place was for centuries forgotten. And now it is again opened to the 
light of day; and as we walk its streets, and see the stores and houses, 
the theatre, temples, and forums, yes, and maik the deep ruts in the pave- 



L E TTERS FR OM ABR OAD. 5 9 

m:nt, we can but believe that yesterday Pompeii fell. The old Hippo- 
drome, or amphitheatre, is the most perfect ruin I have seen. There were 
the entrances for the higher and lower classes, and the seats rising tier 
upon tier far above the arena. There, too, were the cells in which the 
beasts and the gladiators themselves were placed, ready for the conflict, 
and the bloody avenue through which they drew the dead after the con- 
flict was over. All was there ready, and we almost waited for the .sleep- 
ing thousands to come again and take the seats they filled that last fatal 
day when Pompeii was blotted out. A temple in the midst of the city 
attracted our attention. It was dedicated to Iris, and there, beneath the 
floor, was the well in which the victims were purified. The altar still re- 
mains, and ashes and bones were found upon it. A statue of Hippocrates 
stood in the wall, with his finger on his lips enjoining silence. But the 
most interesting spot was the oracle itself, where, behind a large marble 
s'ab, you could see the narrow staircase and door through which the 
priest could enter into the statue and deliver the oracle which the multi- 
tudes supposed came from the god himself. 

The private houses were mostly one, rarely two stories high. Their 
walls were generally frescoed, and many of the pictures are as fresh as 
though just painted. It seemed strange enough to see the wine jars 
standing in the cellars, and the machine at the mills ready for grinding, 
and stranger still, to find coffee, wheat, beans, figs, and nuts perfectly 
preserved. But I cannot describe what requires hours for even the most 
hasty review. Towards evening we took the cars again, and were soon 
rolling through a country rich in historic incident, and beautiful enough, 
with its towering hills folded in fleecy clouds and valleys cultivated like 
gardens, to made another Eden 

Bright and early we were off the next morning for Paestum. Our 
carriage seemed an ancient chariot of victory, as we drove four magnifi- 
cent horses abreast in a style that brought back classic scenes as never 
before. The road was perfectly level, and part of the country very thinly 
inhabited. Our twenty-six miles' ride was accomplished in a few hours, 
and we stood within the pillars of the oldest existing temples in Italy, 
one of which was built at least 600 B. C. The infallible Murray says 
that, " With the exception of those of Athens, they are the most striking 
existing records of the genius and taste which inspired the architects of 
Greece." Paestum was an old Grecian colony founded long before Rome. 
There are three temples remaining, and the central one is one of the most 
simple, yet grand and beautiful buildings I ever saw. The columns were 
short and thick, but the broad capital, surmounted by a cornice in pro- 
portion, made this appropriate. The facade was very simple in its orna- 
ments, but the whole building, while easily comprehended, produced the 
effect desired and contrasted finely enough with the huge Basilica adjoin- 



Go ALL FOR CHRIST. 

ing, with its hundred pillars and toilsome architecture. Those were 
strange old ruins standing in the midst of the flowery meadows, with 
scarce a habitation of man for miles away. We wandered around, find- 
ing vaults and ruined walls here and there, and endeavored in the tangled 
grass and weeds to trace the line of ancient fortifications that once sur- 
rounded the city. 

One of our company sprained his foot sadly, and as we had offered 
sacrifices, viz., sacrificed an excellent collation to our hungry stomachs in 
the very sanctum sanctorum, we reluctantly tore ourselves away and re- 
turned north again. 

Our southernmost point was reached, and in the long vista that 
stretched before us, we saw Naples, Florence, Switzerland, Paris, Lon- 
don, and last, not least, Home. The sun had long been set, when, tired 
out, we entered Naples. In fact, we had accomplished a pretty good 
day's work — 56 miles by carriage and nearly as much more in the cars. 
Our invalid was soon safely stored away, and in a few days was moving 
around again as usual. 

The next Monday was devoted to the valuable museum here, especial- 
ly interesting in the treasures gathered from Herculaneum and Pompeii, 
and other ancient cities. I found my pride in our great Nineteenth Cen- 
tury considerably humbled, when I saw that two thousand years ago they 
possessed nearly every article of convenience or luxury of which we can 
boast. Planes, hoes, shovels, edged-tools of all kinds, glass-ware in every 
variety ; kitchen-ranges furnished in a style that would make a Parisian 
cook's eyes glisten from their perfection and variety. But in the higher 
arts they were also proficient, and in a case of silver instruments belong- 
ing to a physician of Pompeii, was found a peculiar kind of forceps, the 
exact copy of one that was patented in England a few years since as a 
most valuable invention 

I was much interested too in the old manuscripts that were found in 
Pompeii, and especiallly in the very ingenious manner in which they are 
unrolled. For many years no one could imagine what those little black 
masses of charcoal could be. Under a powerful microscope the truth 
was revealed, and since then philosophers have been all alert to discover 
the treasures thus concealed, and unroll the charred mass without destroy- 
ing the characters. This had at last been most ingeniously accomplished, 
and several books have been deciphered, although the process is, of ne- 
cessity, exceedingly slow and tedious, 

I fear you will weary with my long delay in Naples ; but I cannot close 
without giving you a short account of our visit to Lake Avernus, Solfater- 
ra, etc. Early in the morning we took carriage, and were soon rattling 
through the famous old tunnel leading out of Naples through "Virgil's 
promontory." It is at least half a mile in length, and yet nothing is known 



LETTERS FROM ABROAD. Gr 

of its construction. It was in existence hundreds of years ago, as it is 
described by Pliny and others; but it was much smaller then, and you can 
see where the hubs of the wheels once rubbed against the wall high up on 
the side. It is miserably ventilated, and we were almost stifled from dust 
and stench as we rolled along through. We soon came to Solfaterra, the 
crater of an old volcano. It still fumes a little, and in 119S quite a torrent 
of lava poured down its sides into the sea. To reach it we passed through 
Pozzuoli, the once famous post Puteoli, where Paul landed on his event- 
ful journey to Rome; and we mounted up the same steep hill, by the same 
Appian way he once walked. 

A short distance hence is the famous temple of Jupiter Serapis, 
which may well be called a geological chronometer, and which has excited 
more attention and speculation from learned men than perhaps any other 
existing ruin. It consists of a fine large open court, surrounded by walls 
of marble, and in the centre are three fine marble pillars, each some forty 
feet high, and cut from one piece of marble. The floor is now entirely 
covered with water to the depth of some three or four feet, and the whole 
building is gradually sinking into the sea at the rate of perhaps an inch 
yearly. Twice before has it sunk in this way, and then again risen to its 
former level. These changes can be traced on the pillars as at each 
descent they have been pierced by the sea-borers, which have left their 
marks as high as the water rose. Just beyond is Mount Nuovo, which is 
very interesting from the fact that it has entirely risen within the historic 
period. It was formed in three days, and is about fourteen miles in cir- 
cumference, and some five hundred feet high ! The ashes from the erup- 
tion were carried one hundred and fifty miles. You could hardly imagine 
that a spot so blooming with vegetation as this beautiful conical hill could 
ever have been the scene of such fiery visitation. Ruins are here on every 
side, so many that the land cannot hold them, and beneath the sea you can 
trace the streets and temples of bygone days. 

The most beautiful spot in Italy, it is not strange that the voluptuous 
Romans filled every nook with their marble palaces. All the great and 
learned of Rome had their villas here. 

But the interest in all these fades, for we are approaching the Aver- 
nian gulf and the awful cave of the Sibyl. Lake Avernus, with its beau- 
tiful shaded banks, is really not such an awful place, and to tell the truth, 
I saw a good many birds fly over the placid surface with perfect impunity. 
Yet it did seem a little bordering on the marvellous to see stones floating 
on its surface. I could hardly believe my eyes, and taking a stone, hurled 
it far out into the lake, where it danced about like a duck. The enigma 
was solved when I took the stone in my hand. It was lava pumice, some- 
thing like glass slag, very porous and light. We now lit our torches and 
made ready to enter the cave of the Sibyl. ... At last we came to a little 

6 



62 ALL FOR CHRIST. 

side passage, where, on account of the water, it was necessary to mount 
the guide's back, if you would reach the cave itself. The rushing of the 
waters against the sides of the cave sounded in the pitchy darkness truly 
infernal ; and when the voices reverberated through the passages, it 
seemed as if old Cerberus himself was loose. It was really quite a 
relief to get back into daylight and pure air. . . . Delighted with our 
excursion, we returned just at sunset along the magnificent road that skirts 
the cliff high above the bay. It is lined with fine villas, many of them 
romanticly situated, with crooked, winding paths and roads along the 
cliffs to their portals. And then the blue, blue sea, with gay-colored craft, 
and beyond, Naples glittering in the setting sun, while above them all 
rose Vesuvius, with his forehead wreathed in mystic vapors. As I looked 
on that scene I did not wonder that the passionate Italian loved Naples, 
even though it seems built in a crater itself, and exposed any moment to 
destruction. Indeed, since our visit, the very path by which we ascended 
has been swept away, and the fiery torrents are rolling again into the plain 
from five or six new craters. . . . 

Our stay in Florence was comparatively short, yet it was long enough 
to teach us that it is one of the most delightful cities of Europe for a resi- 
dence. The city itself is neat and clean, the streets broad and fine, and 
almost entirely free from beggars, while one can live extremely cheap. It 
cost us only one dollar a day at the hotel, and we were as well provided 
for as any man could wish. The country around Florence is full of splen- 
did drives and views. One can best appreciate the beauty of its location 
from the summit of the Campanile. . . . This Campanile is famous in archi- 
tecture, being considered by many (Ruskin among the number) as a most 
perfect piece of architecture, almost the most perfect extant. It belongs 
to the cathedral, although it stands a few feet from it, and is entirely inde- 
pendent of it. It is seven stories high, and each story differs from its 
neighbor. The work in many parts is exquisitely beautiful, fine enough 
for a lady's flower-stand. 

But Florence has yet higher claims in the magnificent collections of 
fine arts she has gathered. Here is the world-renowned Pitti Palace, and 
here I found that gem of paintings, copies of which I have seen a thou- 
sand times, Raphael's Madonna and child, with John the Baptist stand- 
ing at her knee. It is a small oval painting ; but there is an ease and 
grace about the mother as she sits with her child in her arms, and a deli- 
cate harmonious blending of color in the whole that I cannot describe — but 
to me makes it one of the most perfect of pictures. And this is but one 
of a thousand ; for the whole upper story of this magnificent palace is 
devoted to pictures, and most of them from the most famous pencils of 
history. Here, too, are some splendid specimens of Florentine mosaics. 
Among them is a table covered with fruit, vines, and flowers, most exquis- 



LETTERS FROM ABROAD. 6 3 

itely wrought, and so perfect that you could almost take them in your 
hands. You can imagine the time and pains necessary for its construc- 
tion when I tell you it cost some $40,000. 

There is here too another equally famous collection of paintings in 
the Uffizi. I spent most of the few hours I could here bestow in the Trib- 
une, where are collected the gems not only of painting but of sculpture. 
Here is the world-renowned Venus de 1 Medici as well as the Wrestlers, 
Apollo and the Whetter. I suppose it is very presumptuous in me, but 
I never can like the Venus. The body and limbs are almost faultless in 
their execution, and are truly beautiful; but the arms and hands, by their 
awkward position, mar the whole. They are stiff and unnatural, and the 
wrists seem too long. I have always felt this in the copies, and it is no 
better in the original. But it is almost wicked to find fault in such a 
sacred place, for here are gathered the St. John of Raphael, the Loves of 
Titian, the Sibyl of Guercino — in fact one masterpiece from each of the 
famous masters of antiquity. The room is worthy of the gems it contains. 
The ceiling is of mother-of-pearl, its floor of precious marbles of varied 
hues ; the hangings of the doors of crimson velvet, and the furnishing of 
the whole in the same style of grand yet simple beauty. The frame is 
fine, but it is the pictures that command our reverence in spite of all other 
attractions. . . . 

The next morning we visited the Westminster Abbey of Italy — the 
Church of Santa Croce, famous for the noted dead who are buried there. 
Here are the tombs of Michael Angelo, Dante, Alfiero, Galileo, Macchia- 
velli, and a host of others. It is a fine church, with its monuments and 
beautiful pictures and dome. I was happily disappointed in Pisa. It is 
one of the gems of Italy, so quaint and unique in the architecture of its 
famous tower and cathedral. I know not how, but I had previously 
formed the idea that the tower leaned on account of some accident, but 
when I came to see the cathedral the whole was explained. No two pil- 
lars, capitals, entablatures, facades, or cornices, were alike. One part 
was higher than another, and arches with unequal legs abounded. This 
was the most elaborate Corinthian, that the sternest, simplest Doric. It 
is truly a miracle of art, and I cannot conceive how any human genius 
could make so great irregularities, yes, almost deformities, into one grand 
whole. Yet this is the case ; and as you take the whole in at one view 
scarcely one of these peculiarities strikes you. It is only when you ex- 
amine it in detail that they appear to amuse and astonish. The tower is 
built on the same principle, and as you study it, you can see where the 
nicest calculations have been made to counterbalance the unnatural incli- 
nation. We ascended to the summit, where we had one of the grandest 
views, stretching away up into the Alps on one side, to the Pyrenees on 
another, and to the Mediterranean on the other. It was really frightful 



64 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

to look over the railing and see how much the building varied from the 
perpendicular. 

Delighted with our Pisa visit we turned our faces toward that dreaded 
Mediterranean. Fortunately, the night was calm and beautiful, and about 
one o'clock in the morning, amid the crowing and cackling of innumerable 
fowl that covered our deck, we entered the port of Genoa. I could not 
sleep, so I walked the deck and looked at the same hills, yes, and count- 
ed the same bright constellations that four hundred years ago greeted 
the humble Genoa pilot, the far-famed discoverer of my own dear native 
land. What changes since then! The land that to him was a possibility 
is to me to-night a bright, living reality; and the dreams and visions that 
visited his pillow here, drawing him forth on his adventurous journey, 
are fulfilled. I cannot sleep, but visions fair and beautiful draw me tow- 
ards the same West, the same golden end. May God grant them fulfilment 
in his own good time. Till then, farewell. 

LHARLIE. 



HIS FIELD OF LAB OF. 65 



CHAPTER III. 

HIS FIELD OF LABOR. 

The field of work to which Mr. Payson was called 
soon after he returned from Europe, and in which he 
continued to labor all his life, was in some respects pecu- 
liar. Its relations to the church were anomalous. No 
name has yet been found by which it can be truthfully 
represented in the records of the Presbyterian body. 
The duties of a pastor in this field are those of every 
Christian minister, and are simple and familiar, but the 
position which he occupies is unparalleled, and no official 
recognition of it upon the records of the church has yet 
seemed possible.* The following terse and clear descrip- 
tion of the general features of the work has been kindly 
furnished by the Rev. Howard Crosby, D. D., LL. D., 
and will be found especially valuable to those who are 
not acquainted with the field : 

MISSIONS IN NEW YORK CITY. 
" The city of New York, with over a million of inhab- 
itants, nearly the half of whom are foreign born, has 
long presented an interesting problem to the church of 
Christ in the matter of its evangelization. The churches 
of the city conserve and foster piety among their members 
and their families, but in their own regular services make 
no direct impression upon the vast numbers who never 

* See Appendix, Note A. 



66 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

enter a church. The New York City Mission has labor- 
ed for nearly a half century to meet this want, and by its 
mission-stations in destitute quarters has done much. 
It now has four churches fully organized, under its care, 
besides its numerous mission stations, where much fruit 
is rewarding its wise and energetic labors. 

" Not many years ago, the different denominations of 
Protestant Christians began to work on the unevangelized 
masses in the city by denominational societies, establish- 
ing and supporting denominational missions and churches, 
thus leaving the " City Mission and Tract Society" more 
largely to be supported by Presbyterians. 

" These denominational societies have done an ear- 
nest work. The Methodist Society has established six- 
teen churches and chapels, of which one has become 
self-sustaining and independent. The Baptist Society 
has established five churches, all still dependent upon it 
for support. The Episcopal Society has organized no 
churches, but has established seven chapels. 

" A third form in which general city evangelization 
has been carried on, is by the effort of individual 
churches, the Baptists having two missions of this char- 
acter, the Episcopalians seventeen, and the Presbyterians 
ten. This form of the work has these advantages. 
i. The members of a particular church become person- 
ally interested in the work. 2. They are ready, there- 
fore, to contribute to the full support of the work. 3. 
The wants of the work are fully known to them, and the 
supply of these wants becomes a natural action of the 
church life. 4. The missions thus created furnish an 



HIS FIELD OF LABOR. 67 

admirable field of labor where the church members are 
strengthened in their graces. 

" While the ultimate hope regarding these missions 
is that they may become independent churches, yet the 
difficulties in the way have not thus far been surmount- 
ed. The chief difficulty is, the inability of the members 
worshipping at these missions to furnish pecuniary sup- 
port for the sustentation of independent churches. To 
the question, ' Why do not the parent churches furnish 
the means ?' the answer is, that if these mission churches 
be cut off from the parent church, the special interest of 
the parent church fails, the members seeking other fields 
of labor, into which they throw their strength. On the 
other hand, the reason why the mission church cannot 
support itself pecuniarily, is in the fact that as its mem- 
bers become increased in wealth, they naturally gravitate 
to other parts of the city, and become connected with 
other churches. New York i3 so built, that the poorer 
classes are geographically separated from the richer 
classes, a fact which makes the mission problem pecu- 
liarly difficult. It is this fact that also prevents the 
members of parent churches from going to the mission 
churches and casting in their lot with them, thus ena- 
bling them to bear the pecuniary burden of self-support. 
It might be added, that it would be doubtful whether the 
children of a family that may be brought up away from 
evil sights and sounds, should be exposed to the contam- 
ination of degraded parts of the city, as would be the 
case if such a family should cast in its lot with one of the 
mission churches. 



68 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

" It is true that some of these missions are not in 
degraded quarters, and of the future independency of 
these there is a fairer expectation. 

" The Rev. Charles H. Payson was one of the most 
devoted laborers in this mission field that our city ever 
saw. With sound judgment, indefatigable industry, 
quenchless zeal, administrative ability, sympathetic soul 
and fine pulpit talents, he for seventeen years presided 
over the Third Avenue Mission of the Madison Square 
Presbyterian Church, receiving the hearty and liberal aid 
of that efficient church. Under his ministry the mis- 
sion became, in everything but self-support, a strong and 
useful church, sending forth its blessed influences in 
every direction in that important part of the city. He 
so taught the people to give, that they were able to raise 
from $4,000 to $5,000 a year among themselves. This 
has been a mission church raised in the best neighbor- 
hood and under the very best auspices, and yet its self- 
support is at present impossible. Under wise manage- 
ment, we may ere long see this consummation reached. 

"But now take another instance at the other end 
of the line. Grace Mission of the Fourth Avenue Pres- 
byterian Church is situated in Twenty-second street, 
near First avenue, a neighborhood pronounced by the 
police captain of the precinct in 1866, when the mission 
was founded, one of the worst in the city. The Rev. 
Mr. Cummings, a most able and laborious minister, who 
was pastor of the mission, has testified that it must 
always remain a dependent chapel, because (as we have 
before stated) of the removal of its members to more 



HIS FIELD OF LABOR. 69 

central churches, as soon as their personal reform and 
Christian progress have raised them in the scale of society. 
In this way not only the money is taken away, but also 
the material out of which to make the church officers. 
It seems then that in New York we must expect to have 
this anomalous mission system as a necessity, only now 
and then, under most advantageous circumstances, a 
chapel of this sort becoming an independent church. 

In point of fact these mission churches act like inde- 
pendent churches. They have their own pastor, their 
own communion seasons, their own auxiliary societies; 
the only points of contact with the parent church being 
in the sessional action at the reception of members, and 
in the Sunday-school work of the members of the parent 
church. 

" The appointment of the pastor is made by the ses- 
sion, according to the wishes of the actual workers in the 
field. Of course there is no installation or recognized 
ecclesiastical connection ; and perhaps here is a point (a 
matter mostly of name, however) which should be regu- 
lated in a judicious way, so that every body of Christians 
worshipping together and their virtual pastor, may ap- 
pear before the churches in their true light. 

" In a memorial of Charles H. Payson, this sketch is 
appropriately placed as indicating the wide and impor- 
tant field to which he gave the flower and strength of his 
life. No one knew all the merits of the mission question 
in New York better than he, and no one has done more 
to inspire courage and faith in his fellow-laborers. 

" He now rests from his labors, and his works do fol- 



70 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

low him. Through all ages will results testify to the 
faithfulness of this man of God, and in the history of 
the evangelization of this great and wicked city, no name 
will shine brighter than that of Charles H. Payson." 

The special field in which Mr. Payson labored was the 
Third Avenue branch of the Madison Square Presbyte- 
rian Church, The following outline of its early history is 
taken mostly from the official records of the chapel as 
prepared by the Rev. Mr. Hough, its first pastor. 

In the autumn of 1856 it was determined by several 
members of the Madison Square Church to attempt the 
establishment of a Mission Sabbath-school. Some steps 
towards the accomplishment of this end had been taken 
in the fall of the preceding year through the influence 
of a benevolent lady then living in West Thirty-fifth 
street. A few scholars were gathered in the basement 
of her own house, but the place soon becoming too 
straitened for the numbers in attendance it was deter- 
mined to put the work under the care of the Madison 
Square Church. It was found that the district lying 
east of Third Avenue between Fourteenth and Fifty-fourth 
streets was not provided for by any Presbyterian church 
or chapel, and the work was accordingly transferred to 
this locality. A rough uncomfortable room, which du- 
ring week-days was used as a carpenter shop, was obtained 
upon the north side of Twenty-ninth street east of Third 
avenue. Mr. James Morris was elected superintendent, 
and Mr. Theodore Morris librarian. The first scholars 
were mostly wild, unmanageable children, who, upon, the 



HIS FIELD OF LABOR. 71 

first and second Sabbaths, tore up and destroyed many 
of the Bibles and singing-books, rendering the presence 
of a policeman necessary to the maintenance of even 
tolerable order. Mr. Theodore J. Holmes became con- 
nected with the school in December as secretary and 
visitor ; Mr. J. W. Hough as visitor in January, 1857. 

On the first Sabbath in February the school was 
removed to the public school building in Twenty-seventh 
street. The seats were uncomfortable and the room ill- 
adapted for Sunday-school purposes, yet a great gain 
was thus secured upon the arrangements in Twenty- 
ninth street. In April Mr. Morris died, and in May Mr. 
William E. Dodge, Jr., was elected superintendent. Two 
sessions of the Sunday-school were held, one in the 
morning and one in the afternoon ; but it was found 
after some experience that the classified session in the 
afternoon was impracticable on account of the difficulty 
in providing teachers. Accordingly this was changed 
in October to a " boys' and girls' meeting," at which 
the time was chiefly occupied in singing and general ex- 
ercises. 

On Sabbath morning, Jan. 10, 1858, the school took 
possession of the new and commodious chapel which had 
been erected by the Madison Square Church on Third 
avenue between Thirtieth and Thirty -first streets. On 
the following Sabbath evening, January 17, was held the 
first church service for adults. Mr. Hough supplied the 
pulpit from March 7, 1858, till May 1, 1859, performing 
the duties of a pastor at the same time. A prayer-meet- 
ing was also organized by the aid of several young men 



72 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

from the Madison Square Church. The first morning 
service was held Oct. 17, 1858. About one hundred 
were present, the majority being children from the 
school. The morning congregation seldom reached 
more than one hundred ; the evening congregation 
steadily increased from one hundred to about three 
hundred ; and the prayer-meeting ranged from thirty to 
sixty. Meanwhile the Sunday-school continued to pros- 
per. During the summer of 1858 it was placed under 
the care of Mr. Theodore J. Holmes, who succeeded in 
holding about two hundred in regular attendance. A 
Young Men's Bible Class, was formed under the instruc- 
tion of Mr. Spencer W. Coe, which was afterwards di- 
vided and a portion given to Mr. George W. Lane. 

After the resignation of Mr. William E. Dodge, Jr., 
Mr. Nason B. Collins officiated in his place till May 3, 
i860, when Mr. David Wetmore was elected superinten- 
dent and from that time till this he has performed the 
arduous duties of that position with a zeal and faithful- 
ness which are above praise. 

Mr. Hough was ordained as an evangelist at the 
Madison Square Church by the Fourth Presbytery of 
New York, Sabbath evening, March 13, 1859. " & not 
being thought best to organize a distinct church, steps were 
taken to bring together those from the Mission Chapel con- 
gregation who desired churcli membership as members of 
the Madison Square Church worsJiipping at the Mission 
Chapel, with power to receive additions to their number 
and to observe the ordinances of the church at the chapel."* 

* These are the precise words of the official record. 



HIS FIELD OF LABOR. 73 

Accordingly the session of the Madison Square Church 
met at the chapel, Saturday evening, March 12, 1859, 
when twelve candidates were examined and accepted, 
three being also received by letter. At a second meet- 
ing held on Wednesday evening, March 16, six other 
candidates were examined and received. On Sabbath 
evening, March 20, 1859, the sacrament of the Lord's 
Supper was administered for the first time. Twenty- 
one persons were received into membership. The nu- 
cleus of the present organization was thus formed. 

May 17, i860, Mr. Hough left for a vacation of six 
weeks, hoping thus to recruit his exhausted strength. 
But finding still farther rest necessary he tendered his 
resignation, which was accepted. 

It was at this time that Mr Payson, who had supplied 
the pulpit during the temporary absence of Mr. Hough, 
was invited to take his place, and accepted the call. He 
was ordained as an evangelist at the Chapel, Sabbath 
evening, Nov. 25, i860, by the Fourth Presbytery of 
New York. The large and pleasant room was filled by 
an eager and attentive audience, a great proportion being 
composed of regular attendants upon the Sabbath 
services. 

The opening exercises were conducted by the Mod- 
erator, Rev. James H. Dwight, and the sermon preached 
by Rev. George L. Prentiss, D. D., now Professor in the 
Union Theological Seminary, and formerly pastor of the 
Church of the Covenant in this city. 

"The discourse," as reported by a contemporary paper, "was an able 
and eloquent exposition of the true, practical nature of Christian benefi- 

1 



74 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

cence. This was shown to be nothing less than an entire consecration of 
the life to Christ, and a faithful, persevering work for Him. Energy, en- 
thusiasm, and clear judgment must enter into such a life. The true 
follower of Christ should go ; as He did, among the poor, the forsaken, and 
the outcast, not fearing the contact or the taint of the vile and suffering. 
He must be willing to study with patient care the best means of doing 
good, and with the joy of working for his Master bear with cheerful self- 
denial the hardships and toils so blessed a work may impose." 

If the sermon had been inspired by a prophetic spirit 
it could hardly have been a more fitting inaugural to 
such a ministry. 

"The consecrating prayer was offered by the Rev. Henry B. Smith, 
D. D., Professor of Theology in the Union Theological Seminary, accom- 
panied by the laying on of hands by the Presbytery ; after which a very 
touching charge to the pastor was made by the Rev. William Adams, 
D. D., his peculiar relations as the head of the parent church giving it 
an additional force and interest. He congratulated Mr. Payson on his 
taking charge of so interesting a field, after long years of preparation and 
labor. He alluded feelingly to his ancestral honors and inherited fitness 
for such a work, Mr. Payson's father and grandfather having been faithful 
ministers, and his near relation, Rev. Dr. Payson, of Portland, whose 
praise is in all the churches. Dr. Adams exhorted him as one who would 
now take the charge and responsibility of so important a part of his own 
church work, to great faithfulness and prayer, to enthusiasm in life, to 
careful study, and to faithful adaptation to the great variety of hearers 
who form the congregation at the chapel. The remarks concluded by an 
affectionate appeal to the people to receive their new pastor with love 
and confidence, and to use the same care and preparation in hearing the 
word of life as would be necessary in preaching it faithfully. 

" The services were closed by music, and a benediction by the new 
pastor." 

It is quite impossible to estimate the indebtedness of 
this enterprise to the cordial sympathy and material aid 
of the Madison Square Church. Its origin and financial 
support, and the spiritual growth of its people through 
all the years of its remarkable history, are very largely 



HIS FIELD OF LABOR. 75 

attributable, under God, to the zeal and fidelity of the 
members of that church, of which the Rev. William 
Adams, D. D., was for so long a period the distinguished 
and honored pastor. His successor, the Rev. William 
J. Tucker, D. D., has manifested no less deep an interest 
in the work of the Memorial Chapel ; and under the able 
ministrations of these eminent men, the Madison Square 
Church has continued unremittingly for twenty years its 
generous support of the work undertaken in this field. 
At the commencement it furnished all the funds neces- 
sary for the conduct of the mission ; and during the past 
nine years (since the people at the chapel began to give 
part of the amount) its annual expenses here have aver- 
aged from $4,000 to $6,000, besides the private contri- 
butions to the poor and sick, which have in all cases 
been considerable — probably several thousands of dollars 
per annum. Then, too, the " Snowflake Offering" for 
the erection of the Memorial Chapel in 1874-5 amounted 
to more than $40,000; and $50,000 had been paid for 
lots in 1873-4. 

But these generous contributions of money were by 
no means all nor the greatest share of the support most 
cheerfully provided for this enterprise by the parent 
church. Many of its most efficient and capable workers 
engaged in active labors here. In the Sabbath-school, 
the Employment Society, the Industrial School, the 
Neighborhood Prayer-meetings, at the annual Christmas 
festival, and in almost every department of religious 
work connected with the chapel, the zealous and devoted 
Christians who worship in the Madison Square Church 



76 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

took part with an enthusiasm and fidelity which merit 
the highest encomiums. 

Mr. Payson's field was all prepared for him. The 
members of the large and influential Committee to whom 
the management of this enterprise was intrusted from 
the first were among his constant and cordial friends. 
Although they disagreed with him at times with refer- 
ence to the conduct of the " Mission " (as it was called 
at first and for many years) Mr. Payson had abundant 
opportunity to recognize their uniform courtesy, and un- 
tiring interest in the work. He often spoke of them in 
terms of the warmest appreciation, and both in public 
and private gave frequent expression to the deep sense 
of gratitude he felt for having been called, in the good 
providence of God, to labor with the members of a church 
whose sound judgment and financial ability were in- 
spired by such steadfast zeal. Some of these gentlemen 
were identified with the chapel almost from the very 
first, and were the " pillars " of Mr. Payson's work, as he 
himself often styled them. Humanly speaking, their aid 
and that of those connected with them, also from the 
parent church, were indispensable to his success. In 
season and out of season, by night and day, both summer 
and winter, these noble Christian men labored, as they 
still labor, with a faith and patience, and indefatigable 
devotion to their work, which moved the admiration and 
stimulated the zeal of all who knew them. 

It is especially worthy of note that the members of 
the Madison Square Church who engaged in this field, 
carried light and life to dreary homes, not by the dole of 



HIS FIELD OF LABOR. 77 

chanty or the cold unsympathetic aid of money lavishly 
bestowed, but, as their Saviour did, by the personal con- 
tact of loving hearts. The poor felt the comforts of their 
bounty, bounteously bestowed ; the cheerless were glad- 
dened by their love ; and many a weak and desolate soul 
of whom the Judge may say at last, " It is one of the least 
of these my brethren," was not only succored in distress, 
but saved from sin as well, through their kind ministry. 
There is one man in particular from that church of 
whom we can only speak with the most affectionate and 
kindling admiration of his character. He is loved and 
honored as a father in the chapel. The poor all know 
him as their friend. He goes from house to house and 
from child to child with every want upon his heart and 
every name upon his lip. He is as loving and genlle as 
a mother, and as wise and prudent in advice and thought- 
ful of the interests of all as any man should be who is 
called to administer counsel to twelve hundred clients. 
As a simple matter of fact, this Christian layman has 
been a co-pastor of the church. He has never borne the 
title, but he has done a vast amount of visiting and min- 
istering, and waiting and sympathizing, such as few min- 
isters ever do, and in those favored years not long ago, 
when business did not press too heavily upon his time, 
accomplished quite as much as any pastor does. And 
all from love for souls. He is perfectly simple. No such 
thing as affectation or display appears in anything he 
does. He seldom " speaks " in meeting, but when he 
prays, prays with such fervor and humility, that every 
waiting heart goes out with his to worship at the throne. 



78 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

And still another, with equal zeal and extraordinary 
powers of endurance, in spite of multitudinous engage- 
ments and engrossing cares such as throng upon the 
path of every business man in this metropolis, and in the 
very face of obstacles which ordinary Christians plead at 
times as reasons for neglect of public duty, consecrated 
every Sabbath-day, and at least two evenings every week, 
to the cause of Christian service here. Scarcely a Sab- 
bath-day for seventeen years has seen him absent from 
his post. The prayer-meetings held each Wednesday 
and Friday evening through the year witnessed his con- 
stant devotion and indefatigable zeal. Few laymen ever 
spent more thought and care, or sacrificed themselves 
more cheerfully for the promotion of the cause of Christ 
in any field. And it is hardly possible to overestimate 
the indebtedness of this particular enterprise to the 
benevolence and fidelity of this one man. Almost from 
its very inception it has felt the beneficent influence of 
his life. 

Nor have these Christian workers stood alone to rep- 
resent the parent church. Others engaged in different 
and most important branches of the work with equal 
devotion and faithfulness. Many others made equally 
noble and generous sacrifices, possibly even greater. 
" Every man shall have praise of God." And it cannot 
escape our notice here that the same philanthropic and 
Christian spirit of love pervaded all the efforts in this 
field from the very first. Personal comfort, time, and 
money, were freely given up by those whose highest in- 
spiration is the cross. 



HIS FIELD OF LABOR. 79 

He would be a strange servant of Christ who could 
assume the care of souls under such auspices as these, 
and not find his zeal enkindled by the very atmosphere in 
which he stood. But Charles Payson brought to this 
field a heart already enkindled by divine grace, and already 
aglow with love for souls. He brought an enthusiastic 
nature, warmed and inspired by grateful memories of a 
Christian home, a Christian ancestry, and Christian train- 
ing through all his life ; and he needed nothing more to 
draw him into instant sympathy with all these earnest 
workers for the Lord. 

During the summer of i860, the same year in which 
Mr. Payson assumed the care of the mission, it became 
evident that the accommodations furnished by the chapel 
were insufficient for the growing demands of the work ; 
and accordingly additions were made to the chapel build- 
ing, consisting of an extension of the main edifice some 
twenty-five feet in the rear, together with two wings, the 
one fronting on Thirty-first street, forty by twenty feet, 
the other, on the opposite side of the chapel, twenty by 
twenty feet, each two stories high. These furnished 
rooms for the infant-class on Sunday, and for social 
prayer-meetings during the week, as well as for a large 
and well-arranged Sunday-school library. 

The religious life of the new organization received a 
great impulse at this time ; and during the following 
year between forty and fifty united with the church, most 
of them on confession of their faith. The Sunday-school 
rapidly increased in numbers and interest, and during the 
winter of 1860-61, the average attendance at the morn- 



So ALL FOR CHRLST. 

ing session was six hundred and fifty, as many as seven 
hundred and fifty frequently being present. The prayer- 
meetings also grew very fast, till the room used for this 
purpose was crowded with from one hundred to one hun- 
dred and fifty ; and without any excitement the work of 
grace continued through the year. Several were added 
to the church upon confession of their faith at every 
communion season ; and this peculiarity of the work, 
marking the very commencement of Mr. Payson's minis- 
try, characterized it to the end.* It is a noteworthy fact 
that, throughout the sixteen years in which he labored 
with this people, there was not a single month in which 
some case of hopeful conversion did not occur. The 
spirit of revival was constant in the church, and a deep 
tone of active piety pervaded all its services. 

This may be well illustrated by the following request, 
which is only one of many, presented to the pastor at one 
of the weekly meetings by a lady member of his church : 

" Oh, to be nothing, nothing, 

Only to lie at His feet, 
A broken and emptied vessel, 

For the Master's use made meet: 
Emptied, that he might fill me, 

As forth to his service I go; 
Broken, that so, unhindered, 

His life through me might flow." 

My Dear Friend and Pastor: I most deeply feel that I need 
your prayers and the prayers of our brethren and sisters in Christ. I 
want to be what the lines above express — nothing, nothing, that I may see 
the glory of Christ in the conversion of precious souls to whom I stand 
very nearly related. I have long prayed in secret for a heart single to 
God's glory, but something in me seems to hinder the possession of the 
full blessing I crave. Perhaps I should not so present myself for prayer 

* The only exception (in September, 1S70) was caused by a misunderstanding on the 
part of applicants for admission as to the time for meeting the Session. 



HIS FIELD OF LABOR. Si 

when so many unconverted souls demand our earnest intercession ; bu< I 
feel deeply burdened in spirit. I hope that you are better again, and that 
you may be thoroughly furnished to every good work. 

Most truly your friend. 

Mr. Payson very often received letters of this charac- 
ter. His life was so devoted to the highest good of those 
he served, and was so genuine a life of prayer, that no 
one could remain long under its influence without ac- 
knowledging the power of holiness to kindle holiness, 
and of a pure, self-sacrificing love for Christ to awaken 
longings after just such love in other hearts. He pos- 
sessed in a marked degree the graces of self-sacrifice, 
humility, and simple faith in God ; and these, above all 
other gifts with which he was endowed, contributed to 
his success. They led him on to labor for the poor and 
destitute, the outcasts of society, the lepers of to-day, 
the desolate and heart-broken and hopeless men and 
women of the great metropolis, with a zeal and self-devo- 
tion which have borne their golden fruit in hundreds 
upon hundreds of emancipated souls, the full measure of 
whose blessedness will not be known until the harvest 
home. It was the predicted glory of our Lord's public 
ministry, to which He himself more than once alluded, 
that he was " anointed to preach the gospel to the poor," 
and that the "poor had the gospel preached unto them ;" 
and it was the joy of Mr. Pay son's life that he was privi- 
leged in just this way to follow Christ. 

It is not generally known that during his long and 
patient ministry to this people of the eastern district of 
New York, Mr. Payson received urgent invitations to 
leave his field and become the pastor of other churches, 



82 ALL FOR CHRIST. 

in any one of which, as the world judges, he would have 
occupied a far more eligible position, and wielded a much 
more coveted influence. These invitations were never 
sought in any way ; and yet, through all his ministry,* 
they were repeatedly presented to him by large and flour- 
ishing churches in Toronto, in Montreal, in Bridgeport, 
and in other towns and cities of the Middle and Eastern 
states, as well as in New York itself, in the vain attempt 
to change his purpose and win him from his chosen 
field. He invariably preferred to stay " where," as he 
often said, " the Lord hath called and blessed him in his 
work." But he never dismissed any one of these callsf 
hastily or carelessly, invariably seeking rather by earnest 
prayer — as he did indeed concerning every event of his 
life — to know what the Divine will might be. 

It was the opinion of one of the leading clergymen 
of New York that " in every respect Charles Payson hum- 
bled himself to this work." But with that rare sympathy 
which springs from unaffected love for men, for all men, 
even for the worst, because of the possible good which 
may be wrought in them, he stooped to the very lowest 
whom he met, so generously that no one ever thought 
him condescending, and so entirely, with all the wealth 
of his overflowing heart and vigorous mind and prayer- 
ful life, that more than a thousand men and women still 
bear the impress of his character as members of the 
church of Christ on earth, and as we hope, of that great 

* The last call, of the most flattering and honorable nature, was pre- 
sented in 1876. 

t The invitations were sometimes presented with, and sometimes 
without, the formality of a regular call. 



HIS FIELD OF LABOR. S3 

household in the skies of which the Saviour says, " These 
are my own." Indeed it has been truly remarked that 
" Mr. Payson never knew any distinctions between men." 
His love was catholic. His life was like his Lord's in 
this, that both the rich and poor, the great and the igno- 
ble, the educated and the ignorant, alike found sympathy 
in him, and learned that when he gave himself to men 
he gave himself without reserve. 

The brief sketch of his labors to which we shall soon 
turn, confirms the testimony which another city pastor, 
his associate in the parent church, bears to his self-sac- 
rificing love for his people. " Our brother," he said, 
while speaking to the large and tearful assembly which 
thronged the church at Mr. Payson's funeral, "had a 
spirit of brave, grand, simple, honorable consecration to 
his Master. . . . But it seems to me that his life was 
more than consecrated. He had the rare gift of putting 
himself completely in another's place, and of throwing 
himself without reserve into everything he did ! What- 
ever the work, he gave to it his best energy and thought. 
With him there were no distinctions between what we 
call little and great. . . . Duty was alike important in 
any case. . . . He would not spare himself. What was 
said of Christ might be said in a large measure of him : 
' He saved others, himself lie cannot save; 1 and so truly 
did his heart go out towards the real good and happiness 
of his flock, that this deeply-bereaved people can say 
' We love him, beeause he first loved us /' "* 

* From a partial report of the address of Rev. J. W. Tucker, D. D., 
by a lady friend. 



8 4 ALL FOR CLLRIST. 

In the same strain of thought and feeling, the Rev. 
E. F. Burr, D. D.,* whose reputation as a scholar and 
brilliant writer has made him so widely known, writes, 
under date of February 12, 1877, to Mrs. Payson : 

From the outset of my acquaintance with Mr. Payson I conceived 
the highest opinion of him, both as a man and as a Christian minister. 
The sermons from him to which I have listened were such as to make me 
wonder that the great audiences to which he preached were not still 
greater. While admirably suited to his own congregation, they were quite 
as well suited, as to all the elements of effective speech, to the most 
scholarly and critical assembly in the land. If New York has in her pul- 
pits any man more gifted with comprehensive faculty and robust eloquence 
than Charles Payson, she is greatly to be congratulated. 

But to me the crowning thing in the man was the splendid devotion 
with which he gave himself to a work usually not much coveted among 
men of his large ability. The Master, who himself so pitied the sheep 
which had no shepherd, knows how to appreciate a spirit so like his . 
own. . . . 

And here it may be proper to mention a fact which 
will perhaps place in a still clearer light the " splendid 
devotion " to which Dr. Burr refers. In the " Minutes 
of the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the 
United States" the form under which church work is re- 
ported rendered it impossible, in the peculiar position 
Mr. Payson occupied, that any separate record of his 
work should appear. Thus to one unacquainted with 
the facts he would seem to be there represented as little 
better than an idler in the Lord's vineyard. During the 
sixteen years in which he toiled so faithfully and with 
such blessed effect as one of her pastors, these records 
tell almost nothing about his work. Sixteen empty col- 

* Author of "Pater Mundi" " Ecce Caelum" "Ad Clemm" "Ad 
Fidem," " Work in tlie Vineyard" etc., etc. 



HIS FIELD OF LABOR. S5 

umns follow his name in these official pages year after 
year, and the same silence is observed in the case of his 
devoted fellow-laborers in the field of New York City 
Missions.* Take, e. g., the record for the year 1873, given 
on the next page, and it is substantially the same for 
every other year from i860 to 1877. 

During the past two years the forms have been so 
changed that the contributions of the Memorial Chapel 
stand opposite the name of its pastor ; but from first to 
last no records of the numbers admitted to the church, 
of the children connected with the Sunday-school, or of 
any other proofs of its Christian life and growth are asso- 
ciated with his name. This strange anomaly is perhaps 
the result, in part at least, of our present system of Pres- 
byterian church mission work as carried on in New York. 
In some cases it may well be questioned whether the 
effect of this system has not been to repress and keep in 
the background rather than to develop those free, self- 
supporting virtues which are the strength and beauty of 
any church. And it is to be feared that under this sys- 
tem the mission chapel, its pastor, and its labors may be 
to the eye of the church at large almost wholly absorbed 
and lost sight of in the parent body.f 

But without discussing the point, it is enough to say 
here that Mr. Payson himself was not unconscious of the 
false position in which he, together with his fellow-labor- 
ers in the same field, was placed anew every year by the 

* See Appendix, Note A. 

t Compare upon this whole subject the very interesting and impor- 
tant papers furnished by the Rev. Drs. Hastings and Tucker of this city, 
and published in the Appendix, Note A. 

8 



86 



ALL FOR CHRLST. 



1 w * 

3S^ 



iri 



^ o o 
w' 5" a. 

S' s w 



C 3 

ft- 1 
Is. 



IN ft 

5D -. 



►d "TS >T) C/3 hj ^0 'T) 

J '* * ' ' * 

SI I I 



•"d "t3 *"d 3 ''d *"d ^d 



P" 


£ 










— 






H 




— 












a 


y_ 


6 


(I 


o 



*J 00**J 


m o ui 1 Added on Examination. 


00 OJ 


~j i! £ 1 Added on Certificate. 


*- M 


o a- o 


Whole Number. 


* H M 


»^.„ 


Adults I'.apti/.ed. 


-J >- 


U.&S 


Infants Baptized. 


W m oo 


<^i o 
O t>j o 


S. S. Membership. 


^b "oo 


OS 

M 00 00 


Home Missions. 


00 -< <-n 


M M CO 


Foreign Missions. 


o -u o 


N CO 
-J v) 


Education. 


3S 


w CO 


Publication. 


O 1 M 


O CO 


Church Erection. 




OJ M 
w CO 


Relief Fund. 




O -O m 


Freedmen. 


i '£ S 


U 00 H 


General Assembly. 


"boo 
o o o 


HUI 00 

ut 


O 


Minister's Salary. 


O «-l 


M 5 ' 

o *o • 


Sustentation. 



Congregational and 
Miscellaneous. 



HIS FIELD OF LAB OH. 87 

Minutes of the General Assembly. He would have pre- 
ferred not to be designated, or to see his brethren desig- 
nated there as " S. S.," when to all intents and purposes 
he and they were true Christian pastors, wedded to their 
flock by the tenderest and holiest ties. It was a wrong 
which he thought should be righted, a wrong which he 
did not hesitate, on suitable occasion, to protest against. 
But still he laid no inordinate stress upon this matter, 
knowing full well that the only record worthy of much 
solicitude is that kept by the Master himself. 

The extract from the Minutes of the General Assem- 
bly, given on the opposite page, is in no way exceptional. 
The same contrast might be shown in other years as well, 
and, with the exceptions above noted, it exists in every 
year of his ministry from i860 to 1877. This, however, 
may serve to illustrate the facts. 

In this connection the contemporary record of a judi- 
cious and competent critic, Rev. Lyman Abbott, D. D., 
will be found both pertinent and interesting. In 1872, Dr. 
Abbott wrote a series of letters for " The Advance," upon 
" Popular Preachers of New York," of which the follow- 
ing is that devoted to Mr. Payson. 

Of all the thousands who daily pass up and down Third avenue in 
the neighborhood of Thirtieth street, there are probably very few who 
know that they are passing a church which every Sunday contains one of 
the largest Protestant congregations in the city. And if the reader, stop- 
ping at one of our fashionable hotels, or entering into the more select cir- 
cles of our polite and refined society, were to inquire for the names of the 
most popular preachers in the city, it is certain that Rev. Charles H. Pay- 
son would not be described as one of them. Nay, if he were to ask for 
Mr. Payson's church, it is doubtful whether he could learn where it is sit- 
uated. In fact it is not a church, but only a branch of a church. It is a 



88 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

"mission" established by the Madison Square Presbyterian Church, (Dr. 
William Adams',) which defrays its expenses, provides its pastor, admin- 
isters in the last resort its government, furnishes the Sabbath-school with 
many of its teachers, and to which those who are converted through its 
instrumentality become united when they make a profession of religion. 
Indeed, Dr. Adams' church has for several years received larger acces- 
sions of members through the instrumentality of its mission than directly 
through its own services. In a sense it may be said that Mr. Payson is 
the colleague and copastor with Dr. Adams, though they work in entirely 
different fields, and minister to entirely different congregations. 

Mr. Payson's church is built, to use Mr. Beecher's expressive, though 
inelegant phrase, in " the belly of a lot." Its unpretentious front is hardly 
to be discriminated from the block of stores in the midst of which it 
stands. 

Entering and ascending a flight of stairs to the second floor, the vis- 
itor finds himself in a large hall capable of seating 1,000 or 1,200 people, 
and perhaps more. It is perfectly plain. The pews are movable settees. 
At your right as you enter is a large box labelled "Building Fund," for 
this congregation have become incited with the laudable ambition to be- 
come independent and self-supporting, and secure a church home which 
they can truly call their own. It is slow work, for it takes many pennies 
to build a city church, but the work goes bravely on. At the farther end 
of the hall is a low, broad platform, with a simple reading-desk in front. 
On one side stands a grand piano, a substitute for an organ. Experience 
shows that it serves a better purpose as a leader alike for church and Sun- 
day-school ; and there is no choir. None, did I say ? Rather, every hymn 
is sung by a choir of a thousand voices, a choir which compensates for 
some discords in music by the grand harmony of feeling which animates it. 

It is half-past seven. The hour of service has arrived. The congre- 
gation are in their seats. They are prompter than some of their fashion- 
able neighbors. There are no empty pews, and but few empty seats. 
There are not many Protestant ministers who address larger Sabbath 
evening congregations than Mr. Payson. It is a congregation composed 
for the most part of those whose meagre incomes, varying from $600 to 
$1,500 a year, debar them from churches whose pew-rents are from $50 
to $300. 

The preacher rises in his place. Without being handsome, he strikes 
one as being a fine-looking man. He is, perhaps, a little above the me- 
dium height, with dark hair, keen and at times piercing eyes, and a nervous, 
but self-possessed action. He throws into his reading of Scripture a dra- 
matic fire which fixes the attention of his audience, many of whom follow 
him with open Bible in their hands. His prayer is simple, earnest, but 
not oratorical, and is the utterance of one who knows the wants of the 



HIS FIELD OF LABOR. 89 

people whose petitions he conducts to the throne of grace. He joins in 
the singing, being precentor as well as preacher. He announces his text. 
If his sermon is written, it is only before him as a reminder. He refers 
from time to time to his notes ; but as his discourse proceeds, warms with his 
subject, leaves the desk, addresses his audience now from this, now from 
that side of the platform, throws aside the tone and manner of a minister, 
and appears more like a platform speaker than like a pulpit orator. He 
abounds in illustrations. His sermon does not lack continuity, but its 
power consists in the spiritual warmth which characterizes it. His action 
is sometimes perhaps too fervid, and his tones too intense for our taste, 
yet he rarely breaks the bond of sympathy which unites him to his con- 
gregation. 

The sermon over and the benediction pronounced, you rise decorous- 
ly to go forward and introduce yourself to the preacher. But he is not 
there. With a celerity that is somewhat astonishing he has rushed down 
the aisle and is standing at the main entrance submitting to the American 
handshaking with his congregation — blacksmith, glazier, milkman, butcher, 
and their wives and children, with a kind word of personal inquiry to old 
friends and with a cheery welcome to strangers. Though we account Mr. 
Payson among the popular preachers of New York, it is perhaps this per- 
sonal and unaffected interest in his people which, more than his preach- 
ing, is the secret of his popularity ; and we place his name here because 
he is a type of a class of preachers unknown to fame on earth, though 
not unknown above, who are consecrating their lives to the fulfilment of 
Christ's mission in laboring that the poor may have the gospel preached 
unto them. 

The tables upon the following page, prepared from 
the official records of the Madison Square Chapel, exhibit 
some of the fruits of his ministry. The figures, it will 
be seen, are not altogether complete, especially in con- 
nection with the Sunday-school, but they are sufficiently 
so to furnish a brief and summary description of his la- 
bors ; and the attention of the reader is the more partic- 
ularly invited to them, because, as has been said, this is 
the first and only tabulated statement of his work ever 
published. The pastor of the German branch, it should 
be noted, was the Rev. Martin A. Erdmann. 



9 o 



ALL FOR CHRIST. 



^ -1*0 pT * 

f 9 o " 3*d « 
?0- 2. <■ 5 



r-w ra-d 



"I c ^^ 

la." s'°g, 

3_0 « ^i 3* 



n 



-< a. 



S"S 3 - 



I v. 






srg.2.; 1$ S 

3 tt ■ ■ 



H — O 






"•Si 

c 5 2. 

C/) CCO r^ 



4- OJ Ln U 1 00 
-v) m 4^ OOO W s 

0*WW NSJ Cv 1 w 


OJ OJ Ln to 00 
O - ^1 Ln W to ^J 
W^OOtOO- 1 M 


OJ OJ Ln to 1 O0 

hA MsO MN OO 1 W 


OJ OJ Ln W CO 
Ln OJ in 4> it ] ^J 
OLn 4V ^n oj 4»- M 1 ■** 


n oj o n oo 

Ln <-« Ln sO O — -J 

J> O-f'vOOvON 1 Ln 


OJ U 4* 00 


O* H-Uh 00 
O M 4*- vjOUi ( *-J 







o ""5 5 -• 














[0 


crq B ~ f g 

§ 1*3 o o 








! I ! S* ; 




d 

o 




'.'.'"!' 


l 


3 






00 








o 


rr 






00 


K 


*fl 


1 ! ! ! w 






VJ 








o 


• • . • o 












































- 








3' 




1 •' tfl. 


GO 


hi 








4- 
































O 


. to h W 








i mo»» 




n 




' OwOff 






„ 


■a* 






n 










O»M»0 






M 




ON 






! ■*» 


H 




4- 


» lUi «* 








00 i oo M 


ON 








VI 






m ; t» 


































w 




N ! "6» 


M 






O 1 N M Oj 








O i *■ O O 







^ 


O ; M OOOn 


O 








a. 




10 =» 




-U 


4* M OJ 4* 














O 


VIVO W M O 
















cj ; *«. 


M 










!z! 








A 






m 








J- 


^ 


oo ! =t» 


„ 


— 


8 


M 0O i -t* " 
Ln 0\ • O0W 


00 


2. 




M • . "£» 




n* 


















* 


# * 




r 




m ; *» 


H 




















vi 


' to <-> 


4- 






ui ! *» 


M 






















o> o ' ■»• oo 
















oo ! 'Sft 






















» 


*. o ' n o 


o-J 



21 


^^^ 




•: . tr 


P — 3- 






. - ^j, 0,0, 










3 


5-3 3 




C 


B K -8.S g 

O 'no 
^ ft o n *1 




c 




*i 




E&Si 


rp-ooy h, 












2 3 8 S£.o-^ 

3 -r.f 3 s (l 
S 3" 1 3-3> 










O , ' 


C , mJJO » 




"P i ' 


„3 ; K.>< ; 


^ 




-3 ; " r» ; 


(U 








! ! ! 


p" ! . - 1 ; 








M 










• ■ W CO i h 


vO 






















• 00 O0 O OOsD 


O 










. 4i Oo * 00 






























■ *^ -v) On « 




_, 


[ 






i OJ m M OO c> 




cow o 








1 








4- OO 


1 -OO OOO 


4^ 


M 


; m 












' to o oo (0 n 




to 


; M 










o - o 


• OOO OJ ON 


c-. 




















-wo 


C>J> to ooj 


--i 


















Qv 




' 4^ N N -f* N 












*. 










*M« 




\D 




On 




W.U*i 








»CO »«U1 

















WU1VJ 


« O O on 




Ln 


o\ 


oo 








O O ih 


m o O to - O 




o 






- c>o 








On O On on M 










O M 














CO to oo to o - 






















sO m Qv-O C>m^ui Q\ 






















W 00 O 04i. -^ O 






















*>«0*OuiH4.Ln- 


VJ 








H 








00 M 




> 

















METHODS AND MEANS. Q 1 

CHAPTER IV. 
METHODS AND MEANS. 

In his annual report of the chapel work for 1876, Mr. 
Payson says, " There are from twenty to twenty-five ser- 
vices of various kinds held. every week in connection with 
the chapel, an average of ten each Sabbath and two to 
three each week day. Together with the Sabbath-school 
teachers, over one hundred are employed in one way or 
another each week. This does not include the forty vol- 
unteers who have canvassed the neighborhood of the 
chapel, inviting all non-churchgoers to God's house, nor 
the various works of love and mercy performed by individ- 
ual members of the church on their own responsibility 

You will be interested to know that some gathered from 
off the street fifteen or eighteen years ago are to-day 
among our best Christian helpers. One occurs to me now 
who every Sabbath, rain or shine, takes a journey of two 
miles to bring an impenitent friend and his wife to church. 
She has done this for two years, and still prays and hopes 
for their conversion. This is but one illustration of her 

untiring zeal for Christ Most of our enlarged space 

is already occupied. Four Bible-classes occupy the upper 
story of the building, at the same time that the two lower 
stories are occupied by the infant-class and Sabbath- 
school proper." 

The methods and means which Mr. Payson chose to 



9 2 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

enlist the members of his church in active work were 
such as long experience proved to be best adapted for 
his field. It was an invariable rule with him to give 
every Christian some work to do for the Master. If one 
had a talent for singing, he was placed in the singing- 
class which met each Tuesday in the year. If another 
showed promise for usefulness as a teacher in the Sab- 
bath-school, or a leader of the Young People's Meetings, 
or a visitor among the sick, he was employed, if possible, 
in one or another of those fields. The Temperance As- 
sociation, the Society of Christian Workers, the Commit- 
tees on Strangers, Invitation, Family Prayer-Meetings, 
Employment, and the Sick, and other such agencies, en- 
rolled a very large number of the members of the church, 
and furnished fields of Christian activity for almost every 
one. 

In illustration of the efforts Mr. Payson made in this 
direction, the organization effected in 1867-8 may be 
mentioned, only as an illustration, however. Work did 
not begin nor end with this. It was continued by means 
analogous to those then employed from the very com- 
mencement of his pastorate to its end. But this will 
serve to illustrate. 

In the year 1867-8, under the efficient leadership of 
Mr. S. Tyler Williams, the "Society of Christian Work- 
ers" was organized by Mr. Payson for the purpose of se- 
curing effective cooperation in Christian work. It was 
composed of five committees : " The Employment Com- 
mittee," "The Good Samaritans," "The Committee on 
Strangers," "The Family Prayer-Meeting Committee," 



METHODS AND MEANS. 93 

and "The Committee on Invitation." A "Pastors Cir- 
cular' was distributed through the congregation, in 
which, after quoting the words of the apostle in Romans 
1 2 : 5-8, he says : 

In accordance with these God-given principles, there is work for 
every member of our church. May your pastor ask your earnest, prayerful 
attention to the following questions ? They may suggest your work. All 
responses are confidential, to aid him in classifying his helpers. 

Name, 

Address, 



DEVOTIONAL. 

Will you daily remember your church and pastor, by using our print- 
ed Prayer Register?* 

Will you select one or more unconverted persons and daily pray for 
them till they are brought to Christ? 

Will you endeavor regularly to attend any of the following services ? 
If so, indicate it by an X opposite such meetings. If willing to take part, 
make two XXs. 

Church Services, morning and evening ? 
Sabbath-School, or Adult Bible-Class? 
Young People's Prayer-Meeting, Sabbath evening, 7 o'clock ? 
Church Prayer-Meeting on Wednesday evening ? 
Sabbath-School Prayer-Meeting on Friday evening ? 
Any Family Prayer-Meeting (they are held on Monday, Tues- 
day, and Thursday evenings) ? 
Female Prayer-Meeting, Friday afternoon at 2I o'clock. 

COOD SAMARITAN WORK. 
Will you sit up with the sick, if called upon, one night each month ? 
Will you visit the sick ? If so, what day ? 

VISITING DEPARTMENT. 

Can you take a district, and see that all its families are invited to 
church services ? 

Will you try to bring children to our Sabbath-school ? 
* See page 98. 



94 ALL FOR CHRIST. 



STRANGERS' DEPARTMENT. 

Will you, at our various religious and social gatherings, welcome 
strangers, and endeavor to make them feel at home ? 



No one of course is expected to work in all these departments ; 
if you have any preference, please indicate it on this line. 



When you have filled out these Circulars, please keep one and return 
the o:hcr, through the boxes, to the pastor, 

CHARLES H. PAYSON. 

The Committee on Strangers was appointed, as the 
Circular indicated, "to welcome strangers at all religious 
and social gatherings and to make them feel at home." 
This committee was greatly assisted in its work by the 
fact that the chapel seats were free. 

The Committee on Employment, at the close of the 
first year, reported twenty or thirty individuals for whom 
work had been secured. 

The Good Samaritan Committee was appointed to 
provide watchers for the sick. It was composed entirely 
of volunteers from the chapel, who engaged to take their 
turn in sitting up at night with those who might be ill 
and unable to provide suitable nurses for themselves in 
any other way. More than twenty persons volunteered 
at once to undertake this most exhausting and self-sacri- 
ficing work ; and during the first year of its organization 
more than one hundred nights were spent by the faithful 
members of this noble band beside the sick-beds of the 
poor and destitute. Each member of this committee 
held himself or herself responsible for at least one night 



METHODS AND MEANS. 95 

in every month, and most of them, it must be added, 
were poor, hard-working women. Nor is this work a 
transient one. Nine years have passed away since the 
organization of this committee, and yet we rre told that 
eighteen out of the twenty or thirty still remain, who can 
be called upon at any time to " watch " and nurse the 
sick. There is no other organization, perhaps, connected 
with the chapel that can more effectually perpetuate the 
memory of its self-denying pastor than the " Good Sa- 
maritan Committee ;" and there certainly is none other 
whose work lies more directly in the line of the Master's 
eternal reward and exalted praise, when at the last He 
shall say, " Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the 
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the 
world." 

Thirty or more in frhe same year united with the 
Committee on Family Prayer- Meetings, and proved both 
faithful and efficient laborers in this field. These meet- 
ings were a peculiar feature of the work and deserve 
especial notice. They were established by Mr. Payson 
in various districts among his congregation, and were 
held in private houses, where from six to thirty individ- 
uals would assemble for prayer and conference on such 
evenings as were not occupied by services in the church. 
The average attendance was ten, and, in some years at 
least, one hundred and fifty persons were thus actively 
employed in what has proved to be one of the most 
effective and fruitful agencies connected with the church. 
In the year 1866, c. g., fifteen such meetings were held 
in various localities on four different evenings of the 



96 ALL FOR CHRIST. 

week, eight of which were conducted by gentlemen and 
seven by ladies, some having been appointed exclusively 
for ladies. Mr. Payson during many years was most effi- 
ciently aided in the oversight of these services by mem- 
bers of the Young People's Association of the Madison 
Square Church, and the responsibility for them at all 
times necessarily devolved upon others than himself. 
But from 1861, when first established here,* these "Fam- 
ily Prayer-Meetings," or, as they were sometimes called, 
" Neigborhood Prayer-Meetings," were among his favor- 
ite means of reaching the masses and employing the 
workers of his church. 

The work of the Committee on Invitation is also wor- 
thy of special remark. The vicinity of the chapel was 
thoroughly districted, and all families not attending 
church were invited to do so. A large number of the 
chapel people, who had not previously found any field in 
which to labor, were thus successfully engaged in Chris- 
tian work. In the winter of 1869-70, 1,446 visits were 
made, 153 adults induced to attend church, and 65 chil- 
dren gathered into the Sabbath-school. In 1870-71, for 
the first and last time in the history of Mr. Payson's pas- 
torate, there were no accessions to the church at one of 
the regular communion seasons.f This roused the 
members to new activity. District visitation was pushed 
with vigor. Prayer was offered without ceasing unto 
God, and in January, 1871, the largest number (29) 

* See the letter on p. 27. 

t The sacrament of the Lord's Supper, at which applicants were ad- 
mitted to the church, was celebrated every second month throughout the 
year. 



METHODS AND MEANS. 97 

ever received at one communion were admitted to the 
church. One man is reported to have visited regularly 
seventy of the chapel families, making for himself a little 
parish within a parish. 

In i860 a Young People s Prayer-Meeting was estab- 
lished, which has been continued ever since. The Fe- 
male Prayer- Meeting, begun in 1864, has been faithfully 
sustained. 

In 1869 the German Congregation was organized. 
Mr. Payson's visit to Germany had been by no means 
thrown away. It served to bring him into active sympa- 
thy with a large and most interesting part of our city's 
population ; and the facility in the use of the German 
language which he there acquired enabled him to wield 
an unusual influence over the Germans in his vicinity. 
For the sake of retaining their children in the Sabbath- 
school, it was found desirable to organize a separate ser- 
vice for the adults, and for this purpose to secure the 
assistance of a German pastor who should preach to the 
people in their own language. This arrangement was 
consummated in 1869, and the Rev. Martin A. Erdmann 
was invited to take the pastorate. Since that time he 
has worked most faithfully, except when failing health 
rendered it impossible, and the German branch under his 
efficient ministry has steadily grown in strength and 
numbers, as will be seen by reference to the tables on p. 
90, until now, in 1877, there are 132 members. 

A very effectual means of creating an esprit du corps 
among the members of the chapel, and at the same time 
promoting the spiritual interests of the church, was the 

9 



9 8 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

Prayer Register, introduced early in 1865. It was Mr_ 
Payson's own device, and illustrates perfectly the love he 
bore for every member of his church, and the strong de- 
sire which he felt that all should be united in the firmest 
bonds of Christian sympathy. It originated in his own 
practice of praying individually for each member of his 
church at home, and has been productive of great good, 
not only among the members of his congregation, but 
elsewhere as Christian people have adopted it. The fol- 
lowing extract from the Register in use during 1872-4 
will serve to illustrate its form. The cover and first two 
or three pages are here transcribed, and it will be noticed 
that, after the pastors, elders, and chapel committee, each 
member of the church is assigned a day in which to be 
remembered in the prayers of the people at home. It 
may be added, that after the names of church members, 
were appended those of other Christians " zvorsJiipping 
with us," and of the "children of the church." 

PRAYER REGISTER 

OF THE THIRD AVENUE BRANCH 

OF THE 

Madison Square Presbyterian Church. 
1872, '73. '74. 



Without ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers. 
Rom. 1 : 9. 

God forbid that I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for 
you. 1 Sam. 12 : 23. 

Again I say unto you, That if two of you shall agree on earth as 
touching anything that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my 
Father which is in heaven. Matt. 18 : 19. 



METHODS AND MEANS. 99 

DIRECTIONS FOR USE. 

I. Fasten this Register in your Bible, so that you will see it every time 
you read and pray. 

II. On Sabbath-days pray for the church as a whole. 

III. On week-days pray for the person or persons whose names stand 
opposite the day of the month, with the exceptions mentioned in the next 
direction. 

IV. The exceptions are the dates against which stand the names of 
deceased members in italics. On these days render thanks to God for 
their victory. 

V. Besides the subjects above mentioned, carefully remember the 
special topics for each day of the week, given on the next two pages. 



TOPICS FOR EACH WEEK. 



MONDAY. 



For our rulers, national and state, and all in authority and places of 
influence. 

TUESDAY. 

For a blessing on the missionary labors of Miss Payson, in China, 
Mr. Easterday, in Michigan; and on the missions in Zulu-land and Syria, 
towards which we contribute. Also on our own efforts and gifts, and on 
missions in general at home and abroad. 

WEDNESDAY. 

For the children of our church and Sabbath school, that God will 
bless parents and teachers in their efforts to bring them speedily to know 
and fear the Lord. The same blessing for the children of our whole land. 

THURSDAY. 

For a blessing upon Rev. Mr. Erdmann's labors among the Germans, 
and that God will raise up a truly evangelical ministry for our whole Ger- 
man population. 

FRIDAY. 

For our church — for the sanctification of its whole membership, for 
God's direction of our future, for the parent branch, and for Christians of 
every name and place. 

SATURDAY. 

For the reformation of the intemperate, and a blessing on all efforts 
to promote the cause of Temperance in this city and throughout our land. 



IOO 



ALL FOR CHRLST. 



Thursday, January 4 



SUNDAY. 

For a blessing upon our pastor and his ministry, and on the preach- 
ing of the gospel and the reading and study of the Bible everywhere. 

DATE — 1872. NAMES. 

Monday, January I William Adams, D. D. 

Tuesday. January 2 Charles H. Pay son. 

Wednesday, January 3 Martin A. Erdmann. 

ELDERS OF THE CHURCH. 

f Robert M. Hartley. 

Tredwell Ketchem. 

Oliver E. Wood. 

Ezra M. Kingsley. 
-j George \V. Lane. 

John F. Trow. 

Charles Collins. 

William E. Dodge, Jr. 
[David Wetmore. 

CHAPEL COMMITTEE. 

f Theodore Roosevelt. 

D. S. Egleston. 
I George W. Lane. 

William E. Dodge, Jr. 
I David Wetmore. 

Joseph Gillet. 

S. W. Coe. 

Z. S. Ely. 

Thatcher M. Adams. 

William C. Martin. 
{ S. T. Williams. 



Friday, January 5 



Saturday, January 6 James Goodliff. 

Monday, January 8-- {Henry G. W. Cannon.) 

Tuesday, January 9 Mary Cannon. 

Wednesday, January 10 Mary M. Belger. 

Thursday, January 11 ( George K. Bntterfield.) 

In the Prayer Register for 1875, for the sake of con- 
densation, since the membership had now become so 
large, instead of appointing a separate day for each indi- 
vidual, a single day for an entire family was used. 



METHODS AND MEANS. 101 

Mr. Payson was also very deeply interested in the 
subject of Temperance, as in every other practical sub- 
ject which Christian workers meet. He began at first 
to favor moderation as opposed to total abstinence, but 
before many years was convinced that the only effective 
way to save intemperate men was to practise and to preach 
Total Abstinence. All efforts for reform in this direc- 
tion, however, he believed would prove in vain unless 
controlled and inspired by Christian faith ; and the Tem- 
perance movement in his congregation assumed from the 
first the form of a church movement. In 1870 the 
" Church Temperance Society " was organized, and the fol- 
lowing Circular, accompanied by a Pledge, was sent to 
every member. 

Ye are the salt of the earth : . . . . ye are the light of the world. 
Matt. 5: 13, 14. 

If meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world 
standeth, lest I make my brother to offend, i Cor. 8 : 13. 

" Before God and man, before the church and the world, I impeach 
intemperance. I charge it with the murder of innumerable souls. In this 
country, blessed with freedom and plenty, the word of God and the liber- 
ties of true religion, I charge it as the cause — whatever be the source else- 
where — of almost all the poverty, and almost all the crime, and almost all 
the ignorance, and almost all the irreligion that disgrace and afflict the 
land. ' I am not mad, most noble Festus. I speak the words of truth 
and soberness.' I do, in my conscience, believe that these intoxicating 
stimulants have sunk into wretchedness more men and women than found 
a grave in that deluge which swept over the highest hilltops, engulfing a 
world of which but eight were saved." rev. thomas guthrie. 

Under the leadership of Rev. Mr. Payson, a Temperance Society, on 
the Total Abstinence basis, has been organized in connection with the 
church to which you belong, and is called the Church Temperance 
Society. All are cordially welcomed into its membership ; but it was 
specially designed to enlist church-members, of whom more than two hun- 



102 ALL FOR CLLRLST. 

dred have already enrolled themselves. You, as a CHURCH-MEM- 
BER, are earnestly invited to connect yourself with the Society, and to 
engage heartily in the promotion of its objects. If you are prepared to 
take this step, please sign and return this Pledge without delay, in the 
envelop herewith enclosed. If you are in doubt as to duty, will you not 
seriously consider the matter and decide it now? Whether, on reflection, 
you sign the Pledge or not, be kind enough to return it, in order that there 
may be no doubt as to your having received it. The figures in red ink will 
indicate whence it comes, though it may not bear your signature. Mem- 
bers are not subjected to taxes of any kind. 

S. T. WILLIAMS, 

SECRETARY. 

The results of this movement have not been fully- 
reported. Up to August 12, 1874, when the society- 
numbered one tJionsand and seventy-two members, it had 
had a constant growth, and we doubt not is as efficient 
and useful to-day as ever. The amount of good accom- 
plished by such an organization is of course incalculable. 
One illustration may be given. 

" When I first united with the church," writes one of its members, " I 
was in the liquor business, and thought it all right. I saw other people 
drinking, and reasoned with myself that some one must sell them liquor 
if they would drink, until one Sabbath morning our pastor spoke to me 
about the Temperance Pledge, and told me to pray over it and see if the 
Lord would have me sign it. I prayed over it and saw no way to get out 
of it. I was convinced that I should sign it, and did, and have kept it, 
and shall, by God's help, till I die. Mr. Payson took great interest in me 
and helped me greatly, not so much in pointing out the evils of intemper- 
ance, as by showing me the power in prayer and that Jesus cared for me, 
to keep me and help me at all times and by all means. I must say that 
Satan comes many times and makes the way so smooth to go back to the 
business, not to drink, but to sell ; yet the Lord is strong, and he will keep 
me to the end. Much may have been lost from a worldly point of view, 
yet the Master says : ' In the present time joy, and in the world to come 
life everlasting.'" 

The Woodlawn Association, organized November, 
1 87 1, was most wisely designed by Mr. Payson to meet 



METHODS AND MEANS. 103 

very great need of his growing congregation. The 
number of deaths among its members was becoming 
larger every year, and it was found that the parent 
church could not always provide that aid which was 
sometimes necessary on occasion of burying the dead 
from families connected with the chapel. Accordingly, 
to relieve the poor and protect the rich, a church mutual 
life-insurance company was devised, which was governed 
by the following by-laws, among others : 

(1.) Adults may become members by the payment of fifty cents, chil- 
dren twenty-five cents. 

(2.) On the death of an adult member, the Association will pay $50; 
of a child, at least $25, towards the funeral expenses. 

(3.) At each death an assessment will be made on each member not 
exceeding fifty cents for an adult, and twenty-five cents for a child. 

(4.) Any member failing to pay the assessment within three weeks of 
notice forfeits all the privileges of the Association, and can be restored 
only upon payment of arrearages and by vote of the managers. . . . 

(9.) No person shall become a member unless he or she is a total 
abstainer from intoxicating drinks. . . . 

The affairs of the Association are conducted by a 
Board of Managers elected annually, and consisting of 
nine adult members, who elect from their number a 
president, secretary, and treasurer. They meet once a 
month for business. If a death occurs, they vote an 
assessment. They receive all propositions for member- 
ship, and decide upon them by vote. The assessments 
thus far have averaged a little less than three a year. At 
the commencement there were 197 members, of whom 39 
were minors. During the first two years the Association 
increased rapidly in numbers, and since then has gained 
(net) only three or four each year. The present mem- 
bership is about 260, of whom 60 are minors, so that an 



104 ALL F0R CHRIST. 

assessment raises about $115. It has proved a very great 
help to those in trouble. It comes with relief when this 
is most needed in the families of the poor. Just when 
they are in deepest want of sympathy and aid, this sim- 
ple but most efficient agency provides the indispensable 
assistance which they seek. It has already commended 
itself for adoption in other churches in the city and vicin- 
ity, and is admirably adapted for the good designed. 

Another very efficient means of doing good is the 
Employment Society* which has continued its efforts un- 
remittingly for seventeen years, since October, i860, 
when it was organized to furnish sewing to the needy 
who cannot obtain it otherwise, and to provide substan- 
tial clothing for the poor at cost. The expenses are de- 
frayed by various members of the church. The plan is 
to purchase cloth, and pay the women for making it up 
into garments, which are then sold very cheaply to those 
whose occupation is such as forbids their making them 
for themselves, and who can buy them for less money 
here than elsewhere. Some wealthy and benevolent 
families have frequently had their sewing done by this 
society. In 1870, $700 were expended for material, and 
forty women provided weekly with employment ; in 1865, 
$360 were laid out, and forty or fifty individuals furnished 
with at least seventy-five cents' worth of work to do each 
week for several months. These facts may serve to illus- 
trate the work of the society. 

* The Employmeiit Society and Industrial School did not originate 
with Mr. Payson, but were conducted and supported from the first by the 
generous efforts of ladies from the Madison Square Church. This brief 
description of their methods of work may be found useful in other fields. 



METHODS AND MEANS. 105 

The Industrial School, organized in 1857-8, and faith- 
fully continued every Saturday in the winters for nine- 
teen years, is justly considered one of the most practical 
parts of the work. Its object is to instruct the girls of 
the chapel Sunday-school in sewing, and, if possible, to 
fit them for self-support with the needle — a result which 
in some cases has been attained. In 1865, two hundred 
scholars and twenty teachers were in regular attendance, 
and four hundred and sixty-three garments were made by 
the children and given to them at a cost of $527 for 
material. The largest attendance has been three hun- 
dred ; but during the past three years the numbers have 
been considerably less, as many of the older scholars 
have been compelled to aid in the support of the family 
during the general depression in business. 

For the purpose of instructing the children in the 
doctrines of the Bible, Mr. Payson had a Catechetical 
class, which for several years, towards the close of his 
life, met each week at the chapel to study the Westmin- 
ster Shorter Catechism. His remarkable power of adapt- 
ing himself to children, which rendered his monthly 
addresses to the Sabbath-school most entertaining and 
instructive, enabled him also to deeply interest even the 
youngest of this class in the dry technicalities of that 
admirable formula of faith. A large number of expect- 
ant children were sure to be found awaiting him at the 
appointed hour on Thursday afternoon ; and though the 
record of the other years is not complete, we may accept 
the statement of his journal, that in 1873-4 "there was 
an average attendance of eighty out of a total member- 



106 ALL FOR CLLRLST. 

ship of one hundred and twenty," as affording a glimpse 
of the amount of work accomplished in this way. It was 
Mr. Payson's custom, at the close of the year, to present 
each member of this class with a potted plant or flower, 
or a picture, or Testament, and the attachment between 
the pastor and this little group in the nursery became 
oftentimes very strong. 

The Bible readers, connected with the chapel almost 
from the first, have been very useful. Ladies can some- 
times gain access to families where even the best of pas- 
tors fail, and the amount of pastoral work required in a 
mission field so large as this is at all times far too great 
for any one person to perform. Mr. Payson was ably 
assisted by some of the most faithful Bible readers New 
York has ever known ; and although he made pastoral 
visits every afternoon* in the week, he found the assist- 
ance rendered by these judicious and excellent Christian 
women of very great importance in his work. They car- 
ried aid and comfort to many homes, where, owing to the 
multiplicity of his engagements, the pastor could not go, 
and at a time when just such aid perhaps was indispen- 
sable. It is a humble and a hidden work, this noble 
work of Christian Bible women in New York ; but though 
it has no record here upon the books of men, the Master 
has recorded it above. 

Besides the means and methods now enumerated, 
some of which deserve a more extended notice than can 
be given here, Mr. Payson brought into frequent use all 

* Except Friday, when he was at the chapel to meet any who might 
wish to converse with him. 



METHODS AND MEANS. icy 

those innocent social influences which prove to be the 
handmaidens of the church, and serve to make a people 
at once more sympathetic and efficient. Sociables and 
tea-parties, fairs* and festivals, singing schools, lectures, 
concerts, readings, stereopticon exhibitions — everything 
of the kind which could instruct or edify while it amused, 
found cordial sympathy and active support with him. 
Indeed, it was on such occasions that Mr. Payson was 
most thoroughly at home with his people. His sympa- 
thetic nature and hearty enthusiasm for every innocent 
enjoyment "contagiously inspired all he met." There 
was the most thoughtful consideration for every one 
with whom he spoke — a kind word, a winning smile, or a 
sparkling witticism, which threw new life into every so- 
cial gathering of the church. 

" The poorest and the most forlorn," it has been truly said, '" were as 
thoroughly assured of his effective sympathy as were the most virtuous, 
intelligent, and wealthy. No one could be too poor or too ignorant, if 
there was room in his heart for Christian love. . . . Though his power in 
the pulpit was truly winning and commanding, it was preeminently great 
in social intercourse with his people." 

And this was perhaps nowhere more apparent than 
in the weekly meetings for prayer and conference. They 
were very informal. Every one was encouraged to speak 
or pray; even the ladies at times took part, by sending a 
written note to the pastor, although this was not fre- 
quently the case. One of the members of his church 
writes : 

He was the life of the prayer-meetings. His prayers were wonder- 
ful. He would enter into the service with deep feeling, as though he had 

* At which there was no raffling. 



ioS ALL FOR CHRLST. 

come straight from the throne of grace, and each heart would be wanned 
by his good influence. Many, indeed, have come to the meetings time and 
again, feeling unhappy because the burden of sin or care weighed heavily ; 
and a few words from our dear pastor helped to lift the weight from every 
heart, for he always taught us the words of Christ, "Come unto me, all ye 
that labor and are heavy-laden, and I will give you rest." After meeting 
he would stand at the door and personally greet each one as they passed 
out ; and then would wait on those remaining to see him, and administer 
to them spiritual comfort such as they might need. His remarks upon the 
subject of the meeting were very refreshing and instructive. I believe that 
God always gave him the right words to utter, for his heart was continu- 
ally overflowing with a feast of precious truths for his people. Oh, how 
many times have I left the prayer-meeting with feelings which I did not 
take into it — precious thoughts about the Saviour's love and mercy, and 
resolutions to strive more earnestly to love and honor the dear Lord. If 
anything he suggested to us appeared difficult to perform, he always led 
the way ; and in the neighborhood prayer-meetings our dear pastor would 
call in unexpectedly (for on some evenings as many as three were often 
held) to give a word of advice, comfort, or cheer. When the dreadful 
news of his death came to us, we felt cast down and bewildered, for we 
have lost one who loved our souls' welfare better than his own life. 

But there was one service at the chapel which was 
peculiarly his own. The exercises on TJianksgivin^ day 
were unique. They were of the simplest possible nature, 
and so full of prayer and praise, that no man not a mis- 
anthrope could fail to have his heart enkindled by attend- 
ing one. The pastor carried his loving Christian enthu- 
siasm into this meeting more cordially, if possible, than 
into any other of the year. There was no formal ser- 
mon. Experience had shown that it was of little use. 
The people would not come to hear it. But they came 
very eagerly to such a service as this. There was a 
hymn of praise, a prayer of thanksgiving, the reading of 
a few brief written testimonials of what the Lord had 
done in blessing one and another, and then in rapid suc- 
cession twenty or thirty individuals would rise and tell 



METHODS AND MEANS. 109 

what favors Providence had given them, their families, 
and friends, the church, the Sunday-school class, their 
home, their own souls, until the spirit of praise was seek- 
ing utterance in every heart, and the entire congrega- 
tion turned away reluctantly from such a feast of good 
things. 

These meetings were always full. They were eagerly 
anticipated, and gratefully remembered for many a day. 
The fervent faith of humble souls, the glowing love of 
thankfulness, the sincere joy of gratitude, the tearful 
penitence for misspent days, unkind remarks, ungracious 
thoughts and ways, all found a free expression in these 
yearly meetings of the church, when, like a Christian 
family, pastor and people met to tell their joys and raise 
memorial stones of praise. It is impossible to gather up 
again and reproduce in formal words the sweetness and 
gladness of those bright hours. To more than one weary 
heart they were like a boyhood's vacation. They broke 
the fetters of dull routine, and opened a whole summer 
of rest and sunshine through the hour of simple faith and 
thankful recollection. 

One member of the church kept a " Thanksgiving- 
book," in which he recorded whatever he had to be grate- 
ful for throughout the year, and on Thanksgiving day 
would read from this diary of his best things the an- 
swers to prayer, the unexpected blessings of Providence, 
and the bright, glad days which threw their sunlight on 
his path. 

Another, last Thanksgiving, thrilled the meeting by 

his simple talc of want and thankfulness. 

10 



no ALL FOR CHRIST. 

" One year ago," he said, " the days looked bright and fair, and I 
hoped for a prosperous year in my business. But these have been hard 
times. I have had no work to do, and I cou'.d not find any to do, though 
I looked for it everywhere. My wife was taken sick, and then the baby 
was taken sick, and we thought it would die ; and I had to stay at home 
and walk the floor by day and night with that child in my arms, praying 
that the Lord would spare it, if it was his will. And he did spare it, and 
I believe it was in answer to my prayer. And I want to thank the Lord 
to-day for this great blessing. I never knew before how dear my home is 
to me, and how sweet and good my children are. I don't say this to 
boast. I dare say I have no better things than others of us have ; but I 
do thank God that he has let me be at home so much this year, and given 
me my child again in answer to my prayer." 

Those who could not " speak in meeting" — the ladies 
who observed the Presbyterian injunction so often attrib- 
uted to St. Paul, and other members of the church whose 
diffidence or inexperience deterred them from taking 
other part — sent letters to the pastor on that day, from 
which he chose the most appropriate to read. The wri- 
ters all were known to him, and he never failed to give 
the letters as he read them the life and fervor of that 
grateful love in which they had been penned. The 
meeting would be often thrilled by these brief testimo- 
nies to the good and loving providence of God. 

A poor old washerwoman whose son was miserably 
vicious and dissolute, wrote : 

I can thank God this Thanksgiving day for all his kind mercy to me 
during the past year. I do thank him, for he has given me health and 
strength and many blessings, and he has answered my prayers in so many 
ways. I would ask you to help me to pray for my son that he may be 
brought to Christ and be saved. I have faith to believe that the Lord 
can and will save in his own good time. 

Another, whose early life was very vain and frivolous, 
but who had been disciplined and sobered and made use- 
ful in her home by severe trials, writes : 



METHODS AND MEANS, nx 

I can thank God for this Thanksgiving day, and I do praise and 
thank him for all the blessings he has bestowed on me and my family this 
past year. Although I have had trials and losses, yet the Lord has 
blessed me through them all, and wonderfully blessed me. The Lord's 
promise to his children is, " When thou passest through the waters I will 
be with thee, and through the rivers they shall not overflow thee ; when 
thou walkest through the fire thou shalt not be burned, neither shall the 
flame kindle upon thee." Isa. 43 : 2. 

A very poor widow, whose long life of sixty years 
has been spent in constant poverty, sent the following : 

Better is a little with righteousness, than great revenues without right. 
Better is the poor that walketh in his integrity, than he that is perverse 
in his lips. I thank thee, O Lord, for all thy blessings. 

" My dear pastor," writes another, " help me to render thanks that I 
have the sweet hope that my dear husband and my six children are trav- 
elling with me to our better home I thank God with all my heart 

for the many blessings received, the prayers answered, and especially that 
he has so increased my trust in him within the past few days." 

One, whose family and herself had been converted 
from a Sabbath-breaking, irreligious life, says : 

I cannot express in words the gratitude I feel in my heart to my 
Heavenly Father for his great love to me and mine. We were once walk- 
ing in darkness, but I now rejoice that we are an undivided family, trav- 
elling in the narrow way that leads to everlasting light. My prayer is 
that we may all prove faithful, and be found among the "multitude whom 
no man can number " around the throne. 

Still another says : I fear all the people together cannot praise him as 
I would like to, for our new church, our many blessings as a church, the 
deep religious interest in the church for which I have longed and prayed, 
and above all, that God has been so good as to allow me to help to bring 
souls into his kingdom. Pray that he will use me yet more to his honor 
and glory. For the kind friends he has given me, and for his help in 
peculiar trials, and — if I should go on to mention my causes for thankful- 
ness, I should take up the whole time. 

" I travel on, not knowing, 

I would not if I might ; 
'Tis better to walk in the dark with God, 

Than by myself in the light. 
'T is better to walk with him by faith, 

Than to walk alone by sight." 



ii2 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

Please accept the small sum enclosed in silence. I wanted to do a 
little for Him who has done so muck for me. 

The allusion in this last is to the habit of the people 
of contributing from their poverty toward the wants of 
others yet more needy than themselves, that the Lord 
might help them all to keep Thanksgiving day. Nothing 
could have been farther from their mind than that these 
facts and words should ever reach a public eye. They 
gave as unto the Lord and not as unto men, and the 
spirit of the whole is illustrated by the spirit of these 
few. But no other way seems open of clearly showing 
what those bright Thanksgiving days became to them. 
Under the inspiration of their pastor's leadership, whose 
life was full of thankfulness and faith, they made those 
hours " conjubilant with song." No other meeting seemed 
so near to heaven, except perhaps the glad and solemn 
service of communion. But here they learned the secret 
of that truth which Christians far too often overlook, 
" The joy of the Lord is your strength," and here Thanks- 
giving day began each year. 

In illustration of the way in which the various agen- 
cies referred to were employed it may be interesting to 
glance at the following 

SUMMARY OF ONE WEEK'S WORK, 1868. 

7. Sunday. i. Sunday-school Prayer-meeting. 

2. Sunday-school. 

3. Church Service. 

4. Children's Singing Meeting. 

5. Boys' and Girls' Meeting. 

6. Bible Class and Monthly Teachers' Prayer-meeting. 

7. Church Service. 



METHODS AND MEANS. 113 

4. MONDAY. Four Family Prayer-meetings.* 

4. Tuesday. i. Young Ladies' Prayer-meeting.1 

2. Employment Society. 

3. Service of Song. 

4. Church Prayer-meeting. 

4. Wednesday, i. Young Ladies' Prayer-meeting.t 

2. Three Family Prayer-meetings.* 
2. THURSDAY. i. Female Prayer-meeting (afternoon,. 

2. Church Prayer-meeting (evening). 
4. Friday. i. Young Ladies' Prayer-meeting.t 

2. Three Family Prayer-meetings.* 
1. Saturday. i. Industrial School. 

26 Services. 

In the next year it will be remarked the German ser- 
vices were added — two preaching services on Sunday, 
and two prayer-meetings during the week ; also the 
Young People's Prayer-meeting Sunday evening before 
church, and the Catechetical Class on Thursdays, ma- 
king in all six services not enumerated above. 

The Rev. Wm. Hutton of Philadelphia, who during 
his seminary course, was for a time associated with Mr. 
Payson as visitor in this field, writes : 

He was truly consecrated to his work — the work of preaching the 
gospel to the poor. Difficult, indeed, it was in many respects, but how 
consistently and conscientiously did he perform it ! How much of physi- 
cal endurance, patience, sympathy, and faith is demanded of those engaged 
in the self-denying work of a New York missionary pastor, none can com- 
prehend unless familiar with the work. ... As a preacher he was emi- 
nently practical. His preaching was adapted to his hearers. He fed his 
people, not upon " happy turns " of thought or expression, but upon the 
sincere milk of the Word. He was little exercised about " rounded peri- 
ods," but very anxious about reaching souls. And God gave him goodly 
wages — how many souls were led by him to Jesus ! His prayers were 
remarkable. Critics might say they were too familiar. A man must live 
very near the Master to offer such prayers. By them he led his people to 
regard Jesus as a very dear and sympathizing friend — just what He is. At 

* The number of family prayer-meetings varied from year to year, 
t Three different services of this kind were held each week. 

SI 



ii4 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

the last interview had in New York during the progress of the Moody 
and Sankey meetings, he was rejoicing in the return to home, to temper- 
ance, and to God of certain ones for whom he had been specially laboring. 

The following reminiscences by an intimate friend 
may also be interesting in this connection, as serving to 
illustrate the truthful remark of the preceding writer 
that he was little exercised about "rounded periods," but 
very anxious about reaching souls. 

Mr. Payson had, I think, an excellent command of language and a 
lively imagination, so that, if he had been greatly ambitious to obtain celeb- 
rity as a writer, or had made it his chief aim in life to secure literary re- 
nown, he might have attained considerable eminence in " the world of 
letters." But desire for the applause of men was very far from being 
uppermost in his thoughts. His heart was so busied always with " adding 
to his virtue brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity," so 
overflowing with sympathy for the unfortunate and unhappy and tempted 
ones who crossed his path, that it would have been impossible for him to 
be satisfied with immuring himself in his study, and devoting his time to 
the preparation of elegant discourses. How could he sit there quietly 
choosing felicitous expressions for next Sunday's sermons, rewriting and 
rearranging a sentence here and a passage there, choosing fine flowers of 
poesy and beautiful rhetorical figures, when the messenger from some 
poor, forlorn member of his flock, a washerwoman, perhaps, with a sick 
husband and a dying babe, who begged him to come and pray with her. 
was waiting for him just outside the study-door ! 

And next day perhaps it was a bright-eyed boy, the baker's son, who 
needed consolation. Three days ago he had fallen from the cart and broken 
his leg, and when the sermon was only half finished, there was a timid 
knock at the door, and the boy's sister appeared, who told how, ever since 
the accident, the boy had done nothing but moan and beg to have Mr. 
Payson sent for, declaring that no one else could comfort him as the min- 
ister could. And he must go ; be the discourse a polished and elegant 
one or not, there must not remain uncomforted a single sorrowing or 
afflicted one among his congregation, if any word or act of his can bring 
them consolation. 

Hardly has the happy sister left the door, bearing the good news that 
the minister will call and see Johnny that very afternoon, when it opens 
again and admits that poor inebriate, who signed the pledge last week for 
the third time, and who means to keep it now, if it kills him. That very 



METHODS AND MEANS. 115 

morning he had been most sorely tempted to join his boon companions in 
just one more social glass, and he had almost yielded — was suffering still 
from the agonizing conflict through which he had passed, and there seemed 
no haven of refuge for the tortured soul like the pastor's study. And was 
the door of that to be closed upon him ? By no means ! This large-heart- 
ed, loving-hearted man forgets that he has a sermon to write — has no 
thought of anything but the forlorn and sorrowing brother-man who sits 
by his side, struggling so heroically with the demon of a depraved appe- 
tito. An hour passes — two hours perhaps ; they take no note of time 
those two --the one eager to impart help and strength and consolation, 
the other so intensely eager to secure the needed help and strength. And 
secure it he does. You saw him enter perhaps pallid, weak, and trem- 
bling ; he goes forth looking almost like a different being, dignified, erect, 
and manly, and trusting, not in himself, but in the Lord, for strength. 
And it was the pastor who uttered the words of encouragement, who gave 
the kind advice, who offered the fervent prayer, which were the instru- 
ments in God's hands of bringing salvation to that poor man's soul. Al- 
ready had the angels who were hovering over the hallowed spot flown 
heavenward with the glad tidings that another sinner had become repent- 
ant. But the sermon that might have been so polished and finished a 
discourse — the sermon which was neglected that the feet of a sin-stricken 
wanderer might be set to walking the heavenly road — that is still uncom- 
pleted. The pastor must extemporize the rest. He will finish the arrange- 
ment of it in his mind to-morrow, if he is not interrupted before he goes 
to officiate at the funeral of the washerwoman's baby. 

And what if men did not applaud ! What if other men's sermons 
were more carefully and elegantly written, and brought more fame to those 
who penned them ! His saved men's souls ; and that is enough. His at 
least told the simple story of the Cross in words that touched men's 
hearts, and won them to the truth ; and for what better or higher results 
of preaching can we ask ? The thought was doubtless often in his mind, 

"The Master praises ! what are men ? 
Go labor on — enough, while here, 
If he shall praise me — if he deign 

My willing heart to mark and cheer; 
No toil for him shall be in vain." 

One other fact deserves brief mention here. In pre- 
paring his sermons for Sabbath morning, Mr. Payson for 
many years previous to his death followed a " course." 
Fully two-thirds of his sermons were prepared either 
upon some book of the Old or New Testament, or upon 



u6 ALL FOR CLLRLST. 

a topic, such as The Life of Christ, or The Life of the 
Church. Beginning in 1862 with the Old Testament, he 
preached — 



2 5 ! 


sermons 


upon 


, the book of Daniel. 


16 


" 


" 


" Ezra. 


J 3 


it 


a 


" Esther. 


8 


11 


11 


" Nehemiah. 


76 


11 


11 


" Ephesians. 


22 


11 


11 


Parables. 


14 


(i 


<l 


Confession of Faith. 


2 5 


11 


it 


Names of Christ. 


293 


11 


11 


Life of Christ. 


98 


11 


" 


Life of the Church.* 


4i 


11 


11 


various topics, Baptism, Easter, etc. 


63^ 


Total 


« 


special subjects. 


473 


II 


ti 


general " 



1,104 Total number of written discourses in seventeen years.1 

The remarks with which he prefaced his last sermon 
upon the Life of Christ, July 19, 1874, show his own esti- 
mate of this method. " It is seven years to-day," he says, 
" since we began the study of the Life of Christ. . . . 
How well I recall the fear and hesitancy with which I 
entered upon this work after weeks of prayer and delib- 
eration. How could I hope to interest and instruct in 
studying themes familiar from your childhood ? But 
each succeeding year has more and more impressed me 
with the inexhaustible richness of God's word. To-day I 
should not fear to begin these very books again, and feel 
sure that at every step through the Holy Scriptures we 
should find new revelations to stir and gladden our hearts. 

* He was engaged upon this course when he died, and was following 
history in the book of Acts. 

t Extemporaneous or unwritten sermons are not included in this list 



METHODS AND MEANS. 1 1 7 

" But if with hesitancy I began, it is with greater 
reluctance that I close. How have I found myself in- 
stinctively clinging to these last verses, and wondering if 
ever I could give them up ! And the steady attendance 
and attention through all these years assure me that you 
have sympathized with me in my feelings about this pre- 
cious history. Thank God, it is of this same Jesus we 
shall study wherever we turn in the Bible. The same 
Holy Spirit who has blessed us in the past, will he not 
help us in the future ?" 

In closing this chapter, we may call attention to the 
appreciative words of the Rev. E. P. Roe, the celebrated 
author, who, in a recent communication to the " New 
York Tribune," says concerning Mr. Payson : 

He was one of the most efficient and successful workers among the 
masses that it was ever my good fortune to meet, and I am far from being 
alone in the belief that the labors of only a few others in his calling have 
been crowned with results more pleasing to God than his. He was one of 
whom the world heard little ; but if it be true that the angels rejoice 
" over one sinner that repenteth," his name, as that of one of God's most 
faithful and zealous servants, was honored in heaven. For many years he 
made his chapel a home, a refuge, a place where thousands found the 
courage to enter upon the Christian life. But the power and success of 
his ministry did not consist alone in his vivid and fervent appeal.*, nor in 
his broad, warm sympathies. He was a scholar in the best sense of the 
term. Having received a thorough preparation for his calling, he remained 
a close, careful student to the end, and his strong, practical mind had the 
rare gift of working over the truth gathered, and of imparting it, not in a 
weak, diluted form, but in simplicity, brevity, and illumined by apt illus- 
tration, so that the plain laboring people who chiefly formed his audience, 
could see its bearing upon their vital interests and daily life. His large 
chapel in Third avenue grew so overcrowded that a commodious church 
became necessary, and among the shifting population of that region of 
the city he has maintained a numerous and ever-increasing congregation. 
The number of humble homes that he entered in obedience to the com- 
mand, " I was sick and ye visited me," the number of the sad and of the 



nS ALL FOR CHRIST. 

guilt disquieted that he has cheered and led to peace, cannot be estimated 
even by those who knew him best. Possessing a vigorous mind in a vig- 
orous body, he devoted all his time and energy to the accomplishment of 
practical results. He sought to make his people self-respecting and in- 
dustrious ; he taught them how to make the most of their tenement-house 
life, and in the case of no poor creature did he ever stand afar off or " pass 
by on the other side," but he ever came directly where the sin-wounded 
were, and in the spirit of the Good Samaritan. If the city's welfare de- 
pends at all upon the reform and virtue of its citizens, then such wise and 
untiring workers as Mr. Payson, who aie steadily bringing the best of 
influences to bear upon thousands of lives, are those whose loss is most 
severely felt. 



METHODS AND MEANS. 119 



CHAPTER V. 

METHODS AND MEANS— SYSTEM ATIC BENEFI- 
CENCE. 

Early in his ministry Mr. Payson was brought to 
feel that contributions from his people towards the sup- 
port of the gospel was a necessary means to their own 
growth in grace. By a series of providential experiences 
this conviction was deepened and strengthened until he 
was led to take such steps towards the promotion of sys- 
tematic beneficence in his own church as form a most 
important era in his life-work. Indeed, so profound was 
his conviction that no true Christian development is 
possible for those who do not practise self-denying and 
systematic beneficence that he was willing to let his pas- 
toral relations with this people stand or fall with the 
maintenance of that principle. 

It was for many years his opinion that the remarka- 
ble development of the members of this church was at- 
tributable under God in no slight degree to their cheerful 
obedience to the Bible precept, " // is more blessed to give 
tJian to receive? Certainly it is a remarkable* fact that 
those whose fortunes grew apace and who thus had been 
lifted in the social scale, when self-respect and manliness 
were roused did not desert the chapel as the correspond- 
ing classes so often desert the " Missions " of the city.f 

* Compare the remarks of Dr. Howard Crosby, page 67. 

t In a sermon delivered March, 1S75, Mr. Payson says, "In 1862 



120 ALL FOR CLIRLST. 

Many of those who moved away from the neighborhood 
moved nevertheless with reference to the chapel and 
sought as long as possible to retain their connection with 
it. And it is no less remarkable that the middle classes* 
of our population, who, as a rule, are pushed from the 
wealthy churches by extravagance, and pushed from 
the " Missions" by an honorable self-respect, were being 
more and more drawn towards this enterprise as the 
principles which Mr. Payson advocated secured recogni- 
tion and made themselves felt in the conduct of the 
chapel and became more widely known. Should those 
principles now be carried to a successful issue, as with 
the favor of Divine Providence we can but hope they 
may be, it is not too much to say that the problem of 
"how to reach the masses" will have been solved. 

Beginning with a people, who, when he came to 
them, gave absolutely nothing towards benevolent oper- 
ations, and absolutely nothing towards self-support, and 
who, moreover, (on account of their extreme poverty at 
that time,) were not encouraged to give in either of these 
directions, Mr. Payson with most persistent energy and 
faith and steadfast zeal, through seventeen years of min- 
istry, maintained the Gospel principle that every man 
should give and give systematically and give " according 
as the Lord hath prospered him." The spirit of his 
teaching upon this subject may be gathered from the 

our contributions amounted to $79, now they are over $6,000; and this con- 
trast reflects a like prosperity in many a home connected with our church.''' 

* The congi - egation for many years has been mainly composed of the 
better classes of the poor, (compare Dr. Abbott's remarks, page SS,) so 
that it might even now be called "A Workingmafs Church.'''' 



METHODS AND MEANS. 121 

following extract from a sermon delivered October 30. 
1870. 

"Some people," he said, "will perhaps think that my 
sermon to-night has not much gospel in it, for it is to be 
almost entirely about money. And yet, if I study my Bi- 
ble aright, there is no better method of judging our reli- 
gion at its real value than that afforded by a man's account 
(if I may so speak) with the Lord. How much has been 
received ? how much given ? Abel gave of his lambs, 
and God loved and blessed him for it. Noah took 
■ sevens ' of the clean animals with him into the ark that 
he might have to offer unto the Lord. There was no 
happier hour in the desert than when those poor people 
gave one million to build the Tabernacle. . . . Israel 
never gave as in the days of David and Solomon, and 
never were they so prosperous. Iron became like stones, 
silver as iron, and gold as silver. But when they began 
to withhold the tenths, the least God allowed from any 
Jew, then the land suffered. Cf. Haggai 1 : 9— 1 1 . ' Ye 
looked for much, and lo it came to little, and when ye 
brought it home, I did bloiv upon it. Why ? saith the 
Lord of Hosts. Because of my house that is waste; and 
ye run every man unto his own house! The same law 
holds in the New Testament. 'Covetousness is idolatry.' 
' The love of money is the root of all evil.' The alms of 
Cornelius entered in with his prayers before God as a 
memorial of his life. To make to ourselves friends of 
the mammon of unrighteousness, is to have some who shall 
receive us into everlasting habitations. And it is not 

too much to say, that, as the hands of a watch are the 

11 



122 ALL FOR CHRIST. 

index of the movements within, so the pocketbook is the 
index of the soul. As you are sure enough that the 
movement is all right when the hands keep correct time, 
so you have in your benevolent account one of the best 
tests of the state of your soul." 

He refers to the common plea against free-will offer- 
ings, that it is better to employ plates and subscription 
papers because shame will then compel the selfish to 
give who otherwise would not give at all, and adds : 
" What does this mean ? That the fear of man is a 
stronger motive than love to God. It may be for once, 
but it certainly is not for continuous and faithful giving. 
And, such gifts do not spend well. God loves a cheer- 
ful giver, but such giving is anything but cheerful. Nay 
more, is it not contrary to the Master's rule, ' Let not 
thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth' ? There- 
fore, it is written, ' When thou doest thine alms, do not 
sound a trumpet before thee as the hypocrites do in the 
synagogues and in the streets, that they may have glory 
of men.' I would rather my people would never give at 
all," he adds, " than feel that this is the highest motive. 
But it is not necessary. Look at Midler's hundreds of 
thousands in answer to the prayer of faith . . . Look at 
the Harpoot Missions ; . . .* nearer home, at Roe's work 
in Lowell ; . . . J. O. Adams' in New York ; . . . nay look 
at your own past experience in which the benevolent 
contributions of this church from scriptural motives have 
already risen from $70 a year to $3,500. . . . Let me tell 
you an easy way. Take one-tenth of all you earn each 

* These examples, of course, were enlarged upon in the address. 



METHODS AND MEANS. 123 

week and put it aside for the Lord. On Sunday morn- 
ing take out of this that portion which you feel you 
should give to this work and another for that, praying 
over it, and consulting with the Master about it ; and I 
know that it will not be long before our contributions 
will be doubled and even trebled." 

In an article prepared for the press within a few 
years of his decease, upon "Nineteenth Century Illustra- 
tions of the Master s Ride of Giving"* after speaking of 
the ostentation which too frequently accompanies the 
gifts of the church, and criticising the prevalent method 
of plate-collections, he says : " A congregation composed 
so largely of the poor that they have always been sus- 
tained by the parent church, resolved to try and do 
something themselves. That this might prove no ob- 
stacle even to the poorest in the enjoyment of the privi- 
leges of God's house, boxes were placed near the en- 
trance in which deposits could be made at any time. 
The amount contributed by each individual was known 
only to God and himself. The motives urged were those 
of gratitude to God, and the method advised that laid 
down so plainly in the Scriptures, Let each one of you 
lay by in store on the first day of the week as God hath 
blessed. He that had received nothing, it was added, 
was of course to give nothing ; he that had received 
little, was not to give a great deal ; and he who had 
received much was not to give little. 

" Eight years have passed since that resolution was 
taken During that time no plate or subscription-paper 
* Matt. 6:2-4. 



i2 4 AL *< FOR CHRIST. 

(with a single exception) has been passed. This people 
have given of their poverty, on what they regard a scrip- 
tural basis, each one responsible to God and God alone 
for the use or abuse of his opportunities. The result may 
perhaps best be shown in figures : 

First year $So Fifth year $1,040 

Second" 140 Sixth " 1,400 

Third " 490 Seventh " 2,800 

Fourth " - 700 Eighth " --- 3,200 

" The people love to give, and the Lord is most evi- 
dently bestowing his blessing. If these facts shall help 
others to better understand and practise the Master's 
rule, our purpose will have been fully attained." 

In 1862, under the influence of their pastor's minis- 
try, the people began to contribute to missionary objects, 
and as early as 1864 we find a record of missionaries 
helped in India, Syria, and in the West of our own coun- 
try, as well as of some gifts sent to the soldiers in the 
field, by those who previous to 1862 had been accus- 
tomed to give nothing. In 1867 they began to give 
systematically towards their own church-work, and so 
constant and rapid was their development in systematic 
beneficence, that having begun with the small sum of 
$79 the first year {1862), they were led to give more and 
more until in 1875 their contributions, regular and spe- 
cial, amounted to $6,978* 

* Compare the tables on page 90. It is noteworthy that from 
the very commencement there was an annual increase in the gifts from 
this branch of the church. In 1862-3 this increase amounted to only 
$65 ; in 1874-5 t0 $ 2 M3 > *• e -> trie sum contributed in 1S74-5 was l ar g er 
by $2,843 tnan tliat contributed in the preceding year. The only apparent 
exception to this rule occurs in 1S75-6 (see, however, footnotes on page 90), 



METHODS AND MEANS. 125 

The emphasis which Mr. Payson placed upon this 
means of grace, may be sufficiently illustrated by the 
following brief extract .from his annual review sermon 
for 1876. "Two eras in the history of this church," he 
says, " are worthy of special mention in connection with 
its gifts to the Lord, which are peculiar in that they 
have been wholly voluntary — no collection ever having 
been taken in this congregation. I. The first dates from 
October, 1867, when the church, after silent prayer, rose 
and resolved with God's help to raise $10,000 towards 
a new building, if possible within three years. The way 
in which the people rose, no man looking right or left, 
but each doing it as unto God, is something rarely seen 
in any church. Our contributions as a result of this 
consecration of ourselves to God, doubled in a single 
year from $1,500 to $3,000. That was the beginning of 
this church edifice.* II. The second era was when in 
seven weeks we collected for the Memorial Fund and 
paid in almost $3,300 — in seven short weeks ! Oh, what 
zeal, love, and self-sacrificing devotion marked those 
days."f 

and that is accounted for by the fact that the efforts made in the prece- 
ding year, when the chapel was being built, were extraordinary. 

It may be added here that during the last year of his life, Mr. Payson 
announced his determination to depend for his salary upon the chapel 
people, and they would have raised the $4,000 necessary before the year 
was past. So important did he consider it that some beginning should be 
made in this direction, that he himself stood ready to contribute $zoo 
or even $500 towards it, if necessary. 

* The contributions of this people toward the Memorial Chapel 
amounted to about one-ninth of the whole sum necessary. (Cf. also the 
letter on page 141.) 

t Some details of this effort are given on page 142, et seq. 



T2 6 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

A single illustration of the beneficent influence of 
these efforts upon the spiritual development of his peo- 
ple may be admitted here. Many more might be given, 
and others will be furnished by the narrative; but one 
is here enough to show that the sacrifices which his 
people made were not without rich fruits of faith and 
love. The following article is from his pen. 

GIVING LIKE A LITTLE CHILD. 

Not long since, a poor widow came into my study. She is over sixty 
years of age. Her home is one little room, about ten feet by twelve, and 
she supports herself by her needle, which in these days of sewing ma- 
chines means the most miserable support. 

Imagine my surprise, then, when she put three dollars into my hands 
and said : 

" There is my contribution to the church fund." 

" But are you able to give so much ?" 

"Oh, yes," she exclaimed. " I have learned how to give now." 

" How is that ?" I asked. 

"Do you remember," she answered, "that sermon of three months 
since, when you told us that you did not believe one of your people was 
so poor, that if he loved Christ, he could not find some way of showing 
that love by his gifts ?" 

" I do." 

" Well, I went home and cried all night over that sermon. I said tc 
myself, ' My minister do n't know how poor I am or he never would have 
said that' But from crying I at last got to praying. And when I had 
told Jesus all about it, I seemed to get an answer in my heart that dried 
up all tears." 

" What was the answer ?" I asked, deeply moved by her recital. 

"Only this, 'If you cannot give as other people do, give like a little 
child.' And I have been doing it ever since. When I have a penny 
change over from my sugar or loaf of bread, I lay it aside for Jesus, and 
so I have gathered this money all in pennies." 

" But has it not embarrassed you to lay aside so much ?" 

" Oh, no !" she responded eagerly with beaming face. " Since I be- 
gan to give to the Lord I have always had money in the house for myself, 
and it is wonderful how the work comes pouring in. So many are coming 
to see me that I never knew before." 



METHODS AND MEANS. 127 

" But did n't you always have money in the house ?" I asked. 

" Oh, no ! Often when my rent came due I had to go and borrow 
it, not knowing how I ever should find means to pay it again. But I 
do n't have to do that any more, the dear Lord is so kind." 

Of course I could not refuse such money. 

Three months later she came with three dollars and eighty-five cents 
saved in the same way. Then came the effort of our church in connec- 
tion with the Memorial Fu;id, and in some five months she brought fifteen 
dollars, all saved in the little mite-box I had given her. This makes a 
total of twenty-one dollars and efghty-five cents from one poor widow in 
a single twelvemonth. I need hardly add that she apparently grew more 
in Christian character in that one year, than in all the previous years of 
her connection with the church. 

Who can doubt that if in giving as well as other graces, we could all 
thus become as little children, there would result such an increase in our 
gifts that there would not be room enough to contain them ? 

In the maintenance of these principles of Christian 
beneficence, Mr. Payson, as is well known, met with 
some discouragements. From the very first the policy 
of the parent church was different. The large and influ- 
ential Committee to whom had been intrusted the man- 
agement of the chapel, generously contemplated giving 
to this people the bread of life without money and with- 
out price. They sought to provide a spiritual home for 
even the poorest of the poor, and they did not wish to 
have the rest and comfort of that home disturbed by 
any sense of pecuniary obligation. They endeavored 
according to their means, and to the very utmost of 
their ability, to carry out the spirit of our Lord's exam- 
ple so beautifully expressed in his own words, "The poor 
have the gospel preached unto them ;" and while they 
wished in every possible way to discourage pauperism 
and to reprove the disposition which looked towards 
abject dependence on the rich, they were determined, if 



128 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

possible, to provide for all God's poor committed to their 
care in such a way as to make them feel at home, al- 
though they did not pay a cent. This was the principle 
which underlay the very names " Mission" and " Mission 
Chapel " as at first*" applied to this enterprise. 

It is possible, too, that it may have been this, at least 
in part, which led them not wholly to approve of the 
action of Mr. Payson when in 1867 he called upon his 
people to give $10,000 towards a new church edifice. 
There was no intention on Mr. Payson's part, in doing 
this, to oppose the wishes of the Committee, and, so far 
as we know, such a design was never imputed to him. 
The object presented to his people at that time was not 
strictly in the line of self-support, and therefore not in 
direct conflict with the views of the Committee as he 
understood them. The whole truth is, that an extraordi- 
nary impression had been made upon his mind at the 
meeting of the American Board, from which he had just 
returned, by the report from the Harpoot Mission ; and 
his long-cherished and earnest convictions as to the duty 
of even the poorest of the Lord's people to give some- 
thing to the Lord's cause, could no longer be suppressed. 

For reasons which Mr. Payson did not foresee,! his 
plan failed to receive the approval of the Committee ; but 
the guiding hand of Providence should be recognized^ 
in the use made of this movement to demonstrate the 
practicability and wisdom of the views which he had so 

* The name has since been changed to Memorial Chapel, and the 
word "Mission" dropped. 

t See Appendix, Note B. X Cf. the letter on page 141. 



METHODS AND MEANS. 129 

earnestly and patiently advocated. Any doubts which 
may have existed among the members of the Committee 
as to the ability and readiness of the people to give, were 
dispelled by their spontaneous and hearty response to 
this appeal ; and the result was that finally all objections 
to the receipt of contributions for self-support were with- 
drawn, and in due time Mr. Payson had the satisfaction 
of seeing the plan introduced and in successful operation 
among his people. 

These facts will serve to explain some statements of 
a judicious and discriminating writer in a recent commu- 
nication to the " New York Evangelist." Referring to 
Mr. Payson's work, he says, 

His congregation continually increased, and conversions were numer- 
ous. But not satisfied with introducing new disciples into the Christian 
fold, he taught them it was alike their duty and privilege to strive for self- 
support, and to be helpers in works of charity. Joyfully conscious of the 
advantages he had early gained by self-reliance, he desired his people to 
know how much more noble and blessed it is to give than to receive. 

Yet while his aim was thus elevated, an epoch was reached from which 
his ministry, before marked by a happy routine of usefulness, was sudden- 
ly lifted to a plane of bold endeavor and fearless enterprise. He greatly 
enjoyed the annual meetings of the American Board, and on his return 
from one of these in the autumn of 1867, where he had been especially 
quickened by what he had learned of the wonderful liberality of a church 
in Western Asia,* whose numbers were pitiably poor as compared with 
his own flock ; without taking counsel with any one, he resolved to urge 
his people to contribute freely and systematically to raise money for build- 
ing a larger and more attractive place of worship. On a certain Lord's 
day evening he preached a sermon with unwonted earnestness and enthu- 
siasm in pursuance of his plan. 

That plan having been duly unfolded, and their privilege and duty 
having been eloquently enforced by weighty arguments, he called upon all 
who were willing to cooperate in raising $10,000 for the purpose specified 
ti rise. 

* The church at Harpoot referred to in the Annual Report of the A. B. C. F. M. 
(1867.) 



i 3 o ALL FOR CHRIST. 

His appeal, it should be said, was based on scriptural 
grounds. He recognized the poverty and destitution of 
some of his people, and the need which all of them might 
feel of close economy. " But," he said, " this matter is a 
vital one for you and for me. To give from her penury 
was the privilege even of the widow in the gospel whose 
two poor mites were 'all that she had;' but the ages 
crown her memory with benedictions since the Saviour's 
blessing rested on her act. They were not all rich to 
whom Paul wrote, ' Upon the first day of the week let 
every one of you lay by him in store according as the 
Lord hath prospered him ;' but the claim which he then 
made on those poor members of the church is the scrip- 
tural claim the church should urge to-day on every man 
who seeks to grow in grace. ' Let every one give ' — such 
should be the language of the church — ' let every one 
give according as the Lord hath prospered him.' And 
now I want to lay this obligation on your consciences. 
Give as unto the Lord, and not as unto men. Give from 
the fulness of your love and gratitude to him. Give to 
promote his glory and your highest good. . . . We will 
have a moment of silent prayer, and then all those who 
are ready to pledge themselves to do their utmost tow- 
ards securing $10,000 within the next three years will 
please to rise." 

The hush which fell upon the audience at once was 
wonderful and thrilling. Those who were present will 
never forget the hour. Each head was bowed in silent 
prayer, and over the whole assembly the stillness of a 
reverent and humble " waiting on the Lord " was felt ; 



METHODS AND MEANS. 131 

and when the pastor rose at last, the entire congregation 
rose with him, and pledged themselves by doing so to 
give, as God had prospered them, each Sabbath in the 
year. " Doubtless," as has been said, "some of these peo- 
ple were surprised that night at the change that had 
come over them. They were to be no longer aimless 
dreamers." They were to realize in their own experience 
the wisdom of the words, 

" Do noble things, not dream them all day long, 
And so make life, death, and the vast Forever, 
One grand, sweet song." 

And as the work to which they now had pledged them- 
selves was one which called for energy, they began at 
once to move. A system was devised by which, without 
burdening any one, all might have chance to give. En- 
velopes were procured, marked " For the Building Fund," 
in which the contributions could be sealed and left in a 
box provided for this purpose near the door. The amount 
collected in this way varied from $25 to $50 a week, and 
within the next three years $6,000* were placed at inter- 
est for the " Building Fund," which, together with sub- 
sequent contributions to the " Memorial Fund," finally 

* Mr. Payson's report of the Building Fund, in his sermon of Octo- 
ber 30, 1870, is as follows: 

From box collections, 1867-S $1,240 

" " 186S-9 1,370 

1869-70 864 

Special gifts - 692 



Concert- 



154 



Interest 6S2 

Bonds in hand (conditional)f • 

Deposit in savings-bankt 



t See foot-note on next page (132). $6,002 



i 3 2 ALL FOR CHRIST. 

amounted to more than $12,000, of which sum, it is 
proper to state, Mr. Pay son gave $1,225.* The entire 
$10,000 would doubtless have been secured within the 
specified time, had it not become evident that the church 
would not then be built, and had not the contributions 
been diverted early in the spring of 1870 from the erec- 
tion of a new edifice towards self-support. 

One or two of the incidents which occurred in con- 
nection with this effort, may be mentioned here. 

The sum of $50 was given by a poor washerwoman 
" whose heart the Lord had opened." Another poor 
woman on her dying bed gave Mr. Payson four silver half 
dollars for the new church which he kept as a sacred leg- 
acy for several years until this edifice was built. 

Mrs. drank beer every day before this effort was 

begun, and especially on Mondays when the washing 
was likely to be hard. But she concluded after some 
deliberation that she would give up this luxury and save 
nine cents a day for the new church, which she did, un- 
til at last she brought $9 90 and told her pastor that she 
was now so convinced of the folly of drinking that she 
had determined to abandon it altogether. Still another, 
living in a hall bedroom and earning but fifty cents a 
day, put the pennies which she saved at the grocery from 
" change," after buying a pint of milk or a loaf of bread, 

* The last two items in the report given on the preceding page rep- 
resent in part Mr. Payson's own contribution towards the new church, 
which was to be given "if other $9,000 were raised." It is mentioned here 
only to show that he was not unwilling to join his people in whatever he 
asked them to do. When some one remarked, " This is too much, and the 
church does not want to take this gift from you," he replied, " I have given 
my life to this work, and it is a small thing for me to give my money." 



METHODS AND MEANS. 133 

into a savings-bank for this fund, until at last she brought 
#9 35 with thankfulness that God enabled her to do so 
much for him. One year she brought $2 50, the next 
$3 10 and the third $3 75. And this she did against the 
judgment of her pastor who thought it all needful for 
her own comfort. 1 

A year or two of this kind of effort had passed, when 
Mr. Payson was led to take a step, which, whether viewed 
in the light of possible or actual consequences, was of 
too much importance to pass over in silence. For rea- 
sons which he gives in a sermon to be quoted from 
presently, he resigned his pastorate in the month of 
March, 1870. There was much feeling among his people 
when they learned that his resignation had been accept- 
ed, and it was not long before several of the leading mem- 
bers of the church and congregation waited upon the chair- 
man of the chapel Committee to make known the general 
regret occasioned by the fact and to inquire if there could 
not be a reconsideration. This visit opened the way for a 
conference between Mr. Payson and the Committee, and 
very soon views which seemed at one time irreconcilable 
were harmonized and the resignation was withdrawn.* 

In reference to this matter Mr. Payson himself says, 
at the close of his anniversary sermon May, 1870: 

"This evening affords me the proper opportunity to 
explain to you all why I felt I ought to leave. Nat- 
urally, churches grow by colonies. But the centrali- 
zing policy of Presbyterianism during the last twenty- 
five years has put a stop to this. Pastors here and in 

* See Appendix, Note B. 
12 



i 3 4 ALL FOR CLLRLST. 

Brooklyn complain that in these cities the colonization 
system is impracticable. Their people will not go 
away. As the next best thing mission chapels like this 
were organized. Some of them — this, at least, as all of 
you will testify — were put under the care of as intelligent, 
capable, and devoted a body of men as any one could 
ask for. Money, prayers and efforts have been lavishly 
bestowed, and under the blessing of God, a large success 
has been secured. 

" Warned by the failures of other chapels which at the 
end of a short period have been cast off to struggle for 
themselves, it was resolved that this should form a branch 
of the parent church with the ordinances however admin- 
istered in each at stated periods. That every one might 
feel at perfect freedom to attend here, all expenses have 
been borne entirely by the members worshipping in 
Madison Square. 

" For a time this has worked well, especially since 
plans for encouraging and developing the resources of this 
chapel have been year by year provided. But as I have 
studied my Bible more, and have seen how the apostles 
required their churches to support themselves as far as 
possible; as I have seen dependent chapels year after year 
failing to do any great work for the Master ; as I have 
heard of missions in Scotland and even in heathen lands, 
advanced to a noble pitch of prosperity by self-sacrifi- 
cing, earnest efforts, under circumstances far less favor- 
able than our own ; as I have studied your growing 
means and willingness ; and especially as one and an- 
other have come saying, 'We date our greatest spiritual 



METHODS AND MEANS. i;5 

and material growth from the hour when we began sys- 
tematically to give ;' I have felt that it was high time that 
you did your best to meet the expenses of this place. 
Until now everything has been done for you and many of 
you have felt as uncomfortably in regard to it as myself. 

"It was on this point that the Committee could not 
agree. Some were persuaded that if such burdens were 
laid upon you, many who now feel at home in the chapel 
would be driven away. How to avoid this and yet to 
develop the best energies of this congregation has been 
the burden of the last three years. With each year it 
has increased, and I had resolved that if it could not in 
some way be relieved I should leave this spring. This 
and this alone was the sole cause of my resignation. 

"Your earnest request that I should reconsider my 
resignation, sustained by the kind assurances of the Com- 
mittee of the parent church, have led me to hope larger 
and better things for the future, and I have resolved to 
remain with the people and the work I so dearly love. 

" What then is our present outlook, so far as financial 
matters are concerned ? It has been resolved that all 
those who wish to contribute towards the support of this 
place of worship are to have the opportunity to do so. 
The only condition is that these gifts shall be voluntary, 
and so bestowed that none shall feel that they are not 
perfectly welcome to this place. A committee chosen 
from your own number* is to devise some plan by which 

* With reference to this committee Mr. Payson says in his official 
record of the chapel work for 1870: "In the spring of this year an ar- 
rangement was made by which the congregation at the chapel appointed 



136 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

these purposes can be carried into effect, and it is to this 
end you are invited to meet here next Wednesday even- 
ing. Am I too sanguine in believing that those whom 
God has blessed in this place will most gladly avail them- 
selves of this opportunity of bringing their thank-offerings 
and laying them down each week at the Saviour's feet ?" 
In October of this same year, in connection with his 
report upon the Building Fund, after glancing at the past 
and referring to the progress they had made, Mr. Payson 
said, " But some, disappointed, will ask, ' What of the 
new church ?' To this I would answer : twice since we 
commenced, special efforts have been made to secure the 
proper lots, and a committee is now organized for this 
very work. Should the spirit manifested here among 
ourselves warrant the undertaking, I should not be sur- 
prised if the ground for our new building were broken 

within a twelvemonth And while we await more 

light, let me ask if there is one here that feels poorer to- 
day for what he has given the Lord through that box ? I 
know not a few that feel richer, for (i) they have learned 
to give and the blessedness of giving. They never had 
given before, and they have received so much pleasure 
from it that it has made their faces to shine with a heav- 
enly light I had never seen there before. 

a committee to raise funds for the support of the chapel and such objects 
as they might deem best. This committee was to cooperate with the com- 
mittee from the parent church in all important matters relating to this 
branch of the church." In this connection the attention of the reader is 
especially invited to fuller statements concerning the matter of his resig- 
nation given in the Appendix, Note B. And it should be borne in mind 
that the cooperation above spoken of is not yet coordination, though it 
may eventually become so. 



METHODS AND MEANS. 137 

" (2.) Some have learned to give systematically who 
hitherto were accustomed to give at haphazard. Then, 
every time they gave there was a conflict between their 
conscience and their covetousness. Now, they have only 
to take the Lord's money already laid aside and give. 
The minister who had not a dime to buy a barrel of flour, 
gave $5 to one object and $10 to another before the day 
came when he was to receive his salary, and when asked 
how he could do this, replied, ' That is the Lord's money.' 

" (3.) All of us feel a new strength in ourselves and our 
cause. We have now $6,coo at interest. This church has 
so much in store for the future, and we have learned in 
giving that how it may be doubled and trebled. If each 
one of us lays by him in store according as the Lord 
hath prospered him, no financial embarrassments or 
monetary crises will stand in the way of progress." 

Afterwards, in the same sermon, he refers to the gen- 
erous assistance afforded by the parent church, and says, 
" Twenty-six thousand dollars were subscribed in a single 
week, and the rest of the forty thousand dollars necessary 
would have been forthcoming at once if ground for build- 
ing could have been secured. Are these dear brethren," 
he adds, " under greater obligations to help us than we 
to help ourselves ? . . . . How is it in your families ? 
You take the tenderest care of the most helpless and 
dependent — the little babe. As he grows older you ex- 
pect him to take care of himself, to run on errands, to 
watch over the younger children, and at length to work 
and help support himself. So it is with these dear 

friends. With much prayer, with efforts continued 





138 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

through fourteen long years, with many sacrifices cheer- 
fully met, which will never be fully known till the last 
great day, they have watched over this work and cared 
for it from the first. When it began in the carpenter- 
shop they cared for it ; so, too, in the public-school build- 
ing ; and so, when there was need, they built this chapel. 
And we are using property worth not less than forty 
thousand dollars. At every call made upon them they 
have responded with large generosity, till their gifts to 
us amount to scarcely less than one hundred thousand 
dollars. Their whole management has been character- 
ized by a liberality shown to no other chapel in this city. 
They have intrusted the management of affairs largely 
to you, while they still pay at least five-sixths of the ex- 
pense ; and if we were able to assume the responsibility 
to-day, and it seemed the wisest and best course to pur- 
sue, would at once give everything into our hands. 

" Shall not such confidence and generosity be met 
with a like spirit on our side ? Next spring some of us 
will have to report what this branch of the church has 
done in twelve months. And are we who have gloried 
in your generosity in years past, and who have asked 
that you might be allowed to do for yourselves, doomed 
to be disappointed in our hopes and expectations ?" 

The next year (1871) brought a very happy disap- 
pointment to the pastor of this church and to every other 
friend of the congregation who had " gloried in their gen- 
erosity." It afforded ample ground, too, for justifying 
that most honorable and praiseworthy action of the Com- 
mittee, whereby they have lifted the people of this chapel 



METHODS AND MEANS. 139 

up to a plane of liberty and privilege such as is not en- 
joyed perhaps by any similar organization in the Presby- 
terian church. 

The manner in which this people engaged in the 
effort to secure the Five Million Memorial Fund, design- 
ed by the General Assembly to commemorate the re- 
union of the dissevered branches of the Presbyterian 
church in America, reflects the greatest credit upon their 
energy and faith, and proves them worthy of the confi- 
dence reposed in them by their pastor and the Commit- 
tee of the parent church. The name, "Memorial Chapel" 
which has been given to their new edifice, was derived 
indeed from its connection with this special memorial 
contribution, and a brief review of what they did at this 
time may not be found uninteresting. 

When, by advice of the General Assembly — which is 
the highest authority of the Presbyterian church in the 
United States — each church was to have a share in rais- 
ing this Five Million Fund, and to determine the object 
towards which it should be contributed, Mr. Payson's 
congregation chose to devote their offerings to the en- 
largement of their " Building Fund" and the erection of 
a new edifice. Accordingly, several clergymen were in- 
vited to address the people one Sabbath evening upon 
the general objects contemplated by the action of the 
General Assembly, and to commend this special effort to 
the prayers and hopes of the church. Immediately after, 
circulars were distributed through the congregation, in 
which thg causes and occasion of such an effort were 
briefly stated, and the following appeal subjoined: 



140 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

YOUR OFFERING. 

This subject appeals to every Presbyterian in the land, whether old 
or young, rich or poor, and you are invited to give it your prayerful consid- 
eration. For the encouragement of those whose means are small and who 
are disposed to undervalue the importance of their cooperation, the com- 
mittee mention that the first money received by the treasurer towards this 
great fund of five millions was a single dollar, the pious gift of a poor 
woman. 

Remember that the call is for a thank-offering to the Lord. Let 
whatever you do be done cheerfully, for the Lord loveth a cheerful giver. 

The General Assembly is to meet the iSth of May next, and their 
committee wish to close the subscription-book on the ioth of May, to 
give time for the preparation of a Report. It is necessary that you de- 
cide upon the amount of your contributions soon, and that it be in the 
hands of your pastor on or before the 7th of May, otherwise it cannot be 

included in the Report to the General Assembly 

Your friend and pastor, c. H. PAYSON. 

New York, March, 1871. 

The result of this effort was, that within seven weeks 
$3,300 were collected and paid in, and a conditional offer 
made the amount more than $4,000.* Of this amount 
one young man, who began life as a boy in the mission- 
school, gave $200. Another, who has been saved by its 
influence from drunkenness, gave $25. Five others gave 
each $100. One gave $225, and another $83. But when 
it is remembered that the great majority of these gifts 
were from poor people, it will not appear strange that 

$40 were given in sums of $i oo each. 



60 

54 

12 

800 

iS 

42 



2 00 

3 °° 

4 00 

5 °o 

6 00 

7 oo. 



* Four rhoucand dollars was the sum which had been asked for. 



METHODS AND MEANS. 14* 

490 were given in sums of 10 00 each. 

160 " " " - -o 00 " 

350 " " " 25 00 " 

300 " " " 50 00 " etc., 

and that one gift was as small as ten cents. 

An interesting confirmation of Mr. Payson's state- 
ment,* that the resolution of the chapel congregation in 
1867 to give $10,000 towards a new building "was the 
beginning of this church edifice," appears in the follow- 
ing note, which directs attention to the overruling hand 
of Providence in this matter. It bears the date of Sep- 
tember 6, 1877; and the writer, having spoken of the 
Memorial Fund, says : 

" I think attention should be called somewhere to the 
unexpected opening made by the Memorial undertaking. 
Remember that when Mr. Payson proposed the ' Build- 
ing Fund,' (1867,) the new building had no place any- 
where except in his imagination ; and at the date of his 
resignation, (1870,) when the contributions had almost 
ceased, and he hardly knew what to say to his people 
about the prospect, the Madison Square Church had 
given no sign. ' Daylight was all gone.' After a while 
the ' Memorial Fund ' enlisted the Madison Square 
Church, and in view of the splendid beginning made at 
the chapel, it was natural and easy for the church to 
decide that their offerings should go towards a new build- 
ing. It illustrates the old proverb that ' God helps those 
who help themselves.' 

" My belief is, that had it not been for the ' Memorial 
Fund,' the new chapel would not have been erected, and 
* See page 125. 



1 42 ALL FOR CL1RLST. 

this was not dreamed of when Mr. Payson proposed to 
his people to raise $10,000.'' 

Some incidents connected with this effort were deeply 
interesting. One note, enclosing $20 for the fund, makes 
touching reference to the death of a child tenderly be- 
loved, and then says, 

Btfore our daughter left us we had spoken of contributing to the 
"Memorial Fund " as a family, recognizing our responsibility according 
to the measure of ability. We have found that H had in the savings- 
bank about $40, the gift of a friend ; and in filling up the blank, we have 
pref rred to insert her name among the living children, and opposite 'to a 
sum which we cannot doubt that she, if also living, would heartily con- 
tribute to that church in which she was born, was baptized, and taught the 
truths which, we trust, had made her wise unto salvation. 

A'l her associations with the sanctuary have been with the Presbyte- 
rian church, and had it pleased God to spare that gentle life with its dawn- 
ing Christian graces, we feel assured that she would have early united 
with this beloved and honored church, and in the joys, cares, and labors 
have found she prized its heavenly ways, 

" Its sweet communion, solemn vows, 
And hymns of love and praise." 

Again wishing complete success may crown this renewed effort for the 

new chur.h, and make the work truly memorable, 

Very truly. 
Rev. C. H. Payson. 

Many of the sacrifices made in connection with this 
effort in some of the poorest of these homes will never 
be fully known till the last great day. Some of them 
were heroic, and all of them were inspired by faith. A 
few must be given here. 

One poor woman, who kept a candy store in a very 

small room on street, and who depended for her 

living upon what she could make in this way, became so 
deeply interested in this Memorial effort for a new build- 
ing, that she sold her watch and chain and other jewelry, 



METHODS AND MEANS. 1.13 

amounting in all to $115, that she might honor the Lord 
with her substance. Another, Mrs. , a sewing- 
woman, resolved that she would give something towards 
the new church even when she had no money in the 
house to give, and could not see where any was to be 
obtained. But she had a confident assurance that "in 
some way or other the Lord would provide,", and in the 
bravery of her humble faith began to pray for work. And 
work came, "faster," she said, "than ever before," and 
in such abundance, that within the seven weeks allotted 
for this fund she collected and paid from the proceeds of 
her needlework $20 into the Lord's treasury! and this at 
a time when needlework was not remunerative. 

A poor washerwoman, whose husband was in the 
army, and who was struggling hard with three children 
to make ends meet, promised one day that she would 
give $50 towards the new building " if the bounty-money 
came in." Her pastor disapproved of her giving so much, 
on the ground that she needed it herself ; and really did 
not expect to receive it, knowing that people are apt to 
be far more generous when they have money in prospect 
than when they have it in hand. But the good woman 
was very much in earnest in the matter, and when the 
first payment was received from the government turned 
over $50 to the new church. 

Another very interesting illustration of the genuine- 
ness and simplicity of this people's faith is afforded by 
the conduct of a member of the church who was engaged 
as housekeeper for a gentleman residing on Fifth avenue. 
She had managed by strict economy to save a considera- 



144 ALL FOR CHRIST. 

ble sum of money, and thought it her privilege to give at 
least $100 towards the Memorial Fund. But she hesita- 
ted to take it from the savings-bank "before the first 
Sunday of May," as would be necessary, for then she 
must lose the interest on it for six months; and thrift 
had made her conscientious. But she considered that 
unless the money was paid "before the seventh of May" 
it could not be counted in the " Memorial Fund ;" the 
Lord called for it at once, and it should be paid ; He 
would take care of the interest, she thought. And so 
she drew it from the bank, and deposited it in the little 
box "at the inner door of the chapel," with which, it need 
hardly be said, she had already become familiar. The 
next day her employer sent word to her that " he wished 
to see her at the office, as he had something special to 
say ;" and when she went, fearing lest for some reason 
she might be discharged, she found that he had been so 
much pleased with her services, that he had determined 
to advance her wages for the following year, beginning 
with the first of January, then already three months past ; 
"and so," as she said to her pastor in the joy of her sim- 
ple faith, " the Lord has not only paid me back all my inter- 
est, but twice as much besides, and is going to keep me in 
mind of it all the year through!' 

It would be easy and delightful to multiply these 
illustrations of that people's faith, who, through the 
deepest poverty and darkest griefs, have " trusted and 
obeyed ;" but their record is on high, and the limits of 
this little book forbid our dwelling more upon them here. 



ARMY LIFE. 145 



CHAPTER VI. 

ARMY LIFE AND TRA VELS IN THE EAST. 

While Mr. Payson's whole soul was aglow with zeal 
in religious work, he always felt and exhibited the most 
lively interest in public affairs. Whatever tended to 
promote social and civil welfare ever found in him an 
ardent friend and supporter. As an illustration of this 
fact may be mentioned an incident that occurred during 
his seminary course. 

" It was in 1856," writes a friend, " when the exciting 
and momentous Presidential canvass was in progress, 
with ' Fremont and Freedom,' for the watchword upon 
the one side, and James Buchanan as the leader upon 
the other. Many felt that the very salvation of the 
republic was involved in the issue. This political ex- 
citement stirred even the quiet retreat of the theological 
seminary, and during the summer vacation, Mr. Payson, 
in company with a classmate, set out upon a campaign 
in one of the interior counties of New York. They went 
from place to place, addressing the people night after 
night, upon the vital questions of the great political 
issue. Large and attentive audiences listened to those 
volunteer politicians, who for the time entered heartily 
into the work of doing their part to uphold freedom of 
speech for the press, and for all the people of the land. 

" Into this work Mr. Payson put his entire energies, 

All For Christ. \ 3 



146 ALL FOR CLiRLST. 

with that contagious enthusiasm which always charac- 
terized his labors. Nor from that day onward did he 
ever cease to be profoundly interested in the material 
welfare of his country, and ready always to do his duty 
as a citizen. As Paul, though an apostle, never forgot 
that he was a Roman citizen, so Mr. Payson, though a 
minister of the gospel, never forgot that he was an 
American." 

During the progress of the war also he took an active 
interest in the welfare of the Union army, not only en- 
couraging his people to send contributions of clothing 
and money, but volunteering himself to serve in the 
field and hospital as a member of the Christian Com- 
mission. A brief account of this experience appears in 
the following letter to his brother: 

New York, July 5, 1864, ) 
No. 95 East Thirty-sixth street. ) 

Dear G : . . I have been down with fever and ague since my return 

from the White House, so that on Sunday I could not preach, and the 
rest of the time could only crawl about ... I don't know how much you 
know of my Washington trip, but will only say that I went under the care 
of the Christian Commission, stayed in Washington one week, working 
in hospitals, storehouses, etc., then down to the White House, where I 
stayed another week — suffering all the time from fever and ague, and so 
much that I could not make an effort to get to the army and hunt out 

E .* I was, it seems, within eight miles of him, but returned without 

seeing him. We had to take care of 450 sick and wounded soldiers on 
our return to Washington, and a hard time we had. It was a perfect 
pest-house. It used me up, and though I am much better this week, I 
need rest. . . . 

A letter to Mrs. Payson at this time is dated 

Washington, May 30, 1S64. 
My dear Wife : You see by the date of my letter I am still here in 
Washington. Grant's changes have prevented us from moving. He has 
* A brother then serving as chaplain of the 146th Regiment, N. Y. S. V. 



ARMY LIFE. 147 

already had two bases, Fredericksburg and Port Royal. He is now 
receiving his supplies through West Point and White House, whither we 
expect to go to-day. I looked for a letter from you on Saturday and 
Sunday, but none came on either dny. I was sorely disappointed, for I 
feel anxious about the child. I had to work hard Saturday, not getting 
through till eleven o'clock at night. We had a nice time Saturday morn- 
ing opening boxes from the different churches, of which I will tell you 
more when T see you. 

In the afternoon some twenty of us paid our respects to the Presi- 
dent. He made a characteristic speech to us, shook hands all round, and 
gave us several autographs on the spot, of which I secured afterwards a 
due share. That night I went out some two and a half miles to Emory 
Hospital, after working a couple of hours in putting up a tent to sleep in 
when I returned. Returned at eleven o'clock, and laid down on the boards 
with about thirty others to sleep. Being very tired I rested better than 
you might have imagined. Yesterday morning I attended Dr. Gurley's 
church where I heard a very good sermon on our life being hid with 
Christ in God. At four o'clock went out to the Stone Hospital and 
talked — was back at eight o'clock, tired enough to camp down for the 
night. I suppose we shall have to work hard to-day getting our vessels 
loaded. It is only about six o'clock, and I hope to get two nice letters 
when the postoffice opens at eight. I wish I could run in and see you a 
few minutes before we start off. Take good care of yourself and the baby. 
How does he enjoy the new baby-carriage ? 

I have just received your welcome letter of Saturday, and am so re- 
joiced to know that you and baby are so well .... We shall leave here 
in a few minutes for the White House landing — shall go down by steam. 
Probably you will not hear from me for two or three days at least. Be of 
good courage. May God take good care of you all. Many kisses and 
love in quantities to wife, baby, and all. Pray for me. I read in Acts 

every morning — I have no Psalms. Any word from E ? 

Yours ever, C. H. PAYSON. 

White House, June 31, 1864. 

My dear Wife: On a wet morning, under a dirty tent, surrounded 
by a talking company, I will try and describe a little of what I have gone 
through since I sent you my unsigned letter. 

We arrived at White House at three o'clock, .... reported imme- 
diately, and were soon on shore pitching our tents. In an hour an order 
came for me to go and get our steam-tug and bring it down, so that the 
delegates could go over and make ready to relieve the wounded men 
coming in. We had a fearful time reaching our destination. First our 
tug got aground, and it was some time before we were free. It was dark — 



i 4 S ALL FOR CHRIST. 

nine in the evening you must remember. No one on board knew the 
way .... In five minutes more an eddy caught us, and smash ! crash ! 
we went into a gunboat. I did not know for a moment but we were lost. 
But we grappled the gunboat and found after all that we were safe. Then 
we took to the little boat, rowing a long way, and going four times back 
and forth to land our stores ; then a walk along the edge of the railroad 
bridge and the sand bank, coming every few steps to a narrow pass where 
we ran the risk of plunging into the river. In this way we passed to the 
other side where with lanterns dimly burning, we pitched our tents, kin- 
dled fires, and at twelve o'clock laid our weary bodies to rest, as the train 
of wounded men had not yet arrived. 

At three o'clock we were up and had some crackers and coffee. Then 
we buried a poor fellow who was found on the beach drowned, no one 
knew how. It was really sad. 

We had come back to the other side of the river and had just lain 
down to sleep, when another order came that six hundred wounded men 
had arrived and that every man must proceed to the other side. As you 
can imagine I was hardly fit to go, but back we went in the broiling sun. 
You must know that the bridge across the Pamunkey was burned a week 
or more since, and so all those poor fellows had to stay over on the other 
side — in sight of the steamboats — crowded in the supply wagons, where 
they had lain for two days and nights already. We were soon distribu- 
ting coffee, tea, wine, bread, cordials, etc., among them. One lady, a Mrs. 

II , rendered invaluable aid, getting into the wagons, washing the faces 

of the sick and caring for them tenderly. At twelve o'clock I was com- 
pletely exhausted and had to go into the woods and rest. 

During the afternoon six hundred more wounded men were received, 
making twelve hundred in all. A heavy thunder-storm came on, and in 
the midst of it the poor fellows were brought over and put on board the 
steamers for Washington. I slept splendidly last night and had a good 
breakfast. 

Do write me every day, and direct care of Christian Commission, 

Washington, or I shall get nothing. Ask Mr. to supply my pulpit as 

he proposed, a week from next Sunday. Send me the Times every morn- 
ing, please, after you have read it. S can run to the postofhce with it. 

I can get hold of no papers here. Much love to all. How much I want 
to hear from you and see you. Ever yours, CHARLIE. 

Some additional light is thrown upon this brief chap- 
ter in his life by the following reminiscences of an asso- 
ciate. 



ARMY LIFE. 149 

Portland, May 25, 1877. 
Dear Sir: Your note of the 22d was received last night. My ac- 
quaintance with Rev. Charles H. Payson was too brief and too long ago to 
enable me to make any satisfactory reply to your inquiry. 

It is almost thirteen years, (May 30, 1864,) since I first met him on a 
steamer, bound for the White House, with a party of volunteers in the 
service of the Christian Commission. But for one incident we might have 
parted as great strangers as we first met. Outside of the prayer-meeting 
there is little social Christian fellowship under such circumstances. The 
wounded and dying absorb all sympathy as well as time. Human suffer- 
ings monopolize every thought, despite the clatter of army wagons, the 
bray of mules, the shriek of steamers, and other paraphernalia of war. 

The continuous battles at Cold Harbor had so multiplied the number 
of the wounded that the immense hospital provision at the White House 
proved insufficient. Orders came to send the wounded soldiers to the North. 
A steamer was loaded, and eight members of the Christian Commission 
were selected to accompany this living cargo oifour hundred and fifty-two 
sick and suffering men to Washington ! At midnight brother Payson and 
myself were aroused and asked to take the places of two of the delegates 
who had failed. We arose, and went on board the boat Utica at about one 
o'clock Sunday morning. This transport had discharged a load of mules 
the day before and there had not been time to have it properly cleaned. 
A generous quantity of straw was provided, to afford bedding, and to cov- 
er the dirt ; but the air was offensive. 

The soldiers were put on board the night before. Some were taken 
from the army wagons, directly from the battle-field, and were suffering 
from undressed wounds as well as from the fatigues of the journey, and 
all the wants common to the sick and suffering. They were distributed 
over the decks, in the cabin, and wherever room could be found for a 
man's body. This temporary hospital was divided into eight wards, al- 
lowing fifty patients to a " nurse," as we were called. My assignment 
was between the wheel-house and cabin ; brother Payson had charge of 
the cabin, so that from our juxtaposition we were closely associated for 
two long days and nights. We were on board but a few hours before we 
were summoned around a dying man, who was in my ward, but lay at the 
door of brother Payson's companion way. 

One sick in our families at home taxes the time of the entire 
household ; here were more than fifty men to one nurse. It required 
four pailfuls of water to make one round ; then were distributed coffee, 
beef-tea, pork and beans, lemonade and medicines as the various patients 
required; the spare moments being filled up with drawing water for 
wounds, stirring up the straw pallets, changing bandages, etc., besides tak- 
ing messages and writing letters to be forwarded from Washington. Such 



1 5 o ALL FOR CILRLST. 

was our work during the forty-eight hours of this "middle passage" — 3 
labor that engaged the active hands and sympathetic heart of Mr. Paysor. 
to the utmost. His great executive ability, quickened by religious princi- 
ple, rendered his services invaluable. This close though brief communion 
of heart with heart awakened a friendship to be obliterated by death only. 
But the great Captain of our salvation knows best where and how to oc- 
cupy his soldiers. When they are summoned to the front it is for good 
reasons. " What thou knowest not now, thou shalt know hereafter." 
Very truly yours, but in haste, C. A. L . 

After his return from the army, Mr. Payson did not 
leave his field again, except for the ordinary summer va- 
cations, until February, 1873. In fulfilment of a long- 
cherished plan, he then sailed for Europe, in company 
with his brother, for the purpose of visiting the Holy 
Land. His first letter is dated "Feb. 12, 1873, two hun- 
dred miles from Ireland," and is, in part, as follows : 

My Dear Wife : Here we are, still at sea We shall be at 

least fourteen days on our passage. This is partly accounted for by the 
storm we encountered, which compelled us to lie to for twelve hours, and 

delayed us more or less for five days The captain said it was the 

most dangerous storm he had seen this winter — waves rolling forty feet 
high and the wind a cyclone.* .... It was a comfort to feel that every 
drop of the ocean and every atom of air was in our Father's hand, doing 
his will, and that nothing could touch us except as he wished. 

The last three days have been as bright and spring-like as those five 
were dark and gloomy. Sunday was a splendid day, sun out bright and 
clear, sea smooth, health returning, service in the cabin in the afternoon, 

E reading and conducting the service, and I preaching. At noon 

there was a beautiful rainbow, forming a semicircle and stretching its 
broad base a mile apparently across the waves. 

In the evening there was something still more beautiful. As we were 
walking the deck we saw little skimmers of auroral light flashing up to 
the zenith. In a few moments, however, they were all gathered in what 
you might call an electric cloud, stretching from the northeast to north- 
west, so thin that you could see the stars through it, while along its 
whole length the most beautiful colors chased each other in swift succes- 
* One of the sailors was swept overboard and lost. 



TRAVELS IN THE EAST. 151 

sion. Now it seemed to be the pearl-keyed finger-board of some great 
organ over which celestial fingers were flashing, and whose music could 
be heard had we only a sense to catch it. Anon it seemed as if troops of 
angels, clothed in rainbow hues, were flashing in alternate squadrons far 
across the heavens. You may think me enthusiastic. But when I tell 
you that our captain said that in all his voyages he had never seen the 
like, you can realize it was something really magnificent. 

Our captain, by-the-way, is a genius. He is a great linguist, speaking 
French, German, Swedish, Russ, Italian, Arabic, Spanish, and I know not 
what. He is also quite a musician, playing clarionet, concertina, violin, 
and piano, all of which we have heard— as the steward says, "A good 
few " of instruments. He is, moreover, quite a writer and poet, and has 
entertained us with a rich fund of anecdote and adventure all the way 
over. 

After spending a few days in Great Britain, stopping 
at Glasgow, Edinburg, and London, Mr. Payson and his 
brother hastened, by way of Munich, Innsbruck, Verona, 
and Florence, to Rome, where they met another younger 
brother, and made up a party for Egypt and the Holy 
Land. After spending a few days in Naples and its vi- 
cinity, they sailed for Alexandria, and visited Cairo, the 
Pyramids of Gizeh, Ismailia, and the Suez Canal. At 
Port Said they took the steamer for Jaffa, where they 
arrived upon a calm and sunny day, and, in spite of the 
proverbially rough sea and the yells and shrieks of the 
barbaric Arab boatmen, who, as every traveller testifies, 
are really quite as much of a hindrance as a help in 
reaching the shore, did get safely to land and secure a 
dragoman to conduct them to Ramleh. Here in the old 
convent they spent the night. The following day they 
reached Jerusalem, and his next letter is dated from this 
centre of Christendom, the dear and ancient city so sa- 
cred to every Christian heart. 



152 ALL FOR CHRIST. 



TO HIS SISTER IN CHINA. 

Dear D : In our journeyings among nominal Christians and su- 
perstitious heathen, I have thought very often of you and your laborious 
work. How much there is to discourage you ! When you look at the 
teeming millions about you, and then at the little handful that you and 
others reach, it must weigh you to the ground, especially when you feel 
that your labors so little impress those whom you have reached. But be 
of good courage ! Jesus worked here in a little land one-third of whose 
whole area I saw from the tower of Mizpeh the other afternoon. His 
work was only for three years in this contracted space, and yet to-day it 
fills the world. Work on, then, in his strength, for you know he works 
with you, and his word is leaven which shall leaven the whole lump. 

I cannot tell you how vivid and intensely interesting all these scenes 
are, and especially those connected with the Bible. Those old names and 
places which we have known and learned to love, catch new life and power 
here, and it seems as if we could step into the brotherhood of the ancient 
patriarchs and prophets, and feel that they were indeed men of like pas- 
sions and trials with ourselves, and that as they have conquered, so can 
we also. 

Jerusalem, March 24, 1873. 

My Dear, Dear Wife : How long it seems since a word reached us 
from our homes. At London, Munich, and Rome, we were gladdened — 
since then nothing. Possibly to-morrow friends may bring us news. If 
so we shall be only too glad to see what we hoped to see at Cairo. It 
is only some ten days since we landed in Alexandria, and yet it seems an 
age. If I should write you only a part of what we see each day, it would 
make a book. 

How I wish I could just sit down this evening and tell you and the 
dear children how we rode out to the Pyramids in a carriage, accompa- 
nied by two donkeys, on which we took turns in riding and being laughed 
at. It seemed as if we never could get to those huge piles that seemed 
always so near and yet so far. The air is so pure it deceives you com- 
pletely as to distance. As we at last came up the sand plateau on which 
the Pyramids stand on the very edge of the desert, the Arabs came run- 
ning together, and soon we were going up those steep steps at a great 
rate, with one Arab on each side and another behind pushing at the high- 
est steps. When I tell you that most of those steps were like stepping 
from the floor to the top of the table, and that there were about three hun- 
drtd of them, you can understand that it was some work to go up. The 
view was grand. On one side the desert stretching away towards the At- 
lantic as far as the eye could reach. On the other, Cairo and the huge 



TRAVELS IN THE EAST 153 

hills behind it of sand — between the broad, beautiful plain conquered out 
of these very sands by the Nile. It was interesting to see the struggle 
going on between the desert and the great river. It is not strange that 
the Egyptians should have worshipped the Nile. It is to them a most 
glorious benefactor 

At noon we reached Jaffa. The sea was very smooth, so that we 
went into its ten-feet-wide port with safety ; rode that night until eleven 
and a half o'clock to Kamleh ; slept in the convent, and were off next 
morning to Beth-horon at six o'clock over such paths (they could not be 
called roads) as I never saw in all my life. We were intensely interested 
in the Valley of Ajalon, Beth-horon, Gibeon the Royal, and above all, 
Mizpeh, from whose lofty tower we could see across the land, from the 
mountains of Moab on the east to the waters of the Mediterranean, north 
as far as Ophra, and south to Jerusalem and Bethlehem. I cannot tell 
you my emotions as I looked over that wonderful scene. At my feet Sam- 
uel had gathered the people to elect their king ; here he had erected 
Ebenezer ; one half hour away at Gibeon the tabernacle had found a 
place for years, where Solomon offered so many sacrifices and received 
the wonderful vision promising him wisdom ; then there was Jerusalem, 
that centre of the earth's worship, where the man Christ Jesus preached 
and suffered, died and ascended. I could not keep back the tears. It 
was the sublimest view of my life. 

Since that I have stood at the foot and on the summit of the Mount 
of Olives, and I feel more and more there is no place like it on the earth. 
Yesterday (Sunday) we walked over the Mount to Bethany, and it was 
delightful to feel that we were looking on the same hills, valleys, and sky, 
on which Jesus looked when on earth. I know not why, but they are far 
more to me than Jerusalem itself. We expect to leave here for Hebron 
and the Jordan to-morrow, returning to Jerusalem to spend the Sabbath, 
then on to Nazareth, Damascus, Beirut, and beyond : shall leave Beirut 
(D. V.) the 21st of April for Smyrna, Constantinople, and the Danube. I 
wish I could tell you where to write next after receiving this, but I can say 
nothing more definite than Paris. I hoped to write the children, but fear 
I cannot to-night. May God bless you and keep you all. Love to all the 
dear ones at Orange, and at the chapel that ask after me. 

Yours ever, CHARLES. 

In Camp, Joppa Gate, \ 

Jerusalem, March 31, 1873. > 

My Dear, Dear Wife : How I wish I could see all your dear faces 

to-night, and sleep under my own comfortable roof, spite of all I am 

enjoying. I have reached the last half of my time, and can hope soon, if 

the good Loid wills, to see you all again. It is so very long since either 



1 54 ALL FOR CILRLST. 

E or I have heard a single word from our families. At Naples, Cairo, 

Jerusalem, the same cruel "Nothing" has greeted all our inquiries. And 
now we must leave to-morrow without the slightest prospect of a letter till 
we reach Beirut. We must make the best of it, I suppose, and I will 
endeavor to drive it from my mind by telling you something of our tent- 
life and the strange experiences through which we are passing. 

A week ago last Tuesday we started from Jerusalem for the pools of 
Solomon, about two and a half hours from here, to begin camp-life. Our 

dragoman, Esau Malook, had six horses ready for Messrs. N , S 

of Dayton, Ohio, a young Englishman, E , G , and myself. The 

wind blew so fiercely that, just before we reached Rachel's Tomb, it sent 
my hat spinning across the fields, spite of the elastic by which it was fast- 
ened, and threatened to blow every garment I wore after it. About six 
o'clock we came to our camp, already prepared for us. We found three 
tents. They were about fourteen feet across. Two of them were sleeping 
tents, each of which contained three iron bedsteads for as many individu- 
als, with beds and covering. . . . Rugs covered the ground within ; a table 
fastened to the tent-pole adorned the centre, while nice camp-stools were 
arranged for seats. The third tent served as dining-room. We were 
hungry as bears, and you will sympathize with us when I tell you of the 
fare to which our cook subjected us: (i) Soup ; (2) fish ; (3) mutton roast, 
with peas ; (4) birds, with salad, in sauce ; (5) apricots, deliciously cooked ; 
(6) oranges, nuts, dates, and raisins, with good tea and coffee. Don't you 
pity us ? 

For breakfast we have eggs, either boiled, fried, or in omelette, mut- 
ton chops and potatoes, with coffee, tea, or chocolate, as we may choose. 
At noon, by the wayside, under some shadowy tree, we usually have a cold 
lunch of chicken, mutton, sardines, ham, nuts, raisins, and oranges, on 
which we have thus far managed to survive till dinner came again. 

When I tell you that the roughest roads in North Lyme are better 
than the best here, and that such a thing as a carriage is unknown, you 
will wonder how it is possible for these dragomen to carry so much com- 
fort around with them. They do it by means of donkeys, on whose backs 
they strap not only tents, bedsteads, etc., but huge boxes full of crockery, 
so full that they can change the plates and knives and forks (the latter sil- 
ver, the former Sheffield cutlery) between each course. 

Wednesday morning at eight o'clock we were off for Hebron. Cook's 
party had three-quarters of an hour the start, but we caught them in two 
hours, and rode with them, in a dense fog or drizzling rain, all the way to 
Hebron. We soon came upon the vineyards of Eschol. The whole of 
this part of the country is given up to the vine. Hebron, lying in the 
midst of a beautiful valley, is a lively place of about eight thousand inhab- 
itants. We rode along the narrow streets, about as wide as our sidewalks, 



TRAVELS IN THE EAST. 155 

jostling among the people, till at last we came to what seemed part of a 
house. It was all covered over, and so full of people that I should as 
soon have thought of riding into a large store. As I led the party, I came 
to an abrupt halt. A man, however, took my horse by the head, and led 
us along till we came to a sharp turn, when we saw the Mosque of Mach- 
pelah right before us. We could only look at the outside, as they do not 
permit Christians to enter. 

We took our lunch in the sheik's house, and saw a woman with paint- 
ed eyes sitting on the floor grinding barley. The upper millstone whirled 
around on another hollow stone, which had a little trough by the side of 
it into which the meal rolled as it was ground. After lunch we rode about 
twenty-five minutes, and this brought us to the famous old oak of Abra- 
ham, under which, it is said, he entertained the angels. It is the only tree 
of the kind in this region, and if not the tree ( ! ) appears more worthy of 
the honor than any we saw elsewhere. It rained very fast ; but, thanks to 
overcoat and shawl, which I wrapped around me, I was able to keep pretty 
dry. I have been a little prolix in my description of twenty-four hours, 
because it will help you to understand that during the next four days we 
enjoyed much in journeying to Bethlehem, Mar Saba, the Dead Sea, Jor- 
dan, Jericho, and Jerusalem. 

I never felt better than I do now, and I can but hope that this tent- 
life will give me a vigor and energy I have not enjoyed for months. We 
had a most capital sermon from Rev. Mr. Aspinwall of New York, and a 
delightful communion-service yesterday morning, at the English chapel, 
under the care of Bishop Gobat. I send as much love as this little sheet 
can carry to all my dear friends in Orange and the chapel. Please remem- 
ber me most kindly to all who think of me. 

Your good letter directed to Naples I have just received. It has been 
lying in the postoffice a week in an out-of-way place. We shall go from 
Beirut to Athens, and thence to Constantinople, where we shall be in 
about thirty-three days. We leave for Bethel in a few minutes now, and I 
have no more time to write. With much love, 

Your own, C . 

Damascus, April, 1S73. 

My Dear, Dear Wife : You do not know how glad I am to feel 
that from this old city my homeward journey begins. This is our extreme 
eastern limit, and now " Westward the star," etc. It seems so very long 
since I saw all your dear faces. 

This Damascus is a quaint old place, with a beauty all its own. Its 
abundant water is its greatest glory. Take away the Awaj and Barada of 
to-day, or the Pharphar and the Abana of the past, and Damascus is a 
desert, like the great waste of sand which surrounds it. As it is, you see 



156 ALL FOR CHRIST. 

a large city of fifteen thousand inhabitants (surrounded by one hundred 
villages, containing some fifty thousand more) buried in gardens and trees, 
vocal with running brooks and gushing fountains, and the whole set in a 
frame that adds not a little to the picture — a desert, and barren or snow- 
covered mountains. 

I wish I could give you a sight of the moon as it rises night after 
night behind the minarets of the city and the minaret-shaped poplars 
which grace the gardens here. There is a peculiar golden tinge to the 
desert air that surrounds it which makes you feel yourself in dream-land 
at once, and ready to listen to the "Arabian Nights" or any similar enter- 
tainment. And if you saunter along down the banks of the river, and see 
the lights gleaming through the lattices, or weird processions coming out 
of narrow streets, guiding their steps by gauze, glass, or paper lanterns, 
you feel as though it was not reality, but a picture of the lotus-eater's 
imagination on which you were gazing. You will think I am just giving 
wing to fancies, but I assure you I never saw a city like this before. 

Since I wrote the first page I have taken a canter with the rest of the 
party up to the sand-hill back of the city. The clouds which hung over us 
seemed made of desert sand instead of mist, and fell down about the hill 
in the most peculiar folds, threatening to break upon us at any moment. 
As we turned and looked back upon the city, I was quite unprepared for 
the scene. There it lay — Church's picture — with its white towers, houses, 
domes, and minarets, perfectly embowered in the greenest foliage — a beau- 
tiful pearl set in brightest emerald. As we came back we peered over 
walls six or eight feet high, made of mud, into the hidden beauties of gar- 
dens filled with apricot, quince, peach, orange, lemon, pomegranate, and 
various other fruit-trees, with grains, grasses, and herbs of every kind 
interspersed. Everything depends on the water; hence you find the peo- 
ple making what may be called sunken beds, from twenty-five to thirty feet 
long, and twelve or fourteen wide, which they surround with a little bank 
some six inches high. Into any one of these beds they can turn the many 
streams, which appear to gush forth on every side, until it is sufficiently 
moistened, when they divert them into some other thirsty bed. 

Yesterday I preached for Dr. Patterson, one of the pastors of the 
United Presbyterian Mission, and had a very pleasant service. Most of 
the audience were travellers whom I have met from time to time as our 
paths have crossed in coming from Jerusalem here. To-morrow we leave 
for Beirut, and I will try to write you another page about the ruins and 
Lebanon. 

Here I am, dear M , up among these wonderful ruins of old Baal- 

bec. I thought, from my reading, I was somewhat prepared for them, but 
the tenth part was not told me. At first sight you are impressed with the 
grandeur of the buildings. Think of one structure with an entrance or 



TRAVELS IN THE EAST 157 

vestibule 1S0 feet wide and 37 feet deep, approached formerly by not less 
than 250 steps. Then comes a beautiful hexagon room 200 feet across ; 
then a large court, with several recesses and niches, 476 feet wide and 400 
long ; then the temple proper, 300 feet by 160, surrounded by 54 magnifi- 
cent columns, 6 standing, the remainder on the ground, or carried away. 
You can realize the size better when I tell you that, as I stood by the base 
of one of these fallen columns, it reached one and a half feet above my 
head, being about 8 feet through and 25 feet round. I know these words 
convey little, if any, idea of it to you. If you will look in Thomson's 
"Land and Book," vol. 1, p. 35S, you will find a description of the ruins 
and a plan which will give you a better idea. I felt their grandeur some- 
what as I rode in through a great vaulted archway, which must have been 
150 feet long, built of huge stones and adorned with beautiful faces look- 
ing down from the ceiling; but I felt it most of all when I stood by 
the side of the immense foundation-stones, which are so large that they 
gave name to the whole building, and it was called "Three-Stone Tem- 
ple." They are each over 60 feet long and some 13 feet square. The 
three stones together are as long as a city block, and the whole structure 
would cover from Forty-second street to Thirty-eighth street, and from 
Lexington to Third avenue. 

Adjoining it is another temple called the "Great Temple of the Sun," 
or Apollo. It is as beautiful as the other is grand, and is about 230 feet 
long by 117 wide. The great doorway is 21 feet wide and 42 high. It is 
surrounded by the most exquisite carvings of flowers, fruits, figures, etc., 
4 feet wide on each side. The niches inside are also surrounded by carv- 
ings which look more like lace-work than stone. One, of which I made a 
little sketch, is a semicircle in shape, some 35 feet in radius. The carved 
figures on the outer edge of the little arch come in this order : first, four 
stalks of wheat, then a grape or oak leaf, with six projections, then two 
seed-vesicles of the poppy. These are repeated fourteen times in this one 
niche, and I cannot give you the slightest idea of their exquisite perfec- 
tion and beauty. Each niche has its own distinct design. 

I wish you and all the dear friends were here to enjoy this admirable 
ruin, so beautifully situated between Lebanon and Anti- Lebanon, in the 
lovely valley of the Burka, which opens away to the south as far as the 
eye can reach. Thomson, you will see, argues strongly for this being the 
Baal-gad of the Bible, and thinks the ruins indicate the hand of a Solo- 
mon. It is singular that the Mohammedans attribute them to Solomon, 
son of David. A beautiful spring gushes forth into a stream half a mile 
from here and flows down past the temple, making a garden of beauty 
along its course. 

I hope this has not wearied you. I cannot tell you how happy I am 
to face westward. Three days nearer home than when I left Damascus ! 

14 



158 ALL FOR CHRIST. 

I shall expect to be with you early in June. We think now of going by 
Constantinople and the Danube, Vienna, Strasburg, Paris, London, etc. 
Love to all my dear friends in Orange and New York, Pray for me. 
Good-by. Kisses for the dear children from PAPA. 

TO HIS SUNDAY-SCHOOL. 

Munich, 1873. 

My Dear Children : Yesterday and the day before we were travel- 
ling on the banks of two of the most famous rivers in Germany — the 
Rhine and the Neckar. We were kept busy running from one side of the 
railroad-car to the other looking at the castles perched on the hills and 
cliffs on either bank. Every one has its own strange story, and they all 
remind me of one line in the Bible : "Their works do follow them." It is 
in the last book. See if you can find it. 

I thought I would tell you a little about the most famous and most 
beautiful of these castles. That you may better remember it, I send you 
two things : first, a leaf picked off the walls, and next, the picture which 
stands at the beginning of this letter. You see the castle is built on the 
side of a high hill, called the " Konigstuhl," or King's Throne. Below it 
lies the city, which has the same name as the castle — Heidelberg. It is on 
the left bank of the beautiful Neckar, and on the other side is anothcr 
high hill called the " Holy Mountain," because many years ago a good 
man lived there in a cave. 

A hundred years before America was discovered by Columbus, a man 
named Rudolph began this castle. He lived first in a strong place on the 
Rhine, but I suppose he thought this place more beautiful and just as 
strong, so he came here and built the first part of this palace-castle. He 
was a count, very rich and brave and selfish, I should think. I say selfish, 
for his castle shows that he was very much afraid somebody would rob him. 
Having robbed other men, he was afraid of them, and therefore built his 
stronghold on the side of this steep hill. I do not think you could climb 
up the path at all, for I saw strong men sit down and rest before they got 
even to the foot of the castle wall. Then, too, he made it of stone, very 
strong and thick. One tower, which he thought the strongest, has walls 
over twenty feet thick, that is, thicker than our house is wide. He cut 
narrow windows, called loopholes, through these thick walls on every 
side, so that he could put his guns out and shoot anybody that tried to get 
at him. Having dug a deep ditch all around his castle, he filled it with 
water, and over this ditch there was one narrow bridge, the only way by 
which anybody could get to the gate of the castle. This bridge was pulled 
up every night. The gate was made of strong timber covered with iron. 
It could be lifted, and its sharp teeth would come down in a minute if the 
soldiers wished to crush any one passing under it. 



TRAVELS IN THE EAST t;q 

Rudolph and his descendants lived here for more than four hundred 
years, and the people who gathered around these counts lived at the foot 
of the hill, and went out with them to fight against their enemies, and ex- 
pected them to protect their homes. But do you suppose they always did 
it ? No ; spite of all their efforts, poor Heidelberg has been plundered three 
times, cannonaded five times, and twice burned up. If you examine the 
picture closely, you will see the castle is in ruin. More than one hundred 
years ago they had to give it up. Strong as it was, the French took it. 
Perhaps the count and his family escaped by a secret passage which leads 
down a long flight of stairs, runs under the city, under the river itself, and 
comes out more than a mile away from the castle. The French put pow- 
der under that strong tower of which I spoke, and it split into two great 
pieces. One remained where it was, the other slipped down into the ditch, 
and lies there to-day. 

So you see these ruins tell two stories : first, they say how cruel and 
selfish these men must have been to need such castles to defend them ; 
and second, how cruel and mean their enemies must have been to have 
burned and ruined the beautiful building and city it took so many hundred 
years to finish. 

There is another part of the castle which tells a different story. It is 
a wing built of cut stone by one of these counts for the home of his wife, 
whom he dearly loved. Behind it was her garden full of fine trees and 
flowers. Wishing to surprise her, he had a very beautiful gate made of 
costly stones and finely carved. The stones were made ready, and one 
night the workmen came and put it all up in a few hours. In the morn- 
ing the princess went out into her garden and was amazed to see the gate. 
Coming nearer, she saw some words on it which said it was a present from 
her husband to his dear wife. That was three hundred years ago, but 
there it stands to-day, and is called " Elizabeth's Gate," sometimes, " Beau- 
tiful Gate." 

Children, your works will follow you. God help you to build in love, 
not in hate. Then before all the world he will put a crown on your head, 
and say, " Well done." My paper is filled, and I say Good-by. 

From your affectionate Pastor. 



i5o ALL FOR CHRIST. 

CHAPTER VII. 

THE OLD AND THE NEW. 

It will readily be seen, from what has been said in 
previous chapters, that the attachment of Mr. Payson's 
flock to the old chapel must have been very great. That 
rough room, which, with its uncarpeted floor and un- 
cushioned benches and ugly wooden posts, appeared so 
little like a church, was nevertheless the spiritual birth- 
place and home of many a weary soul, who there found 
comfort and rest and joy such as no other spot on earth 
could give. To more than one member of the mission 
congregation that bare and desolate-looking room had 
become indeed a Bethel, where the very words and expe- 
rience of the patriarch were repeated in their hearts. 

It was, therefore, with no ordinary emotions of regret, 
after all the preparations had been made, that they turned 
to leave the old chapel at last. When the final hour of 
worship had arrived, and the- new, large edifice on Thir- 
tieth street, with its spacious and quiet auditorium and 
beautiful Sunday-school rooms, stood ready to receive 
them, the pastor preached a sermon* to his people in 
which he endeavored to give some expression to the min- 
gled feelings of joy and sorrow with which they stood 
upon the threshold of the old. His text was chosen in 
Ezra 3: 12, 13 : "'But many of the priests and Levites 

* Sabbath evening, March 21, 1875. 



THE OLD AND THE NEW. 161 

and chief of the fathers, who were ancient men, that had 
seen the first house, when the foundation of this house 
was laid before their eyes, wept with a loud voice ; and 
many shouted aloud for joy; so that the people could not 
discern the noise of the shout of joy from the noise of the 
weeping of the people ; for the people shouted with a 
loud shout, and the noise was heard afar off.' 

" How thoughts and emotions wrought tumultuously 
in human hearts twenty-four hundred years ago in Jeru- 
salem ! A remnant of Israel's millions had returned 
from Babylon. Among the ruins of the sacred city the 
foundations of the new temple had been laid, and the 
people gathered to place the cornerstone. Young and 
old were there. Men who, between fifty and sixty years 
ago, had gone up to the temple of Solomon, and had 
looked upon that glorious building, which was one of the 
wonders of the world, stood among them. Is it strange 
that they wept as they contrasted the present weakness 
with the past glory, or that profound emotions stirred 
their souls as they recalled all of loss and trial they had 
passed through since last they looked upon that temple, 
going out in flames, and dying a ruin at their feet ? 

"These wept, and others sang and rejoiced. Those 
who had often heard of the past in the land of tears, 
rejoiced that once more the Lord had 'done great 
things for them.' The same God who had brought 
Israel out of Egypt with a mighty hand, had come and 
brought them out of Assyria ; and more than this, he 
had touched the heart of Cyrus, so that he helped Israel 
with army and treasure, while Pharaoh, when he held 



1 62 ALL FOR CHRIST. 

them captive, did all he could to prevent their exodus. 
Throughout this exile they had had neither temple nor 
tabernacle — a thing Israel had not known before for a 
thousand years ; but now they were to have their own 
temple again, and they shouted and sang.* . . . 

" As we glance at the past, the best thoughts, it seems 
to me, are those which recall the good hand of our God 
upon us in all these years of our grow th — material, in- 
tellectual, and spiritual. 

"(i.) Let us look first at the material growth of our 
church. What hath not God wrought in this direction ! 
Twenty years ago, a lady, one Sabbath afternoon, saw 
idle boys and girls in the street, and called them into the 
basement of her house. The little Sunday-school there 
begun was soon moved into a room on Thirty-fourth street. 
In the fall that school divided, one part locating on the 
west side, the other on the east. The eastern school had 
in it the germs of this work. 

"The first Sunday-school services were held in a rough, 
uncomfortable room in Twenty-ninth street. Then the 
school removed in a few months to the public school 
building in Twenty-seventh street, where it remained 
until its own building — this chapel — was completed, Jan- 
uary 10, 1858. 

* Both the sermons in this chapter, it should be said, are fragmentary 
and incomplete even in the manuscripts ; and they are selected for publi- 
cation not so much because of their intrinsic value as specimens of Mr. 
Payson's oratory, as because of their intimate connection with the history 
of his church. Still they may serve in a measure as illustrations of his 
style, if only it is borne in mind that they are at best but outlines or 
sketches. It will be remembered (cf. page 89) that he always spoke 
extemporaneously. 



THE OLD AND THE NEW. 163 

" In two years, more room was needed ; the wings on 
each side, and that part of this room from the pillar 
eastward, were added ; and the same kind Hand which 
helped us to gain so many blessings then, has been with 
us all these fourteen years since. Once more we have 
had to lengthen our cords and strengthen our stakes. 
God grant that it may not be the last time. May the 
success of the past only stimulate us to nobler and high- 
er endeavors in the future. 

"Nor should we overlook the growth indicated by in- 
creased contributions. Thirteen years ago I find our 
contributions were less than one hundred dollars for all 
benevolent work in this church. Now they have risen 
to nearly four thousand as the regular average amount, 
and this year's receipts will be probably over $6,000. 
And this, dear friends, is only the reflection of a like pros- 
perity which through this very work has come to many a 
home connected with us. 

" (2.) Intellectually we have grown. How many will 
look back to this place as the school where their minds 
were disciplined. By lectures and sermons, prayer-meet- 
ing and Bible class, Sunday-school and library, have they 
been led to grapple with the grandest truths which ever 
stir the minds of men, the truths of revelation. [Sir 
Isaac Newton's testimony.] . . . Some, in preparing to 
help others, have helped themselves yet more. . . . Other 
some will recall with profound emotion the noble teach- 
ers who for almost a score of years, in and out of season, 
have labored for their good. . . . 

" (3.) Best of all is the spiritual growth connected with 



1 64 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

this sacred place. What revelations of God's love and 
grace have we received within these sacred walls ! Some 
will say in the Psalmist's words, ' I was born there.' There 
my life really began. There God quickened me, who was 
dead in trespasses and sins. There he wrought the great- 
est miracle in me, the miracle of redemption. If there 
is a peculiar feeling connected with one's birthplace — if 
men will travel thousands of miles and make unnumbered 
sacrifices to die where they were born, what words can 
fitly describe the tender emotions that will move many 
a heart as they turn back in memory to the place where 
God first met and called them his, and how will they 
praise and magnify his name for those great gifts which 
he has here bestowed. I believe that even in heaven 
this dear old chapel will be remembered with reverence 
and affection. 

" Again, others will recall that this for them has been 
a place of spiritual growth and culture. Here they first 
began to pray, to work, and to give. And as they look 
back over prayer-meeting, Sabbath-school, Bible class, 
sermons, and communions, blessed to them in this very 
room, they will say, ' This is my Bethel. It is none other 
than the house of God, the very gate of heaven !' Others, 
too, recall to-night with peculiar emotions dear friends 
who here plumed their wings for glory. We saw them 
ripening fast, and knew not that it was because the King- 
would soon call them to thrones and kingdoms with him 
for ever. Hallowed are these memories. But joy tri- 
umphs over sorrow, for we know our loss is to them eter- 
nal train. Part of the host is in heaven. . . . 



THE OLD AND THE NEW. 165 

" But note that God rebukes the sorrow of some on 
this very occasion, Hag. 2 : 4, 9 . . . ' Be strong, all ye peo- 
ple, saith the Lord, and work, for I am with you, saith 
the Lord of hosts. The glory of this latter house shall 
be greater than of the former, and in this place will I 
give peace, saith the Lord of hosts.' Do not limit me. 
I gave to you the ark, the tabernacle, yea, and the tem- 
ple ; and I took them away for better things. You would 
have made idols of them as of Nehushtan ; I would lift 
you to a higher worship. . . . 

" So in due time ' the Word was made flesh, and dwelt 
among us.' And it is said, 'Ye are the temples of God, 
and the Spirit of God dwelleth in you ;' . . . God ever 
drawing nearer, until he enters the very soul. 

" Let us, then, beware of limiting our God. It is not 
these stained and dingy walls, these posts dividing our 
audience-room in twain, nor the ungainly and cumbered 
entrance, which has brought the blessing. No ! it is 
only because, in spite of these obstacles, God has been 
with us. Oh, limit him not ! If any one years ago had 
said, ' Keep the school in the basement, or had forbidden 
us to add this library, class-rooms, and German chapel,' 
would it have been well ? So let no one weaken the 
hands of his brethren by saying, ' It had been better to- 
day in the old place.' 

"But, none the less, let us remember that God only 
can make these new courts glorious. As walls and seats 
here have not the blessing in themselves, so God must 
be with us, or all is vain and lost. ...[... David and ark — 
Uzziah — Uzzah]. 



1 66 ALL FOR CLLRLST. 

" Now we need to impress upon our hearts this solemn 
lesson. We are to feel that no building is of itself sacred. 
The pulpit, communion-table, seats, organ, are nothing 
in themselves. It is only as they become helps to spir- 
itual life and worship that they can prove real blessings 
to our souls. Look at John 4:23, 24 : ' But the hour 
cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall wor- 
ship the Father in spirit and in truth ; for the Father 
seeketh such to worship him. God is a Spirit, and they 
that worship him must worship him in spirit and in 
truth.' Through faith and prayer only can we reach 
after Christ and find him. ' My house,' says Jesus, ' shall 
be called the house of prayer.' It is a place to commune 
with God. . . . 

"... Above all other things, let us remember that 
love is the fulfilling of the law. Therefore may all hatred, 
envies, jealousies, evil speaking, be left behind us. May 
each, in the spirit of love and holy courtesy, seek not his 
own, but his neighbor's good. And thus may we show 
to the poor and stranger those divine fruits of Christian 
charity that have made this old chapel beautiful to many 
a weary heart. . . . 

" By faith, dear friends, we can reach our hands to 
Christ. By prayer, through Christ, we can receive the 
Holy Ghost, and he shall be to each of us, wherever we 
may be, the Comforter and Guide to everlasting life. . . . 

"In my journey through Palestine, we paused on 
the heights of Samaria. A glorious view opened before 
us. Below and to the south lay the beautiful plain of 
El-Mukhna, suggesting in its loveliness the precious 



THE OLD AND THE NEW. 167 

memory of sacred places left behind — Jerusalem, Beth- 
any, Gethsemane. Before us lay the path to Nazareth 
and Galilee, and other spots endeared to every Christian 
heart by words and miracles of Christ ; while far be- 
yond, to the eye of faith, appeared the borders of another 
land. Should we then linger there ? We might well 
rejoice to remain among such scenes for ever; but to 
the north lay our homeward way. Duty, honor, work 
called us to go forward. 

" So here we stand to-night. God calls us to a new 
place and a new work for him. Hearing this word, let 
us go forward, believing that he is able to make the way 
plain to better things on earth and the glories of the 
New Jerusalem hereafter." 

The Annual Report of the Chapel Committee, read, 
April 21, 1875, by Mr. David Wetmore, chairman, be- 
fore a public meeting of the Madison Square Church, 
contains the following reference to the Memorial 
Chapel : 

" It is doubtless known to all present that this church 
decided to appropriate their Memorial Contributions to 
the erection of a new edifice for the better accommoda- 
tion of those worshipping at the chapel, feeling that, with 
enlarged and more comfortable quarters both for Sunday- 
school and church services, the numbers and efficiency 
of the organization would be increased and the cause of 
the Master promoted. It will also be remembered that 
at the date of the last Annual Report the Chapel Com- 
mittee announced that the land had been contracted fo^ 



1 68 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

in four lots on the north side of Thirtieth street, ioo feet 
east of Third avenue ; size, ioo feet front by 98 feet 9 
inches deep. The lots were delivered in June, and work 
commenced soon after. The cornerstone was laid on 
September 14 by our pastor the Rev. William Adams, 
and the chapel was dedicated to the service of the Mas- 
ter on Easter Sunday, March 28. 

" It will not of course be expected that we in this 
Report to you should describe the edifice, as it has spo- 
ken for itself to most of you, and certainly should to all. 
Its praise already is in most of the churches. We must, 
however, be permitted to mingle our congratulations with 
yours, sir, and our fellow-members', that we have been 
permitted, in the good providence of God, to add another 
temple to his praise, to open another sanctuary in his 
name, whose word of invitation is, ' Whosoever will, let 
him come.' 

"The old chapel — also memorial — will soon pass from 
our possession. Can we take leave of it without the 
liveliest emotions of gratitude to Him who hath led us 
there in all these years. He has been there in the midst, 
and that to bless. There men have been born again, and 
little children have sat at His feet. Its walls have echoed 
the song of praise, and notes of joy have been carried up 
to the temple not made with hands. To it the Lord has 
looked, and from it the heart-whisper has gone to his 
open ear. A little while some were with us there, and 
again a little while and they were not, for they had fol- 
lowed Him who went to prepare a place for them. Rich, 
full, and hallowed are the memories that cling to the old 



THE OLD AND THE NEW. 169 

chapel. Richer, fuller, and more sacred may those be 
that shall cluster around the new." 

The following description of the new church is kindly 
furnished us by the architect, Mr. J. C. Cady of this city. 

This building is designed to meet the wants of a large and growing 
congregation for church and other services, to accommodate (separately 
from the church auditorium) one of the largest Sabbath-schools in the 
city, and to provide for the independent services of a German congrega- 
tion, as well as the various organizations connected with the general work. 
It has been the purpose of its architect not only to meet these varied 
wants, but to infuse into the whole an artistic spirit appropriate to the 
peculiarities and arrangement of the building. He has designed the de- 
tails involving ornamental effect with especial reference to this — the 
stained glass windows, the organ, the furniture, and appointments gener- 
ally. The building covers a plot of 100x100. The front, to a depth of 
about forty feet, is three stories in height, and is used for Sabbath-school 
and kindred purposes. On the first floor the infant-classes have three 
large rooms, which may be connected or otherwise by sliding doors, and 
which can, if desired, be connected with the auditorium. 

On the second floor and over the infant-rooms is the main Sunday- 
school hall, accommodating several hundred children, also the Library 
and superintendent's rooms. Over this story is one devoted to Bible- 
classes, having some fourteen rocms, each adapted to from twenty to 
thirty persons. A large class of young men have with great interest 
raised funds by which their apartment has been quite elaborately and 
beautifully furnished. 

The various stories described face the south, having an abundance of 
light (and sunshine if desiped). In the rear of these, covering about 
6Sxioo feet, is the church auditorium, seating about eleven hundred per- 
sons. It is approached by broad, well-lighted halls at either end of the 
facade, as well as a spacious central entrance. This room is in form an 
elongated octagon, and gets light from seven of the eight sides, transmit- 
ted through large traceried windows that are placed quite a height from 
the floor, giving much dignity and loftiness of effect. The lighting of the 
room is further increased by a large panelled ceiling light, which will also 
throw the organ into bright relief when its decorated pipes shall have 
been tdded. 

The seating is based upon a polygonal figure, and brings all the audi- 
tors easily within the influence of the speaker, and with cosey and social 
effect. The pulpit is placed at the centre of the rear wall. 

The organ is bracketed out from this wall above the pulpit, and is 
15 



170 ALL FOR CHRIST. 

designed, by means of its richly-decorated pipes, to be the focal point of 
the room. 

The roof is of the "open timber" variety, the spandrels of the large 
trusses being filled with ornamental work. The iron work is exposed to 
view and emphasized bv decoration. 

On the east side the series of large traceried windows is discontinued, 
(a necessity owing to the position of an adjoining building,) and there is 
an arcade of seven smaller windows. 

A lofty clock, rising from the auditorium belt-course to the central 
window, will, when in its place, complete the grouping. 

Two large light-wells, (one on either side of the building,) built of 
masonry, do the further service of receiving the smoke-flues, the venti- 
lating and the rain-water pipes; so in case of damage to either, it would 
be limited to the masonry well. The ventilating-flues are built around the 
smoke-flues and heated by them, gaining a strong draft which draws off 
the foul air of the building. It is believed that thus grouping together 
these important, but sometimes troublesome and dangerous adjuncts of a 
building, will prove an advantage both as regards efficiency and safety. 

The style of the building is the early French Gothic. 

The facade on Thirtieth street is built of Philadelphia pressed brick, 
with trimmings of Nova Scotia stone and buff brick. A tower, with bel- 
fry, stage, and spire, terminates each end of the facade, while a large 
gable with a rose-window rises over the central portion. The many rooms 
of the front portion, all requiring plentiful light, have rendered necessary 
a large number of windows. These have been grouped and emphasized 
with reference to the general effect. 

The building and furniture have cost about $60,000. 

Upon entering the new chapel, Easter Sunday, March 
28, 1875, Mr. Payson delivered a discourse, of which the 
following is a rough outline. The notes of this sermon 
were fragmentary, and this attempt at reproduction is in 
consequence very imperfect, but it may serve the pur- 
pose of indicating in a rude way his line of thought. 

" ' THESE STONES SHALL BE FOR A MEMORIAL: 

JOSH. 4: 7. 

" ' Can we ever forget ?' some might have asked, as 
they stepped dry-shod out of the bed of the Jordan. To 




Memorial Chapel of the Madison Square Church. 



THE OLD AND THE NEW. 171 

many an Israelite a memorial may have seemed unneces- 
sary. 'This wonderful experience, this parting of the 
spring-floods of Jordan, this passing with ease where our 
enemies believed that we could not pass at all — can these 
ever fade from memory ?' Perhaps not 

" But man ' cometh forth like a flower, and is cut 
down ; he fleeth also as a shadow, and continueth not.' 
This generation and the next passed away, what will 
have become of this story ? Gone, gone for ever, or else 
mingled with the myths of the past in a confusion worse 
than oblivion itself. Why ! Men to-day doubt the ex- 
istence of Troy and Homer ! . . . . Hence a memorial 
was needful, and for two reasons : (1) to stimulate in- 
quiry, and (2) to strengthen memory ; so that (ver. 24) 
' all the people of the earth might know the hand of the 
Lord that it is mighty, that ye might fear the Lord your 
God for ever.' 

" God has surrounded us with memorials. The rain- 
bow, the passover, the Lord's Supper, and the Sabbath — 
all these are memorials ; and God has thus endorsed that 
feeling, which is almost instinctive in human hearts, to 

rear some monuments of special grace So then 

we have divine encouragement to make this building 
serve a double purpose : that while we gather here to 
learn new lessons of his love, we may at the same time 
be reminded of the past and all the favors and the bless- 
ings it has brought. 

" In the providence of God this building serves as a 
triple memorial ; and the very day when we are permit- 
ted to present this gift to him is the chief of all the days 



172 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

of the year, for not only is it a Sabbath, but the Sabbath 
of Sabbaths. Is it not Easter Sunday? and are we not 
permitted to feel that this is one of the best-established 
of all the memorial days ? Before, the Sabbath marked 
the Creation ; from that first Easter it marks a greater 
and more precious event, namely : the victory of Christ 
over death and the grave, and through him the victory 
of all whom he represents — the army of the redeemed in 
every age and clime. 

" And this anniversary of religious liberty is a fitting 
time to recall that, one hundred years ago, our fathers 
began their great struggle for freedom. Often, in the 
course of the next fifteen months, I shall have occasion 
to refer to this. Now I will only remind you that, but 
for God's great goodness, we should to-day have no city, 
state, or general government. Who that was a partici- 
pant in the last war, who that saw the mob surging along 
our streets a few years since, does not thank God that 
we have a church in which to worship ? 

" There are, however, apart from these general consid- 
erations, two objects for which this new building must 
ever serve as a special memorial. The first is the reunion 
of the Old and New School Presbyterian Churches ; the 
second, the united efforts of the two branches of the Mad- 
ison Square Church for sixteen long years, which have 
finally culminated in the erection of this new edifice. 

" I. The Reunion. Surely, we ought to recall, with 
profound gratitude, the reunion of the divided Presbyte- 
rian Church of America. To it, under God, we owe the 



THE OLD AND THE NEW. 173 

final erection of this building. All previous efforts had 
met with comparative failure. We were aground. But 
that grand tidal wave of benevolence which swept over 
the united church in 1871, bore us on to success. That 
this aid came from God, is apparent from the reports of 
the Committee who had the Memorial Fund in charge. 
Enthusiastically had the General Assembly in Philadel- 
phia, in 1870, voted as a thank-offering, to be collected 
within a year, a fund of five millions. But ten and a 
half months passed away, and the Committee could only 
report part of one million contributed. Then it was 
that they went to God, and, in the striking language of 
their excellent chairman, gave all up to him, feeling that, 
if such was his will, they would gladly content them- 
selves with two or three millions. And then it was that 
God appeared in power and seemed to move the churches 
as by a common impulse. 

" How many here to-day remember that wonderful 
seven weeks when we raised more than $4,000, and the 
parent church ten times that sum. You will recall that 
the whole Presbyterian Church reported not five, but 
eight millions ; and with the two which the Committee 
felt were given to other objects then on account of it — 
even ten millions. Thus under God we have reason to 
trace the erection of this church to the influence of the 
reunion. 

" But this was only one out of many deliverances which 
He wrought at that time. Think what a work that re- 
union was. In the Old School branch there were some 

2,700 churches, and 250,000 members; in the New 

9 



i 7 4 ALL FOR CHRIST. 

School i, 800 churches, and 170,000 members. What a 
body to harmonize ! For more than thirty years they 
had been separated. The division had been felt not only 
in seminaries and in all educational and benevolent in- 
stitutions, but in the churches themselves. Often in the 
same little village two poor organizations would struggle 
for existence till their life seemed a living death. So 
bitter was the feeling and so great the obstacles to be 
overcome, that wise men on the Committee said that, 
while they were willing to work for the reunion, they 
never expected to see its consummation during their life- 
time. Think of the eight long years required to accom- 
plish the work, and we realize the numberless difficulties 
to be met. 

" There was one dark hour recorded which will illus- 
trate our obligations to Him who has given us all. The 
Committee had been striving for several days to arrive 
at some statement which should harmonize all minds ; 
but it seemed an utter impossibility. They separated 
for three or four hours for refreshment and rest, feeling 
that when they came together again it would be to de- 
cide that no way to union now seemed attainable. Dr. 
Gurley (who died soon afterwards) went away not to 
rest, but to fast and pray, and while in prayer the Gurley 
Amendment, so called, came to him. The Committee 
met, and with joyful surprise found that it covered the 
case. So again we were saved. 

" But the hand of our God is seen even more strikingly 
in the removal of American slavery. Dr. Adams, in his 
interesting article on the reunion remarks, that slavery, 



THE OLD AND THE NEW. 175 

as it caused the war, had also much to do with the divis- 
ion of the Presbyterian Church. This was not generally 
recognized in public debate. But large ships are turned 
about by that plank which is out of sight beneath the 
water. The entire extinction of slavery has been among 
the many causes which has made reunion more possible 
and more certain. What occasion for joy have we then 
to-day, as we feel that this beautiful building becomes a 
memorial of the extinction of American slavery, the 
foulest blot that ever rested on the fair name of our be- 
loved land. May the lesson of those long years of suf- 
fering endured by the negro, and of the fearful four years 
of civil war, with all their sacrifices of treasure and blood, 
never pass from our minds. May it help to make sin 
more exceeding hateful. May it enable us to realize 
that the putting away of one sin will lead to the removal 
of a thousand other evils, and open the door to number- 
less blessings which perhaps otherwise we never could 
have seen. 

"Asa church we owe profound gratitude to God for 
permitting us in his providence to occupy so honorable 
a position in consummating this work. Dr. Adams was 
very unexpectedly called to take a leading position as 
chairman of the Reunion Committee. Here his wisdom 
and rare judgment did much to bring about the best re- 
sults. The memorial says that his speeches at New 
York and Pittsburg contributed most powerfully to the 
conviction which seemed finally to become unanimous, 
that reunion was safe and right and most glorifying to 
God. So distinguished were his services that some have 



176 ALL FOR CHRIST. 

felt that we might depart from the usual custom, and 
rear this memorial to his honor, even while he is still 
with us. But we know that this would not be his desire, 
and that he would rather say in the words of the Psalm- 
ist, ' Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy 
name give glory, for thy mercy and for thy truth's sake.' 
How fitting however it was that the church which 
through God's providence has been so signally honored, 
should bring the largest memorial offering and lay it 
down at Jesus' feet. Of the four thousand churches of 
our body, the Madison Square contributed the greatest 
amount, obtaining over $182,000, (one hundred and 
eighty-two thousand dollars). ... 

" May this building then remind us of God's goodness 
in securing (1) the Reunion, (2) the Extinction of Sla- 
very, and (3) that Generosity which resulted in so many 
blessed fruits both at home and abroad. 

"II. In the second place these stones are a memorial 
of the itnited efforts put forth by the two branches of our 
own church towards securing the erection of this edifice. 

"We are reminded first of all of an eventful evening 
in October, 1867. During the previous week I had at- 
tended a meeting of the American Board, and my heart 
had been stirred by the loving sacrifices of the converts 
from heathenism — especially the work done by the poor 
churches connected with the Harpoot Mission, which 
led me to inquire if I was encouraging my people to do 
all that they could. If those, whose means were as noth- 
ing compared with ours, could do so much, should not we 
be ashamed to do so little ? That night I told you the 



THE OLD AND THE NEW. 177 

story of what I had seen and heard as. best I could. 
You were greatly interested. But when I asked if you 
were ready to practically apply the lesson, if each one 
would undertake the next three years to do your best to 
raise $10,000 towards a new building, you were some- 
what staggered, and I do not wonder. This was over 
$3,000 a year, and we had never raised more than one- 
half that sum in the same length of time. 

" But each one was asked to give only as the Lord 
blessed, and to give not for your pastor's sake, but to 
God himself, and for Christ's glory. Then we united in 
silent prayer. Then came the moment on which the 
existence of this building under God depended. I shall 
never forget that moment. Would you assume this bur- 
den, or not ? Nor shall I ever forget that rising vote. 
No man waited for his neighbor, no man looked right or 
left ; but, as if moved by one spirit, every member of our 
church, I think, and almost every member of the congre- 
gation arose. It was a glorious moment in our history, 
and these stones are its memorial here. What memorial 
God hath made of it above, eternity will reveal. 

" In the first year you raised the sum called for, and 
I doubt not the third year would have seen the amount 
required, had it not become evident that the new church 
would not then be built. At the end of three years, 
however, we had $6,000 in bank. 

" The following spring witnessed our extraordinary 
efforts to secure the Memorial Fund. Then you were 
asked to raised $4,000 in seven weeks. Could you pos- 
sibly do it ? . . . . Some gave fifty cents, some two dol- 



178 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

lars, some five, twenty-five, fifty, one hundred, two hun- 
dren, two hundred and twenty-five even ; and at the end 
of the time allotted more than $3,000 were paid in, and 
a conditional offer made the sum more than $4,000. Ah ! 
those were days of prayer and sacrifice ! Who of us 
that had a share in that work will ever forget what zeal, 
enthusiasm, and devotion to the Lord, characterized it 
from the first. Some gave their souvenirs of better 
days. Some sold their jewelry and keepsakes. Some 
promised money, and knew not where the work was to 
be found by which it could be secured. They prayed 
for work, and it came ; and their pledges given in faith 
were redeemed. It is a remarkable fact that out of 
hundreds of subscriptions, only between twenty or thirty 
remained unpaid at the end of seven weeks. 

"That $10,000 put at interest, became $12,000; and 
these stones are for a memorial. They show what this 
church, through God's blessing, has done in the past, 
and what therefore we have reason to believe we can do 
in the future. 

" These stones too are a beautiful memorial of the 
generous spirit which has ever ruled among our brethren 
at the Madison Square Church toward those who meet 
at Third avenue. From the beginning, twenty years 
ago, they have shown the most liberal spirit toward this 
work. But when we came to the memorial collection 
for the erection of this building, an event occurred which 
is not to be forgotten to-day. Instead of giving by col- 
lection or subscription as is their custom, they made it 
a Freewill Offering. In accordance with the sugges- 



THE OLD AND THE NEW. 179 

tion of their pastor, each donor sent an envelope con- 
taining his contribution. ... It was snowing as he 
make the request ; and with his wonted felicity of lan- 
guage, Dr. Adams suggested that their offerings should 
come into his house even as the snowflakes were then 
falling upon the earth. Thence came the name of 
' Snowflake Offering,' which was given to that noble gift 
of $40,000. 

" It is one of my greatest joys connected with this 
building to recall that it is built entirely of freewill offer- 
ings. There never has been a collection or subscription 
in either church for this purpose. And when I remem- 
ber how God loves these freewill offerings, and rejoices 
in a cheerful giver, and what promises he has associated 
with them in his word, I can but hope for unwonted 
blessings to connect themselves with this House of 
Praise. There was another feature of this ' Snowflake 
Offering' which was especially pleasing. In looking 
over the record we find the children associated with the 
parents in this work, and even the very youngest of the 
family have participated in the gift. May we not hope 
that this may prove a beautiful augury that the children 
will retain the same loving interest in this work in the 
future which their parents have shown in the past and 
in the present. . . . 

" But it is not these stones alone which are a memo- 
rial. I am surrounded to-day with other offerings, each of 
which is fragrant with pleasant memories. Permit me to 
speak of two or three. Here is a small Bible ; and yet 
to me it is most precious. S ven years ago next month 



iSo ALL FOR CHRLST. 

an aged mother in our church lay dying. She was poor 
in this world's goods but full of faith and love. . . . She 
bade her son take a little roll out of her trunk. It con- 
tained four silver half dollars — his Christmas present to 
her. . . ' Give this to the new church,' she said, ' when I 
am gone.' Seven years have I kept that money sacred. 
Last week those silver half-dollars were exchanged for 
this book. Thus, though dead, she yet speaketh through 
the best of books for her Lord and Saviour on earth, 
whom she is loving and adoring in heaven. 

" This platform and all the furnishing of this pulpit 
remind us of the efforts of our Bible-class. Ten months 
ago they began their good work, and, by many a sacrifice, 
have been enabled, not only to provide these things, but 
to make their own room so inviting, that almost every 
visitor seeks it out, though it is on the upper floor of this 
building. I allude to this with the more pleasure, be- 
cause this effort has brought with it so many other bless- 
ings. It has made these young men to know and love 
each other. A year ago they scarcely knew each others' 
names. It has told them how much forty young men 
can do, when there is united purpose. Shall we not all 
pray that the lesson they have now learned of the bless- 
ings of giving may be sanctified to them in all the future ? 
May this church and the cause of Christ throughout the 
world long be blessed through the gifts and efforts of 
those young men, who in a single year have secured 
probably not less than seven hundred dollars. May their 
example stimulate others to nobler deeds and loftier 
purposes. 



THE OLD AND THE NEW. iSi 

" In a few days we expect to see a beautiful clock 
placed in this room to be called 'The Children's Clock,' 
since largely through their efforts it has been secured for 
the church 

" But I must not forget one other memorial to-day — 
those cushions, which add so much to the cheerfulness 
and comfort of the room. They are the results of one of 
the most pleasant works ever undertaken in this church — 
our Fair of last December. Many of you like myself 
were opposed to fairs ; but we found that it was possible 
to conduct even a fair upon Christian principles. How 
many with busy hands were at work all summer through ? 
Young and old, weak and strong, alike labored, and 
many, if not all, as they labored prayed. How much 
enthusiasm, what zeal and brotherly love were stimulated 
by it. How many pleasant acquaintances were made : 
how much of kindly feeling on the part of our neighbors 
found expression. A divine benediction seemed to rest 
upon it, and the results — eighteen hundred dollars — have 
been a wonder to us all. It only shows how much can 
be accomplished in any congregation when each one 
willingly does a part, no matter how little. . . . The 
building and furniture have cost not far from sixty thou- 
sand dollars ; the land fifteen thousand ; some fifteen 
thousand- are yet to be provided for " 



Mr. Payson concluded his discourse by unfolding and 

enlarging upon the following lessons, of which we have 

however, orfly this skeleton left : 

16 



1 82 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

"Lessons, i. We see how strong, under God, united 
effort for a definite purpose becomes. 

" 2. That the highest joys and blessings here are those 
for which we have toiled and sacrificed ourselves. 

" 3. That the same God who guided the church for six 
thousand years is with us. Oh ' remember that dark 
Friday eighteen centuries ago when Christ travailed in 
soul. He shall see the result and be satisfied. May we 
travail with him here and rejoice there for ever." 

In the providence of God it proved that Mr. Payson's 
work was almost done when he entered this new build- 
ing with his flock. He was privileged to worship with 
them there scarcely two years, and then was taken from 
the midst of abundant usefulness and widely extending 
labors, in the fulness of life, with the best part of his 
ministry yet in prospect, and in the very prime and 
promise of his years, to worship in those other courts 
not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. But 

" Service there is rest, 
Rest, service : for the Paradise of saints, 
Like Eden with its toilless husbandry, 
Has many plants to tend, and flowers to twine, 
And fruit-trees in the garden of the soul 
That ask the culture of celestial skill." 



HOME LIFE. 183 

CHAPTER VIII. 

HOME LIFE AND PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS. 

There are a great many elements of character which 
can never be discovered in the forum or the street. They 
must be sought for in the quiet seclusion of the study or 
the drawingroom, an hour's frolic with the children, a 
summer's tramp in the woods, or the common routine of 
daily experience at home. 

The unselfish love which Mr. Payson cherished for 
those who in the providence of God were brought to be 
in any way dependent upon him, made him at all times a 
most dutiful son and a helpful and sympathizing brother. 
Speaking of his care and thoughtfulness of their widowed 
mother in her declining years, one of his sisters says : 

Most fond and proud his mother always was of this her eldest son. 
She being like him, warm-hearted, active, and energetic, their feelings were 
wholly congenial, and his annual visits to her home were occasions of 
much delight to both mother and son. What Charles thought, or said, or 
did, was always wise and right in her partial eyes, and during her eight 
years of widowhood she relied implicitly on his advice and judgment. He 
was indeed to her in every respect all that the eldest son should be to a 
widowed mother. 

We younger brothers and sisters (she continues) looked up to Charles, 
our eldest brother, especially after he entered college, as to an oracle ; and 
when older grown, numberless have been the occasions when we have 
sought his kind advice or sympathy, and found it to.be just what we 
needed. Going to him with burdened hearts, the cordial grasp of his 
hand and his cheerful words of welcome lightened our burden at once; 
and with this energetic older brother to aid us in our various plans and 
undertakings, we almost felt that there was no such word as fail. He had 



1 84 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

such strong faith, and prayed so earnestly, that I have often been glad- 
dened to know he was praying for me. I hope his supplications will not 
cease now that he is gone from earth. 

In a note dated January 3, 1855, he says : 

My Dear Sister: I wanted to write that "long letter" you asked 
for, so that you should receive it New Year's, but, as usual, was too busy. 
I see from the tone of your last that you are in what might be called the 
desperate part of the moulting period. You feel as though you cared for 
no one, and no one cared for you ; that you are of no use to the world, 
and the sooner you are out of it the happier you would be. You look 
upon every one as a critic, and while you would like a kind friend, you 
wish others to make all the advances. Every word and move is construed, 
if possible, to your disadvantage. In fact, you feel generally miserable. 

Now, my dear sister, while I pity, do n't think I shall give you one 
encouraging word. I know just where you are, I think.- I have been 
through the same battle, and know that every one must fight it for himself 
some time. You have fought it younger than most ; but I think I can see 
a little clear sky in your case. You say that you '"are going to do just 
what is right, and let people do and say what they please." A capital 
resolution! And just as soon as, trusting in God, you can live it, you will 
be happy. Till then all the letters of consolation and the volumes of 
advice that could be bestowed will not benefit you a straw. So thinking, 
I shall now cease my homily and take up the news. . . . 

SepV. 6, 1859. 

My Dear Little Sis: I call you little, for I cannot realize that you 
have become so old. I can't make you more than seventeen, and I do really 
hope that my dear, cheerful, laughter-loving sister may always remain sweet 
seventeen at heart, even though her hair should in the lapse of time turn 
gray and her loving face be wrinkled with the cares of this busy world. 
You know as well as I the best charm to drive dark trouble away. Oh, is 
it not blessed to cast all our care on Him ! 

I was reading a sweet verse this morning, and I must tell it to you. 
It is in Psalm 38 : 9 : " Lord, all my desire is before thee." He is a happy 
man that can bring his every desire — all of them, and lay them down be- 
fore Jesus, and say, " Lord, thou knowest my every wish ; if it is best for 
me to have them, it will make them tenfold more precious because thou 
didst give them; and if thou seest that I shall be better without them, I 
am content, for thou art still my own, and in thee I am happy, though all 
else be removed." Let us, my dear sister, make the most of our precious 
religion, it is so full of joy. We can carry heaven in our hearts if we only 
will. Why, then, stay so far away from Him that is altogether lovely! 



HOME LIFE. 1S5 

You speak most affectingly your pathetic farewell, as though it was 
settled that I was to be married in four or five weeks. Spare your tears. 
It will be time to shed them when the direful event takes place, if at all, 
which seems extremely doubtful. Still, if my Father would send to me 
the " right one " to make my lonesome hours cheerful, to sympathize with 
me when I come in tired out — in fact, to make the solitary one a home, I 
should be very happy and very thankful ; and yet even this I can leave 
with him. Just when Thou pleasest. I have never been so happy as 
during this last year, and all because I have lived nearer to my Saviour 
than ever before. Keep your hand in his all the time, dearest, and you 
will always be happy. 

Forgive my long sermon, but my heart was full to-night, and I talked 
as I felt. I often think of you in your loneliness, and am very proud that 
I have such a dear, courageous sister, and one that is winning so many 
dear friends to herself and family by her energy and cheerful courage. 

Yours, CHARLIE. 

No. 113 Clinton Place, ) 
Sept. 6, 1859. i 

My Dear Mother, Sisters, and Brothers : I received your de- 
lightful package of letters to-day, and a happy morning I had studying 

them out. By the way, D , allow me to remark that a little lampblack 

or coal-dust would not injure the color of your ink. I was very sorry to 
learn of the serious illness of so many in Fayetteville. Do be very care- 
ful of yourselves, and especially of mother, as I feel very anxious about 
her delicate state of health. If any of you are seriously ill, inform me at 
once, for I can run home any time for a day for two, if it seems best. . . . 

Everything is only too encouraging in my work. I am almost afraid 
when I see God beginning to bless me ; I become instantly so proud, that 
I have to suffer fearfully in consequence. But he is very good. I never 
was happier, and hope I can leave everything in his hand to guide just as 
he wishes. Do pray for me. It is blessed to think you are prayed for. 

Let me hear soon, as I feel quite anxious in regard to the prevailing 
epidemic. Yours, 

CHARLIE. 

His eldest sister was called, in the providence of 
God, to labor as a foreign missionary in one of the open 
ports of China, and her departure to that field in 1868, 
and faithful labors for many years among the perishing 
millions of that heathen city, became the occasions of 



1 86 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

an active sympathy and prayerful interest which only 
death could change. 

"It has been sad work," he writes to a friend, "getting D 's 

things together — sometimes even solemn, as I thought we might never 
see her again, China is such a long way off. Still the thought comes at 
once, 'It is God's work, and when he calls, blessed are those who obey.' 
I hope none of our House will ever be Jonahs, refusing to do his holy 
will. China is such a grand field. There is so much that is thrilling in 
the thought of bringing that vast empire to know of Christ and his salva- 
tion." .... To herself he writes : " We think of you and pray for you 
often, hoping the dear Lord will use you to his glory and the good of 
souls. And we will be willing to say, ' Thy will, O God, be done.' " 

Nov. 17, 1868. 

My Dear Sister: We were very glad to hear from you yesterday, 
and to learn of your safety thus far. When I heard the windows shaking 
Saturday night, as I had not heard them shake for months, and thought 
that the wind was blowing directly on shore, I felt no little concern for 
your safety. Monday and Tuesday morning papers, were eagerly scanned 
for any news of the Arizona, and, I assure you, that time no news was 
good news. My seasickness for ten days in crossing the Atlantic enables 
me to appreciate your trouble ; I only think I had rather have it right 
sharp, as you did in the gale, than long drawn out to perfect weariness. 

You will be glad to know that our people remember you in their 

prayer-meetings. G says he was a little startled Sunday night to hear 

a young man in the prayer-meeting who had prayed for the church-offi- 
cers, exclaim, "But we would particularly remember the sister of our pas- 
tor, who has just left us for China." If it is startling, nevertheless it is 
most delightful to him who believes in prayer, to feel that others who 
love God and whom God loves, are presenting petitions in his or her be- 
half Your dear letters are a great comfort to us. Our people are 

deeply interested in them, and if there is any way in which you could 
wisely use $100 or $200 a year for the mission, I am sure it would be 
forthcoming. They have just sent an extra $100 to Mrs. Lloyd, of South 
Africa, making $260 for the year just ended. G has sent you a speci- 
men of our new Prayer Register, from which you will see you are remem- 
bered especially, every Tuesday I rejoice in God's goodness to 

you, inclining the hearts of your dear scholars to seek Christ. Our peo- 
ple prayed for them with much earnestness. It is remarkable that so 

large a proportion of them have shown such interest 

Ever yours, CHARLES. 



HOME LIFE. 187 

" Forgive me, my dear sister," he writes again, " if I seem neglectful 
ever. This is Monday, my rest-day. Yet I have a service at half-past 
eleven, and another at half past twelve. Presbytery meets at two o'clock, 

and I have an urgent invitation from Mrs. I to address a Woman's 

meeting this evening. . . . We have scattered 300 mite-boxes among our 
families, and have received some $200 in four months. I have asked the 
Sunday-school children to raise the money for the telescope you need. 
They gave me about $40 last Sabbath, and two months hence will bring 
their contributions again, so that I hope to forward the instrument to you 
before a great while." 

New York, 1876. 

My Dear D : How fast the weeks speed away ! until before we 

know it they have passed into months ! You know not how often I re- 
proach myself for permitting so many days to pass before I write you. 
There are two reasons for this, I think. In the first place, I have no fac- 
ulty as a letter-writer; and in the second, I feel as though (you are so far 
off) T must write a very long letter to make it worth while to write at all. 

Perhaps if I did not see your nice letters to G , I should write oftener, 

for the sake of getting hold of Foochow news. I was much pleased, as 
well as the rest of your friends, at the pluck with which you rescued your 
pictures from the "absorbing Chinee." We all laughed, and felt you 
needed no one to fight your battles 

Our new building is every week more homelike, and we all enjoy it. 
Our people have raised about $7,000 this year, and there is at present an 
excellent spirit among them. We are beginning to count the years and 
months before we can hope to see you. I trust you will have an assistant 
in training, so that you can leave without anxiety. 

With much love, yours, CHARLES. 

Mr. Payson's domestic life was as happy as his public 
life was useful. He was married August 6, 1861, to Miss 
Mary Lord Ely, eldest daughter of John Ely, Esq., of this 
city, who proved to him through all his remaining years 
a faithful and devoted wife. His children — of whom 
there were five, two boys and three girls — were as dear 
to him as the apple of his eye, for he was a man. of ar- 
dent affections ; and their early lives were blessed with 
the love of a father whose prayers for them each day at 



1 38 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

the family altar seemed to bear them up on eagle wings 
to the very shelter of the throne. 

His entire life at home was pervaded by the same 
spirit which made him among his people and in the 
church so tenderly beloved. In a letter to his sister, 
written January 12, 1876, he says : 

It often seems to me that it is not so much /or what we do that God 
gives us work here, as to.see what sort of characters we shall develop in 
these duties ; nay, rather, what spiritual wealth we may gather in and 
through them ; and I do hope that all your trials of loneliness and care 
may make you very rich to all eternity. 

Under the influence of this belief his domestic life 
was continually illumined by the cheerfulness of a sunny 
faith which, as one of his most intimate friends once said, 
"resolutely looked at everything in a bright light, and nei- 
ther foreboded evil nor imputed it to others." His coming 
home was to his children like a burst of sunshine. The 
evening which he always spent with them, in fulfilment 
of his engagement with his people to be regularly " at 
home on Thursdays," was the happiest of the week. 
He usually had some story or game or interesting bit of 
information with which to amuse them, and the hour for 
retiring always came earlier in their judgment on that 
night than on any other. Nothing could attract or inter- 
est them in any degree as he did. 

By instinct and experience a teacher, he was fertile 
in devices by which to impart useful knowledge to them, 
while at the same time he was giving them diversion and 
amusement. One method which he chose was to have 
them each bring him, at breakfast, the name of a famil- 



HOME LIFE. 



iar object (as knife or chair or book) in all the different 
languages they could find. The object was agreed upon 
the day before at the breakfast-table, and he himself took 
part with them in the work and the sport. Each one was 
furnished with a book neatly ruled in six columns, for 
English, French, German, Latin, Greek, and "Various," 
by which was meant Dutch, Spanish, or Portuguese, as 
the case might be. The words were always printed, be- 
cause the youngest could not write ; and if the work was 
neatly done, at the end of the week each child received 
some slight reward. Following is an example of this 
exercise. 



ENGLISH. 


FRENCH. 


GERMAN. LATIN. 


GREEK. 


VARIOUS. 


HOUSE. 

DOOR. 

HALL. 


MAISON. 

PORTE. 

SALLE. 


HAUS. 
THOR. 
SAAL. 


DOMUS. 
PORTA. 
AULA. 


OIKOS. 

THURA. 

AULE. 


CAS A. 

PORTA. 

SALA. 



His children also greatly profited by his love of na- 
ture and science, especially of geology, of which he was 
very fond. He would call their attention to a common 
stone or flower, perhaps, and then, after reading a little 
from some book on the subject, which was far beyond 
their comprehension, would give them a simple lecture, 
explaining the laws of nature with apt and frequent illus- 
tration, and making it all so attractive that even older 
persons would stop and listen as interested as the chil- 
dren themselves. 

He seldom went away from home without writing 
them letters, of which the following illustrate the readi- 
ness with which he could adapt himself even to the 
youngest. 



Tuesday //IphhLng 

?aJ>cu- if f&£3 WAoait/ JbleetsetC tr get; you.t* ncee. 
\t£ter~T a,ftd know t/ou, do n6trto/*g(d Aim, /fe. wiH Aai-e, TT see* 
Cs" triti£r~f(o*veh Ae*t a,s Soon. <ts A&oets A/o»ie-~ 

WA&h. Jofi&s Wax u/ iru ike f»o octs tAzy iAcwedAun to ttttfe, 
ds-tcun. d Vtv &ul fitcddCe. or KiyJLaA^. "Two w ccAs o^go~c£^f 
S<X,\*- S'o)n&~&u.n£ SwipiftiLiiQ U\j i£t, MrcCfetzTAet/tiok, tfu^-ooeCts 
CLn.cC we-tCt afte-t~ cA: hn&t, thJLJf gof c2ase.tr it 6%.&u Jom^ It 
Was cu Jiea,h . Ate, could, hj>~C Aito^f tALefiis trv &ie~\rccfer> So 
they dit-orz. A//n en to the, Xstajid- Ofi^otct wcrfcA-etA &nx> 
Urncle, the oiAet- went AneAfo^ ihj^pun^ coixC ctcg- iVAteA^ 
/%eu Cdtoe-AacA the, ■J^Cd.^' Add yun, CrCtS thcAitsAes. TAedop 
f a-n, aft H)u.n\cL thuing "to find Acm . TA£,~i%rt /nasi went 
a-ft&r- Ac'm, o/it, Wttfl tft-e. gun ; &i<l. acnes- wi&T $t~on cs- wC/iZ 
cJiz&xi. At&tf> close Usl(fi youh- gu.fi soyoi(- Ccla. fail Ai»v (J 
/ie- Hen? after- ?n-L~,''Ae.s<uct. W/itfi. Ae, 7ooAt-ejd Aou,hjcL- /%£, 
iTL-CLru Aq,cL Hot sttA-leed //&. tve^s af/-£cd^.' TAe/t the, /na,ft^ 
titt-tri? a, sCf/j c aits' Afe. AusA.es. 7/u. fie&J* ycux> o iCtr //i£^, 
Aleut sAot aim w L(& me gun, Au-ir did hoir Aili Aiu?i* 
7Ae Sear- Ju.m/6-ed, cn-to' the, bade., /&, dog aftes-Acm. 

T/ie,mtft got into "ttf*. Jfo&t^tovv-ed, after Aon. s/iot- 
Ac/n a-ga.cn a/ict fttllccC A £>n ■ MAehs h? g«C aiet-t- tke.tj s/iew* 
<4cL /;;<. O/ie. of /ic$ gr-tut sAis.^6 cla.ws- 
AUtl Qi*. ^BaAu v £ctcfa <r tf&HiA *-/fJajrtA, *■ %'tre. sny love tTaiL 



HOME LIFE. 191 

Monday Morning. 

Dear Charlie and Sarah and Bess : It rains very hard to-day, 
so I will take time to tell my dear children what I have been doing. The 
cars took me by Mr. Brown's house, South Orange, and Morristown to 
Dover. There I took the Boonville cars. These are wide cars like the 
Erie's, and I had a very good seat. When I reached the Delaware river 
Mr. Jessup came into the cars. He told me all about the great river that 
runs in the deep gulf so far below. 

Then we rolled across a high bridge and passed into another state. 
Geography class! please tell me what state it was. Then we climbed up 
to the top of the Pocano mountains. Here was a great sawmill and thou- 
sands of huge logs belonging to Mr. Dodge of New York. A little be- 
yond we came to a large town named Scranton, where we got a lunch. 
Mr. Jessup left me pretty soon after at Montrose. It is up here that our 
coal comes from. They dig it out in big pieces, then put it into a kind of 
mill called a Breaker, which makes it of the sizes you see in the cars. At 
five o'clock I was at Binghamton. Tell mamma the first person almost 
that I saw was Mr. Joseph Ely. He wished me to come back and preach 

Sunday 

Then we rolled across the country to Syracuse. When I found that 
there was a train at nine o'clock to Manlius, I was very sorry I did not 
bring Sarah with me. Aunt Amelia was very glad to see me. Willie was 
so sorry Charlie did not come. He had a pony and rode him very nicely, 
"because he was seven years old and was strong." In the afternoon I 
took the cars to Auntie Lou's. Fanny was in bed, but wanted me to come 
and kiss her. Now, where are your letters ? Write soon. Give love to 
all, and a kiss to mamma and Eddy from 

Your own dear PAPA. 

Nothing touched him more deeply or gave him 
greater joy in all his intercourse with his children, than 
even the slightest evidence of their being drawn in any 
degree towards a Christian life. His daily prayers for 
them at the hour of "worship" were very remarkable. 
Each schoolboy temptation and childish want were re- 
membered at the throne of grace with a fervor and rev- 
erent familiarity of faith which seemed to plead that no 
want could be small in the sight of God which was a real 
want. His reference to the changing experiences of 



192 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

their daily lives — the separations, reunions, sorrows, joys, 
and providential blessings, which come and go perpetu- 
ally in life, was often most pathetic, so that even casual 
visitors who worshipped with the family were deeply 
moved and led to own the power of simple faith to make 
a Christian home the very house of God and gate of 
heaven. 

A marked characteristic of his daily life was prayerful- 
ness. " Every morning after breakfast, before begin- 
ning his studies for the day," writes Mrs. Payson, " he 
had an hour to himself for prayer and meditation which 
he never missed when at home. While he was ill, I read 
to him, at his request, from Bowen's Meditations* and a 
short passage from the Bible. From the time we were 
married I never knew of his having anything to decide 
that was of any importance that he did not ask me to 
pray with him. He always prayed over his sermons, and 
asked me, if I did not go to church, to remember him in 
prayer at home. He never went to any committee-meet- 
ing without praying with me, and I do not remember of 
our going out to make calls or visits together, especially 
if it were at a time when what he said might be of influ- 
ence to others in a religious life, that he did not ask me 
to pray with him. 

" He did not go out to his afternoon visiting among his 
own people without prayer, if only a moment or two in 
the study before leaving. He often took some one per- 
son and made him an especial subject of prayer. Such 

* His favorite book of devotion during the last years of his life. 



PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS. 193 

he would commonly remember at bedtime when we were 
alone. He would pray for any of those near to his heart 
either by ties of blood or friendship at our family morn- 
ing worship. I rejoice to remember how very often he 
has prayed with me in every trouble, and in every cause 
of thanksgiving, in our own especial cares and troubles 
as well as those of his dear people. And the same spirit 
of constant devotion made itself felt in all his relations 

to his friends. You recollect that when Mrs. M 

asked him to remember her sons at the Fulton St. Pray- 
er-meeting, he said to her, ' Why not here and now ?' 
So he then knelt with her, and she will never forget his 
earnest, loving petitions for her and hers. Often when 
anything came up that especially disturbed him he would 
spread it out before the Lord, and then as he said ' he 
would leave if, and not suffer himself to be wearied or 
troubled by it. I shall never forget the day he left us, 
how the same little grace was said over his cup of beef 
tea or glass of milk : ' God bless this food and may it 
give me strength to recover.' He desired to have the 
doctors prayed for as his friends, and to give them the 
assurance of his trust in their skill." 

His confidence in prayer was remarkable. Nothing 
that gave him any trouble was too small for him to spread 
before the Lord, and when he had done this he expected 

to receive an answer. Speaking of moving from O 

into the city he says : 

I do not know whether we shall get into the city this summer or not. 
Am trying to leave it all in our Father's hands. What a blessed thought 
that we are His lowed children, and that He so tenderly cares for us be- 

AU for Ctirlst. 1 *\ 



i 9 4 ALL FOR CLIRIST. 

cause we are his children, Joshua I : 7 to 9 has been a great comfort to 
me of late. Read it, and may God help you to be strong and of good cour- 
age. 

About the erection of his new chapel he writes, 
" Pray for us that God would send us the right place, the 
right building, and the right kind of people to fill the 
building." The architect, Mr. J. C. Cady, sends us the 
following reminiscence : 

Some three years ago, when the movement for building his new 
church was pressed forward, I had an appointment to meet the building 
committee and pastor, and for the first time exhibit the studies prepared 
for it. As they assembled there was some pleasant conversation on vari- 
ious topics, when finally one member said, " Well, I think it 's time we 
entered upon our evening's work ; suppose we have the portfolio opened 
and begin to consider the design." 

Before any movement was made Mr. Payson said very quietly, "I 
feel it is a very serious matter that we enter upon this evening. Shall we 
not look to our Heavenly Father for his divine guidance and wisdom ?" 
There was a general assent, when he offered a short, fervent, and perti- 
nent prayer. 

Although meeting frquently with church committees upon such busi- 
ness, I had never before met with one whose proceedings were opened in 
this proper and reasonable manner. Some time after, when the plans 
were drawing near completion, I met a mechanic — a member of Mr. Pay- 
son's church — with whom I was acquainted. Said he: "Mr. Payson 
prayed for you the other morning in church.'' " Prayed for me! What 
do you mean ?" said I. " Why he prayed that the Lord in his wisdom 
would bless and guide the mind and hand that were arranging and design- 
ing their new house of worship, that it might be to the glory of God and 
their own best advantage." 

Mr. Payson's religion pervaded his whole life, as these incidents 
illustrate. One could not be with him five minutes without feeling this, 
and realizing the genuineness and sincerity of his piety. 

Yours sincerely, J. CLEAVELAND CADY. 

In this connection may be also mentioned the follow- 
ing incident related by a member of his church, which 
illustrates the fact that religion not only pervaded all his 



PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS. 195 

life, but that it bore its natural fruits in a loving- and for- 
giving disposition. 

In the summer of 1872, while Mr. Payson and his family were 
absent from the city for a time, two boys of 16 or 18 years of age were 
seen to enter the basement of his residence and remain long enough to 
create suspicion. The police were notified, and upon opening the house 
found the two boys endeavoring to secure valuables. They were arrested 
and were believed to be in league with professional house-breakers. 

That same evening Mr. Payson returned to the city, and after 
attending the prayer-meeting invited me to spend the night with him. 

The earnest prayer he offered before retiring I shall never forget. 
He remembered his absent family most affectionately, and the church 
people in all their vicissitudes in life, and asked that God would bless 
them and cause all out of Christ to early seek his salvation. And then 
came the part of the prayer which impressed me most. He prayed God 
to forgive those boys that had sought to rob him, and to lead them out of 
darkness into his marvellous light, that they might be changed from their 
evil ways and that this experience might prove a great lesson to them and 
prevent their going on in sin. . . . 

Another incident is recalled by a friend in the follow- 
ing words : 

One of his church-members accidentally broke her looking-glass, 
the only one she had. Distressed at her loss, and, on account of her 
poverty unable to replace the article, she took her trouble in prayer to 
God. She had heard from the lips of her pastor of God's loving father- 
hood, and that although nothing was too great for his power, neither was 
anything too trivial for his notice. So she prayed in faith and very soon, 
the next day it may have been, the answer came. A wealthy gentleman 
having heard of the poor woman's loss, made her a present of the desired 
article. 

This gentleman meeting her pastor soon after, referred to the 
broken looking-glass and expressed some doubts as to the propriety of 
troubling the Lord with such a trifling matter. " But," said Mr. Payson, 
"it was no trifle to the poor woman. Her one mirror was perhaps as 
valuable in her estimation as a whole cargo of mirrors would be to you. 
And I think if you had a ship loaded with costly mirrors just nearing the 
harbor, and a fearful storm should arise driving the vessel out to sea, you 
would not think it out of place to ask God to preserve the vessel and its 
valuable freight." The gentleman's reply indicated that he should feel 
quite justified in offering prayer concerning an affair of such importance. 



196 ALL FOR CHRIST. 

This feature of his character, it should be said, greatly- 
affected his influence upon his people. Not only did it 
lead him in his pastoral visits to pray with and for them 
with an impassioned fervor and directness which enabled 
them to realize the divine sympathy, but it moulded all 
his intercourse with them, and especially his friendly 
counsels and advice. More than one has testified since 
his decease that throughout the seventeen years of his 
ministry, nothing impressed them so deeply as the uni- 
form earnestness and sincerity with which, after they 
had conferred with him about some doubt or trouble and 
he had given them sound advice, he would invariably 
add, " Now take the matter to the Lord. Lay it before 
him and ask what he would have you do. You cannot 
go astray if you are following his voice." 

Next to his prayerfulness should be mentioned the 
cheerfulness of Mr. Payson's life. The hearty enthusiasm 
with which he engaged in every good work for the Mas- 
ter was carried into games and recreations as well ; and 
in the dull routine of common life there was seldom 
found an hour when he could be surprised by his friends 
in anything like despondency. His cheerful faith in God 
was at all times sunlit and bright, gladdening his own 
personal experience and sweetening his intercourse with 
men. 

One secret of this, perhaps, is to be sought in the sin- 
gular purity of his character. Nothing impure ever se- 
cured a lodgment in his mind ; it was like a magnet, which 
draws the clean bits of shining metal from the heap of 



PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS. 197 

sand. He abhorred that which was evil. Obscene and 
vulgar things might come to his notice day by day, as 
they must come to every man engaged in work like his ; 
but no sooner were they met and recognized, than they 
were indignantly cast out of mind and heart with the 
same sort of repellant energy with which the pith-balls of 
an electric machine are touched and tossed. His lan- 
guage and conduct, as the mirrors of his thought, were 
pure. 

"Although," says a most intimate friend, "it was his 
lot to often see and know much that was vicious, he 
never was tainted by it. He was always distressed if a 
story or a joke were told in his hearing which would not 
bear the light of open day, and was not perfectly pure. 
This was very lovely in him ; it was like Christ. He was 
truly among those blessed ones who are ' pure in heart ;' 
' blessed, for they shall see God.' " 

The Rev. Thomas Street, formerly of this city, 
writes : 

My intimacy with him was very close ; but I never heard from him an 
expression which he would not have the whole world hear. Full of viva- 
city, sprightly, cheerful, ready to join in the heartiest merriment in the 
very boyishness of abandon, he never departed from the most delicate 
purity, nor would he tolerate it for a moment in others. He carried with 
him constantly the conviction of God's presence and his own accountabil- 
ity. " Lord, what wilt thou have me to do ?" was the question of his life, 
and to do God's will was his inflexible purpose. In this, if possible, he 
was morbidly conscientious. 

Such purity of mind must have its influence on the 
life. It leaves it sunlit, like the sky from which each 
earthly cloud is brushed away. And Mr. Payson's life 
was full of cheerfulness. 



i 9 3 ALL FOR CHRIST. 

"There was nothing long-faced or straight-laced about 
his religion," writes a sister ; "not the slightest tinge of 
melancholy. By nature cheerful and buoyant — more so, 
I think, than any of the family — he carried the same 
enviable disposition into his religion. But it was his 
strong faith and childlike confidence in his heavenly 
Father, inducing him to bring every trouble and anxiety 
of life to the Father's feet, and leave them there, which 
served, quite as much as did his natural temperament, to 
keep him so light-hearted and untroubled. There were 
assuredly very few days in all his ministry when he 
was not able heartily to respond to the words of the 
hymn, 

" Careful without care I am, 
Nor feel my happy toil, 
Kept in peace by Jesus' name, 

Supported by his smile ; 
Joyful thus my faith to show, 

I find his service my reward ; 
Every work I do below, 
I do it to the Lord." 

In a letter to one of his sisters, he says : 

There is a good deal of religious interest among our people. Our 
prayer-meetings have been well attended — indeed, better than ever before, 
and many are anxiously asking, " What must we do ?" On Monday last 
we had an important meeting of our Committee, in which they decided not 
to attempt the raising of the funds necessary for our chapel till times look 
more auspicious. I came home quite disheartened, and when I awoke 
the next morning and recalled the unwelcome decision, I hardly felt am- 
bition enough to dress. . . . But just then a little voice began to whis- 
per in my heart. I would not listen at first ; but it grew louder and 
stronger, till I could not but hear, and it said, " Why art thou cast down, 
O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me ? hope thou in God, 
for I shall yet praise him who is the health of my countenance and my 
God." I need hardly say, my dear sister, that with that precious word out 



PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS. 199 

of the wells of salvation my anxiety took wings, and I went forth to my 
duty to spend as happy a day as I have known in a long time. 

"On Christmas last," writes a member of his church, "we had the 
customary festival for the children. The writer was requested to see that 
the organ and pulpit were decorated with evergreens, and Mr. Payson was 
desirous that it should be done on Saturday evening to be ready for Sab- 
bath morning, as his sermon treated of Christmas, and Monday was Christ- 
mas day. The evergreens did not arrive, however, in time to admit of 
their being hung ; and when I sought Mr. Payson the next morning (Sab- 
bath) to explain to him the reason, with a heavenly light on his counte- 
nance he replied, ' It is all right. If the dear Lord wanted them, he would 
have arranged it so ; but as it appears he did not so ordain, it is just as 
well.' 

"To our dear pastor," he adds, "everything was right, when guided 
by the Lord ; and that Sabbath day was full of heavenly thoughts to me, 
caused by those few golden words about the evergreens." 

It appears from this fact that "little things" as well 
as great felt the impress of his cheerfulness. His whole 
life, indeed, was pervaded by the sentiment that that is 
an unpardonable conceit of men which makes them look 
upon some things as little in the sight of God which 
they call little, and that, if it pleases God to think of us 
at all, everything we care for is His care. So common 
life and trivial wants were touched and gladdened by his 
faith. ' 

He had a great love for nature too, which appeared at 
times to attain the strength of an absorbing passion. From 
childhood he was a most enthusiastic fisherman, and in 
summer vacations would roam for days together by the side 
of a little stream or mountain lake, delighted whenever 
he caught a " shiner " or " had a bite." He loved the wild 
woods, and the crags and peaks of rocky hills. Switzerland 
and the Tyrol remained an inspiration in his memory long 
after he had been among their peaks. And "camping 



200 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

out," whether among the streams and forests of his own 
free land, or in the barren, desolated plains of Palestine, 
became a mode of life congenial to his tastes and grate- 
ful to his love of nature. He was a welcome visitor in 
any camp of fishermen or hunters, entering heartily into 
all their sports, and never failing in such an intercourse 
with friends to leave the impress of a cheerful, sunny, glad, 
and buoyant faith, which sanctified whatever he might 
meet, and threw a halo over hours which sometimes are 
distained by rudeness or impurity. At the risk of a 
slight anticipation of the narrative, we cannot refrain 
from adding here the testimony of a friend and brother 
minister, the Rev. William J. Erdman of Chicago : 

My memories of him are peculiarly pleasant and delightsome. We 
always met in late years in a vacation among the hills and streams, until 
within four or five years past; and between enjoyment of nature and fel- 
lowship in divine experiences, our days were wont to pass in light and 
peace and deep mutual joy. 

A week we once spent among the hills of New Hampshire is espe- 
cially dear to memory. Other men might be remembered for some tran- 
sient experiences in such a vacation of a summer week; but his form 
and cheery laugh and springy step are for ever associated not only with 
wild hills, and cold, clear, mountain streams, and the peaceful meadows of 
the Connecticut, but far more with deep spiritual discourse on diviner 
things, and the great unseen world he now has entered. Hereafter, should 
I again revisit those scenes, I know how instinctively I shall recall his 
image and his words. An unseen form will move through light and 
shade, unspoken words will sound over running brooks and along the rude 
footpaths and sheepwalks of the hills, and a light that never shone on land 
or sea will illumine all. 

I speak of this, because at such times of freest fellowship, the best 
and brightest, the most true and real, comes to the light; and I can say of 
Charles Payson, I loved him. His self-denying work, continued perse- 
veringly, patiently for waiting years, found in me at least an appreciating 
admirer, and I rm glad to remember how I always spoke of him to others. 
And while writing these things I can hardly keep back my tears, for no 
death for years affects me so. 



PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS. 201 

These testimonies to his purity, his cheerfulness, his 
love of nature, and his trust in God, are witnesses that 
Christian principles do not depress or sadden human 
hearts, nor cast a gloom upon the daily life. The native 
charms of an affable and sympathetic nature, sobered by 
experience and disciplined by care, are none the less 
great when Christian faith and love and glad obedience 
to God have thrown their grace upon the character. 
Like clambering vines in autumn, crimsoned by frosts 
and glorified by age, these common principles of Chris- 
tian life make yet more beautiful what God in providence 
or nature may have made attractive in itself. And 
though it would not be denied that Mr. Payson's char- 
acter like that of every other man was incomplete, and 
unsymmetrical in parts, and certainly not " perfect " in 
the ideal sense, it is no less a truth that his experience 
confirms the teaching of the past that Christian virtues 
give an added beauty to a character which in its native 
traits is fortunate. 

A single word may well be added here concerning his 
free and generous hospitality. It was genuine. No one 
that ever stepped within his door and sat beside his 
well-filled board could think himself a stranger there 
again. There were a heartiness and a spontaneity about 
his conduct as a host which made one feel at home with 
him at once; and every resource of a well-stored mind 
and heart, as well as every comfort of the pastor's house, 
was freely placed at the disposal of his guests. For 
more than one, who had no special claims upon his 



202 ALL FOR CHRIST. 

thought or care, the cheerful welcome which he gave, 
and the kind intent which breathed through all his con- 
duct towards his guests, made the metropolis, which 
otherwise was drear and cold to them, a resting-place. 
There was one spot at least amid its thronging multi- 
tudes and stony streets, where kindliness of heart and 
courtesy and glad self-sacrifice for friends had thrown the 
charms of their attractiveness, and where the native good- 
ness of a generous man, and all his Christian though tf ill- 
ness, had made the atmosphere of home. 

His cheerfulness was just as marked a feature of his 
social life. Here, too, it was enkindling. It " melted 
the ice all out of the air." It dissipated coldness and 
formality. It made the scene a charming one for those 
who came within the influence of his words. And the 
secret of his power here, which was certainly far more 
than ordinary, is to be given perhaps in the word per- 
sonal. His social life was personal. He had no faculty 
at entertaining a whole roomful of guests at once. The 
grace and charm which have distinguished other men in 
such a sphere of influence as that, he did not have. 
But there was something engrossing about his way of 
conversing with a friend in society, so that for the time 
being the individual with whom he spoke was made to 
feel (what was most true) that for that interview at least, 
Charles Payson was thinking and living for him alone. 

His social gifts were magnetic. A fine enthusiasm 
pervaded all his intercourse with men. A short acquaint- 
ance with him would suffice to show that he had carried 
Christian principles and Christian motives of action into 



PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS. 203 

this more common but important sphere of life. A stran- 
ger soon discovered that 

"'Twas his ambition, generous and great, 
A life to life's great end to consecrate ;" 

and in that end as an essential past he placed unselfish 
love for man, which sought the good and happiness of 
all he met. His courtesy was real. The affectations of 
society he despised. He hated duplicity. What was 
merely "polite" but insincere, he could not tolerate. 
With all the indignant scorn of an honest heart he 
repudiated what society too often is quite willing to en- 
dorse. But what was generous and kind and true was 
sure to find a ready recognition in his heart. 

" With a fine presence and engaging manners," writes a friend, a 
member of his church, "he had the instincts of a gentleman, combined with 
culture and refined tastes. Few men had such a faculty of winning the 
esteem, confidence, and affection of others. He carried a full heart in an 
open hand. That soul must have been downcast indeed that did not find 
itself lightened and cheered by coming into contact with his warm and 
generous nature. He was peculiarly the friend of the poor, the erring, 
and the sorrowing. Many influential associations brought him into circles 
of affluence and social eminence, but his great joy was to be among the 
poor, and to go about like his Master doing good." 

His fondness for society was as great as his faculty 
for making others happy. He loved to be among his 
friends, and his readiness for forming new friendships 
which became at once "a part and parcel of his life," and 
remained a constant source of happiness, was quite as 
marked a feature of his character as the constancy with 
which he cherished them. A few days' visit at Edin- 
burgh in Scotland, where he rested from his journeying, 
sufficed to make of utter strangers there some of the 



2o 4 ALL FOR CLIRLST. 

warmest friends of his whole life. In Montreal, in To- 
ronto, in Glasgow, in Rome, in Cairo, in Damascus, the 
interview of a clay or two with Christian friends whom 
he there met for the first and only time, endeared him to 
their memories, and became a source of lasting pleasure 
to himself. In many a humble home, hidden among the 
hills and forests of our own land, where a summer's vaca- 
tion gave him intercourse with " common people," and 
rest or recreation for a day, his name is remembered still 
with undisguised affection. Everywhere, as has been 
said, "he carried a full heart in an open hand." His 
nature was transparent, and being pure and wholesome 
and affectionate, attracted men to love and honor him. 

The broad catholicity of spirit which tempered his 
public life should not be overlooked in any estimate of 
his character. He worked for men as men. He was a 
philanthropist in the grandest sense of that word — a 
Christian philanthropist. He loved all those who loved 
his Saviour's name or sought his Saviour's grace with a 
peculiar affection ; but he sought the good of every one 
he met with an honesty and directness of purpose which 
no man could deny. During the protracted meetings at 
the Hippodrome, held in 1 875 under the direction of Mr. 
Moody, he labored with an assiduity and devotion which 
were remarkable ; and several cases of peculiar difficulty 
among the inquirers — such as reformed inebriates — were 
intrusted to his special care. Strangers were attracted 
towards him by the kindliness of his manner and by his 
just consideration of the views of others who differed 



PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS. 205 

from him ; while his " energetic and often ardent way of 
presenting his own views upon any subject which he 
considered vital," impressed all those who heard him 
with his unmistakable sincerity. 

One of the members of his church thus speaks of her 
experience : 

If I had time I should like to tell you what he did for me, and I must 
tell you a little. After having been prayed and labored with for many 
years, and all to no purpose, except to make me more stubborn than ever, 
if possible, I happened (?) one Sunday evening to hear him at the Young 
Men's Christian Association. I had never seen or heard of him before, 
but he made such an impression upon me that I felt that I must see him 
and talk with him and ask him "what I should do to be saved." .... 
Consequently the next day I found his address in the Directory, and called 
upon him. I need not tell you how kindly he received me, nor can I tell 
you what he did for me, save that, humanly speaking, I feel that I owe 
my conversion to him. . . . After this I took a class in the Sunday-school, 
and generally remained to the morning service, which I enjoyed very 
much. 

Another, who was never a member of his church nor 
in any way connected with his work, writes from Italy, 
after receiving the news of his decease, as follows : 

Ever since I first knew Mr. Payson, I felt I could talk with him as I 
never have been able to do with my own pastor, and so I used often and 
often to speak to him as my pastor, for he had made plain to me some 
dark places; and that winter when I was sick in New York he did more 
to help me to be patient than any other friend. The memory of those 
visits to my room are very precious, when, from his own nearness to the 
Saviour, he made me almost to feel the presence of Jesus in my sick- 
room, and I used to think, after one of these visits, that I bad been on 
holy ground. 

Speaking of his success in the work to which he gave 
his life, a brother minister writes to " The Evangelist" : 

The secret of it is not hard to find ; it was the enthusiastic devotion 
of his whole being to the field where the Master had placed him, and his 

18 



2o6 ALL FOR CLLRLST. 

implicit reliance upon the presence and the power of the Holy Spirit. The 
same characteristic that fitted him so well for the special work in which 
he was engaged greatly endeared him to all who knew him. 

Charles Payson was as honest, as truthful, as transparent, as it is pos- 
sible for a man to be. He never reached his ends by side movements, by 
concealment, by finesse. Every one might freely know just what he thought 
upon any subject, and exactly what he wished to do. He did not hesitate 
to lay bare his heart, and he never dreamed that such frankness could give 
offence, and it very rarely did. 

He was a very enthusiastic, and at times impulsive man. This gave 
him force at all times and in every undertaking. He gave himself wholly 
to everything that he had to do. It was remarked by a friend, at his fune- 
ral, that he made less distinction than most men between great things and 
little. Nothing to him was a little thing if it was in the line of duty. . . . 

Above all, it is to be said that every power of mind, body, and soul, 
was consecrated to the service of the Master. The grand characteristic 
of his life was his personal piety. Every question was looked at with ref- 
erence to his duty as a servant of God. In conversation this thought was 
always manifest; in debate the subject was considered with reference to 
its bearings upon personal duty ; in his public addresses there was always 
the same earnest enforcement of complete submission to the will of God. 
It was this characteristic that gave him personal influence with all his com- 
panions, that explained the power" of his preaching, and that made his 
own life peaceful and happy. It was this same complete submission to 
God's will, and unquestioning faith in the Divine love, that took away all 
fear of death, and enabled him with perfect confidence to leave his people 
whom he loved, and the family that clung to him, to the care of Him who 
doeth all things well. 

Another friend, a member of his church, says : He believed that " the 
Gospel should be preached to the poor," and to this end he did not shrink 
from any labor. The visiting among them he did not delegate to others ; 
he went among them himself, visiting in their humble and wretched homes, 
and carrying the light of his own beaming presence into many dark places. 
For twenty years he had made the subject of City Missions his earnest 
study, and had become so familiar with all its aspects that hardly any de- 
tail escaped his notice. Hence his counsels in Session and Presbytery 
were always valuable. In his speech and in his action he had almost a 
boyish enthusiasm. This, however, was balanced by such solid and dis- 
creet judgment, that his opinion carried weight with men much older than 
himself. In discussion he proved a man of positive convictions, yet stu- 
diously tolerant and even tender towards brethren whose opinions con- 
strained dissent. 



PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS. 207 

The Rev. Thomas Street, formerly of this city, in a 
letter to his brother, dated January 25, 1877, pays the 
following tribute of affection to his memory : 

In my ministry of over thirty years I can scarcely recall an acquaint- 
ance whose memory is so full of pleasure and profit to me as his. He 
was so pure, so strong in Christian qualities, and so simple-minded. He 
had a wonderful comprehension of the Scriptures. He would, as by intu- 
ition, strike the very heart of its meaning. I have had from him some 
remarkable revelations of beauty and power in his impromptu exegeses 
which I shall never forget. They were the result of that good common 
sense which strongly characterized the whole man. He always touched 
the spiritual key, opening up rich harmonies of divine tenderness. He 
not only loved, but venerated the word of God. He never questioned the 
possibility of inspiration. " Thus saith the Lord " sounded all through 
his studies of the Book. It was God speaking to his inmost soul. 

I said he was simple-minded. He was a child in this regard — a child 
in full companionship with his Father. His faith was absolute. No one 
could hear him pray without feeling that he was wholly absorbed with the 
presence of God. His prayers reminded me of the pleading of Abraham 
in behalf of Sodom. They were familiar without being irreverent, confi- 
dent without presumption. His earnestness was specially marked when 
ho bore upon his heart the church of which he was pastor, which he so 
dearly loved, and of which he was so justly proud. Many times have I 
bowed with him in the little room adjoining his chapel in Third avenue, 
and felt that his faith was literally the evidence of things not seen as yet, 
while he poured forth his soul in yearning for his precious flock. . . . 

In giving he was generous to a fault. In working he was untiring. 
In preaching, in revival and Sabbath-school labor, in the Temperance and 
other reforms, he threw his whole force, and in everything he was manly. 
In the pulpit and out of it he never lost his manhood. His splendid phy- 
sique was typical of his character. He utterly despised the conventional 
effeminacy of the pulpit. Broad, liberal, decided in his Christian views, 
he expressed them clearly, fearlessly, and manfully. His sincerity, his 
honesty, his entire consecration to his work, the evident purity and nobil- 
ity of his purpose, gave him a hold upon all who knew and heard him 
that never relaxed. 

I write these words to you, my dear brother, from my honest convic- 
tion of his worth and from the warm love I bore him. If Charles had 
been permitted to live I believe he would have attained the highest posi- 
tion of responsibility and usefulness within the gift of the church, for he 
had in his character all the elements of the grandest results. 



2o8 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

The following appreciative words are from a member 
of the Memorial chapel : 

Although my infirmity of hearing denied me the privilege of listening 
to Mr. Payson on the Sabbath, I have had, through weekly reports of 
members of my family, a good account both of the manner and matter of 
his discourses. I always had the conviction that he wielded no little power 
in the pulpit. His manner was reverential, highly nervous, and often im- 
passioned. His style was lucid and familiar, and no one ever thought him 
perfunctory in the pulpit, or indeed elsewhere. Sometimes there were 
flashes of irony or sarcasm, which, although not inconsistent with a proper 
humility and warm affections, might, I feared, give a stranger reason to 
think him less amiable than every one else knew him to be. He was a 
diligent student of the Word, and unfolded its truths in the spirit of one 
who had himself been taught by the Great Teacher, and held a great com- 
mission from his Master. He attached little importance to those aspects 
of truth which are non-essential to salvation and Christian culture, and 
which only remotely touch Christian obligation. Whatever value such 
truths may have in the schools, he deemed the discussion of them unsuit- 
able for his people. Hence, when he saw the impenitent and ignorant 
perishing around him, he had no time or taste for the subtleties of the- 
ology. 

I well remember once asking him if he had read a work of a polem- 
ical character which had interested me, and seemed an important treatise 
for both ministers and laymen. The terms of his reply I cannot recall, 
but I shall not forget the spirit in which he deprecated the controversies 
which, in his judgment, promised no good results, fomented strife among 
brethren of a common faith and hope, and paralyzed Christian labors. . . . 
He ever felt, what Paul taught the Corinthians, that "knowledge," of a 
certain kind "puffeth up," but Christian "charity" or love "buildeth up;" 
that, " intellectually, we can know little of God, and that Christian knowl- 
edge is this : to know by love." He felt, in all the intensity of his large 
emotional nature, that he must preach Christ, the wisdom of God — through 
his atoning death, our righteousness; through his Spirit, our sanctifier; 
and in his spotless example, our model. And so our pastor handled the 
word of God, and preached to every man's conscience, as one who had felt 
in his own soul its power and grace. 

I suppose few pastors ever had the wonderful versatility of gifts which 
in the last century were conferred on John F. Oberlin, and, together with 
rare Christian graces, were all consecrated to the instruction and guidance 
of that little flock near Strasburg. His life and labors among the humble 
peasantry not only made the hamlet of Waldback famous, but have made 



PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS. 209 

his name the theme of admiration and delight in far distant lands. Our 
pastor had so much healthy common sense, and such a fund of resources 
at command for the benefit of those Mr. Lincoln termed "plain people," 
that I have often thought of Oberlin when observing how easily his flexi- 
ble character and faculties could meet their various wants. It would be 
untrue or extravagant to say that he had Oberlin's almost intuitive knowl- 
edge about education, medicine, and surgery, the construction of good 
highways and strong bridges, the processes of agriculture, and of almost 
all secular business, which made him so invaluable as adviser and helper ; 
but I am convinced that the same circumstances and exigencies would 
have developed in Mr. Payson in large degree the same executive powers 
and fitness as a leader for the masses. He seemed always to have what I 
must term the knack of being helpful to poor, distressed, and discouraged 
people, in just the times when assistance was most needed, and in the 
ways where it was most valuable. In our own chapel his brain was ever 
teeming with plans for their relief and support ; and all were so wholesome 
and practical, resulting from a fertile common sense and sound judgment, 
that the manhood and self-respect of beneficiaries were guarded and en- 
couraged, and almost never forfeited. His whole nature seemed a foun- 
tain of active kindness, bubbling up and running over in quick, warm, and 
active sympathies for dependent and suffering humanity. It seemed 
almost a conviction with him that he must endure in his own life and ex- 
perience every circumstance of privation, discomfort, and sorrow which 
befell this flock of Christ over which he was the under-shepherd. No 
ease or self-indulgence stood in the way of his taking inventory of their 
material and spiritual wants. These known, " he remembered the forgot- 
ten;" he visited and relieved the widow and fatherless ; his cheery tones 
made a cordial for the despondent ; he hastened to counsel and bring 
back the erring one, to pray with the sick, to clear the way of obstacles 
from before the weak, and to lift up those who but for his kind sympathy 
had despaired of help from themselves, from others, or from God. . . . He 
knew in a measure unknown to most of Christ's professed followers the 
burden which weighed down One of whom the prophetic historian wrote, 
" Surely he hath borne our griefs and carried our sorrows ;" and this great 
burden he assumed and carried bravely, resolutely, even joyfully, through 
the constraining love of his Master.* 

I well remember my first interview with him, in 1862. He then im- 
pressed me as having, with a becoming clerical dignity, a most genial and 

* His deep interest in the welfare of his church was shown by the fact that out of a 
total membership of nearly 700, he knew where all but four could be found, and what 
their new relations were if they had changed their residence. He was greatly indebted 
in this matter to the invaluable aid of his associates in Christian work. 



2io ALL FOR CHRLST. 

amiable temper, and he seemed at that time, as he ever afterward proved 
to be, the most accessible of men. His fine magnetism was electric, and 
operated stronger than argument in making him at once attractive and 
never repellent. Very soon after an introduction one felt that he had 
made a personal friend in Mr. Payson's acquaintance — that the good man 
was interested in him, although a stranger. He soon learned that he was 
a true man, and, without cant or ostentation, an advanced Christian, and 
that the name, person, and work of Christ were engaging themes, stirring 
to its depths a heart full of Christian and human sympathies. He knew 
that the man before him believed life to be real and earnest, and that with 
heroic ardor he was sharing its labors and conflicts — a man who, like 
Nehemiah, was doing a great work, and could not come down to the trifles 
and baubles of the hour. More than this, he evinced by word or manner, 
or both, that he earnestly desired that his visitor should be engaged in the 
work of carrying up the temple of God in his own heart, and in restoring 
the moral wastes around him. And all this seemed the ordinary life-work 
of a man without vainglory or hunger for applause, or the consciousness 
of doing more than other laborers in the Master's vineyard. He seemed 
conscious only of remembering and obeying the injunction, " Whatsoever 
ye do, do it heartily as to the Lord." . . . 

One living a life so consecrated to God and Christ, and so full of love 
for man, is always ready for death, and at the end of forty-five years has 
lived long, because he has lived to make existence noble. Our pastor 
was true to God and for God. His life was spent in loving loyal service 
for the Master, and he loved his race with a breadth and ardor that proved 
that he felt debtor to all who bore the name of man. And being dead, his 
works do follow him. 

" Thy works and alms, and all thy good endeavor, 
Stayed not behind, nor in the grave were trod, 
But as faith pointed with her golden rod, 

Followed thee up to joy and bliss for ever." A . 

It need hardly be added that the influence of such a 
man upon the people of his charge was very great. 
They loved him, To-day they mourn for him as for a 
friend — a personal friend — in many cases as for a father 
or a brother. His whole soul had gone out towards them 
and he had become almost identified with their lives. 



PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS. 211 

"In imitation of his Master," as has been truly said, "he 
aimost literally 'himself took their infirmities and bare 
their sins.' " To him they came for counsel and sympa- 
thy, not only in spiritual things, but in temporal anxieties 
and fears. Said a member of his church, as she spoke of 
him with tears running down her cheeks, " For ten years 
I have gone to him with every trouble !" What wonder 
that he was tenderly beloved ? 

When he went abroad to Palestine, in 1873, and it 
was discovered just on the eve of his departure that he 
was himself to defray the expenses of the journey and 
also of supplying the pulpit during his absence, this poor 
people, who were compelled as a rule to live by the day, 
immediately raised $200 to relieve him of the burden of 
supply. One good woman on whom the committee 
called — the widowed mother of a large family of children, 
all of whom have joined this church — was just leaving 
her room to purchase the meat for dinner, when the 
question was asked, " Can you afford to give us anything 
to help supply the pulpit while Mr. Payson is in Pales- 
tine ?" " Yes," she replied at once, " I will give you the 
fifty cents I was about to spend for dinner. We can go 
without our meat well enough if it will only help to raise 
this sum." And it may be added that $200 contributed 
in this way measures a vast amount of genuine affection 
and very strong attachment. 

It was said by the members of the delegation that 
waited upon the Chapel Committee of the parent church 
in 1870, when Mr. Payson's resignation was accepted, 
that so great was their love for him that fully two-thirds, 



2i2 ALL FOR CHRIST. 

if not more, of the people would have followed him to 
another church if he had been compelled to leave. 

And to-day in many a happy home whose Christian 
principles and faithful service of the Lord have been es- 
tablished by his life, the mention of his name will bring 
the instant hush of sorrow; and the softening tone and 
tearful eyes of such as mourn "in hope " reveal the depth 
and strength and genuine worth of that affection which 
a Christian pastor wins. 



THE LAST DA 1 r S. 2 1 3 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE LAST DAYS. 
" ' Death has made his darkness beautiful with thee.' 

" Thinking of our dear brother sleeping sweetly now 
and dreamlessly beneath the violet-sprinkled sods of 
spring, the sentence quoted above seems to be just the 
one to describe what his life and death were like. . . God 
has a plan for every one of us, and I am not vain enough 
to imagine that I know better than He what is best for 
me, or what was best for that dear brother. He was 
needed in heaven or he would not have been called up 
there. Perhaps there was work up there which had been 
waiting for him from his earliest days, and God had been 
preparing him all these forty-five years to engage in that 
work. 

" ' So many worlds ! so much to clo ! 

How know I what had need of thee ? 

For thou wert strong as thou wert true.' '' 

Such were the thoughts with which an absent sister 
endeavored to console herself and others in view of the 
affliction to which they were unexpectedly called by the 
sudden decease of Mr. Payson. His work was ended here 
abruptly, in the full prime of manhood and by a brief and 
fatal illness which no physician's skill could stay ; but it 
is continued in another world beyond, as we have reason 
to believe, almost as it was interrupted, in the praise and 



2i4 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

adoration of a Saviour's love. Few Christian ministers 
even have been privileged to say with greater truth, 
"When I go down to the grave I can say like many 
others, ' I have finished my day's work,' but I cannot say 
I have finished my life. My day's work will begin the 
next morning. The grave closes on the twilight to open 
with the dawn." In a letter dated Sept. 24, 1872, Mr. 
Payson writes: 

My Dear Brother : Here we are high up on the hills of old Lyme 

at the beautiful home of Mrs. E , in sight of the old church where 

father preached in 1838-40, and of the valley where I went to school. 
There, opposite, are Essex and Old Saybrook, and the lighthouse, and the 
Point where I lived so many other weeks, all full of pleasant memories 
that come trooping across my mind as each peculiar scene passes before 
me. As I look, they bring to my mind that passage in Stanley's Egypt 
where he tells of the tombs of the kings with their many chambers, on 
whose walls are pictured the mementoes of each monarch's life, so that 
when he wakes he shall be in the midst of the scenes in which he lived. 

Will it not be one of the joys of heaven to sweep the horizon of 
memory, and pass once and again and again through vistas made inex- 
pressibly beautiful by the associations of life ? Oh what a place will heav- 
en be, with all that is lovely, and noble, and grand, of old earth, the glory 
of the nations brought in and all the vile and bad and deceiving left out 
for ever and ever ! 

The last public service in the chapel at which Mr. 
Payson officiated was the sacrament of the Lord's Supper. 
Upon the evening of January 7, 1877, he gathered his 
beloved people for the last time before the communion 
table of the Lord, and there spoke to them of the Saviour's 
love with all his accustomed fervor and pathos. Neither 
he nor they had then any thought of the sad separation 
which was so soon to follow, and they now recall his 
words on that occasion with peculiar gratitude that in the 
kind providence of God they were permitted to sit down 



THE LAST DAYS. 215 

with him at this last interview in "heavenly places in 
Christ Jesus." He dwelt upon the theme of the Saviour's 
love most fondly, in his own warm, earnest, happy way, 
pleading tenderly and eloquently for the blessed Redeem- 
er, and urging the acceptance of His grace by souls 
unsaved. 

After the service, as was his custom, he kept the new 
communicants for a little while and addressed to them a 
few especial words in view of their new relations to the 
church. 

Monday, the day following, was the first of the Week 
of Prayer, an anniversary which was always observed at 
the chapel by services in the evening. During the first 
part of the day Mr. Payson was down town attending to 
some necessary business, and appeared to be as well as 
ever until early in the afternoon, when he complained of 
a sick headache. With his usual determination, however, 
he put this aside, and went down to the evening prayer- 
meeting, when he spoke upon the topic for Monday. 

Tuesday morning found him still uncomfortable with 
headache and pain, and that afternoon he consulted Dr. 
Andrew H. Smith, who lived near by, and whom he 
greatly esteemed both as a physician and a friend. No 
serious cause for alarm was discovered at this interview, and 
some simple remedy was prescribed. During Tuesday 
night, however, he suffered extreme pain, so that the physi- 
cian was summoned as soon as it was day, and gave him 
anodynes. On Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday, he still 
suffered, and, as there appeared no immediate prospect 
of relief, he became at last content to abandon his active 



2i5 ALL TOR CHRIST. 

labors for a time, and to bear this sickness which had 
been laid upon him so unexpectedly as from his Father's 
hands. Saturday morning the disease was pronounced 
to be a clear case of pneumonia, and Dr. Smith re- 
quested that the family physician, Dr. John L. Campbell, 
should be called in consultation, having given very strict 
orders that no one was to see the patient but those who 
were called to nurse him, and that all exciting topics 
were to be avoided. 

The immediate cause of the disease may be traced to 
Mr. Payson's exposure to the terrible storm of Saturday, 
January 6, although his health for several months pre- 
vious to this had not been as firm and vigorous as usual. 
He was greatly favored in having for his physicians two 
personal friends, both medical men of high standing and 
long experience in the metropolis, in whose skill and 
judgment he had the utmost confidence — Dr. Campbell 
having been for many years his family physician ; and he 
remarked during his illness that " if he had been a prince 
he could not have had more devoted attention or untiring 
service." 

The kind thoughtfulness of his many friends also was 
a great source of comfort to him. They proved most 
loving and faithful and devoted. Every day and almost 
every hour brought him some new assurance of their 
interest and sympathy. Delicacies for the sick-room, 
flowers and fruits, and all the little gifts which affection 
prompts loving hearts to offer, came in large measure to 
him and never failed to give him pleasure. 

The constant inquiries of many anxious friends, as 



THE LAST DA VS. 2 1 7 

soon as it became known that he was really ill, were 
remarkable ; and in addition to those made at the house, 
word was sent every night and morning to the sexton of 
his church for the information of his devoted people. His 
brethren in the ministry called and inquired after him, 
and prayed for his recovery, if it might please the Lord 
to spare his life. The prayers of his people, and of all 
those who loved him, were daily offered in his behalf; 
while in many of the churches of the city and its vicinity 
he was publicly remembered upon the Sabbath. Every- 
thing was done which the fondest and most tender affeo 
tion could devise ; and his physicians were unremitting 
in their care. Favored by a naturally strong constitution 
and a vigorous hold upon life, it did seem that he must be 
spared for many years to his family and to the church. 

But Providence determined otherwise. Amid the 
alternations of hope and fear, with sometimes a promise 
and sometimes a threat, his friends saw the dreadful 
progress of the disease continue from bad to worse. On 
Sunday, January 21st, there was an apparent change B for 
the better, and frequently from day to day there would 
appear some gleams of light. But upon Monday, January 
22d, a most unfavorable change occurred, and on Tuesday 
his friends were filled with the gravest fears. They saw 
that there was only the barest possibility of his recovery. 
Throughout the day and night the most powerful stimu- 
lants were administered once every hour ; but nothing 
availed to check the steady progress of the disease. Early 
on Wednesday morning his wife said to him, while busily 

engaged in making him more comfortable, " You have 

19 



218 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

been very brave to get through this dreadful night ;" and 
he replied, " I am not through yet, dearest." 

The physician was sent for at daylight, in the hope 
that something might be done to relieve his labored 
breathing, and a quantity of pure oxygen gas was procured 
and given to him constantly as long as he could breathe. 
But it only served to delay the event. Nothing could 
save him then. He died very peacefully at the last, 
breathing his life out calmly and quietly, as though he 
were taking rest in sleep, and with an utter absence of 
all fear. He rose once and again to struggle with the 
disease, and seek to regain his failing breath ; but, just as 
an expiring flame dies almost away, then rises fitfully and 
flashes brightly for another instant, and so, surely and 
steadily, passes away, he fell asleep. 

" What did we ask, with all our love for him, 
But just a little breath of fuller life 
To float the laboring lungs ? And God hath given 
Him life itself — full, everlasting life ! 
What did we pray for ? Rest, even for a night, 
That he might rise with sleep's most golden dews, 
Refreshed to feel the morning in his soul ; 
And God hath given him His eternal rest." 

From the very commencement of his illness the beauty 
and brightness- of Mr. Payson's character were most ap- 
parent. It was a great pleasure to be with him in the 
sick-room. He put aside all care and earthly anxieties, 
and was cheerful and composed when not in actual pain ; 
and then he was patient and fearful of troubling others. 
During the first few days, when he suffered most, his 



THE LAST DAYS. 219 

gentleness and patience were remarkable. And towards 
the close of his sickness, when the loneliness of death, 
the separation from friends and from work which he 
dearly loved, and the desolation and need of his family 
must have come before him in their dreadfulness, he was 
sustained and cheered by a constant faith in God, which 
enabled him to leave his wife, his children, and the church 
he loved so much, in the hands of Him whose changeless 
love he never doubted even while so sick. 

As might have been expected of him, he could not rest 
content without holding family worship each day, both 
morning and evening, with his wife and as many others 
present as his failing strength would permit. Frequent- 
ly he called one of his brothers to the bedside, and asked 
that he would kneel and pray with him that God would be 
pleased to bless the medicine used, and to insure his re- 
covery, if it were His will. It was most affecting to those 
who were with him upon the last day, to notice how his 
faith reached down to common things. The powerful 
stimulant* which he was obliged to take on Tuesday night 
was very distasteful to him, as brandy always had been, 
and he only consented to take it as a prescription of the 
doctor. But his faith in the power of prayer was shown 
in the unaffected earnestness with which he asked his 
brother to kneel and pray that God would bless this stim- 
ulant to his recovery ; and again, when the next time came 
for taking it, said, " I think that our prayer the last time 
helped us a great deal ; wont you ask the Lord to bless 
us again ?" 

* A mixture of brandy and ammonia. 



sac ALL FOR CHRLST. 

He fid not lose hope :: life until aver time 

e he died. Indeed, he did not seem to consil.r it 
likely that he would die, until the physician plaint] 
him so at eleven o'clock on Wednesday. Then he 
■ I cannot understand it It does not s sem passable I 
cannot think my _ k is done. One word from 

.11 still live on and work for him.'' And then 
ied his brothers to pray for him, that if i: 
Lord's will he might be spared and permitted to labor 
longer for the church on earth. He was a strong man 
stricken down in the very prime of life, and seemed to 
cling to life just as was natural ; and he e" 
ished a very great attachment for fa Repei 

during that Jay he asked that if it was the Lord's 
he might be spared to labor oo But there was not the 
slightest suggestion in any tone or look of anything like 
a rebeHk a s d r uncheerf ul spirit in submitting to the 
Father s lD 

He felt bo fear a ::' the ratnre, bat was ena- 

bled peacd trust his family, his little chi". L i : 

dearly-tewed church and - - scul in the 5a 

hands. Once he said thai - faith that he had 

preached and that he loved, in that faith he could 
[t was triumphant There was no exultant c 

: intoxic;- ■ : notions such is dreams cr 
ions might bring; there -was no parade of faith. But 
there zc^as victory, and death was no more to him 

He left the dearest trea mat he had on earth 

— his wife, "---is children, and his church — in the har. 
a covenant-keeping God, as quietly and with as evident 



THE LAST DA VS. 221 

satisfaction as though he had seen Him and heard Him 
say, " I will provide for them now." There was no dread 
or doubt — not the slightest trace of either of them in all 
that he said. With an unclouded intellect and a perfectly 
clear understanding of what his danger was, his faith was 
firm and constant to the very end ; and he fell asleep at 
last as fearlessly as though it were no other than the 
daily rest from toil of which he knew the end — refresh- 
ment, strength, and new, fresh life. 

When his wife brought the children to his bedside 
early on Wednesday morning, he spoke to them each at 
length, with broken words and sentences, as his breath 
was failing him, but most impressively. It would be sac- 
rilege to repeat the words he uttered to her and to them 
at such an hour ; but none that heard them can ever for- 
get the fervor with which he commended them one and 
all to the love of God, invoked His special blessing on 
their lives, exhorted them one by one to a loving, faithful 
service of His will, and assured them that " to live near 
Christ was the only true happiness ;" while with a pathos 
none of his children can recall without a tear, he added, 
"And as you have loved your father, remember these 
words." When the baby was brought wonderingly to his 
side, he said, " Let me kiss the darling !" and then, as he 
clasped her in his arms, he added, "How can she do 
without her father ? But God knows best." 

Not long after this he said to his wife and friends 
that "it was his desire to do the will of the Master, 
wherever it might lead." He sent the most affectionate 
assurances of regard to the father and mother of his wife 



222 ALL FOR CHRIST. 

begging her to thank them for all their kindness, and 
said that " he wished to bear testimony that he had found 
among Episcopalians as warm and earnest Christians as 
any in his own church." 

To his absent sister, a missionary, he sent, as his 

parting message, " Tell my dear sister D that I had 

hoped to live and see her here again. Tell her, that 
when she comes to die she will feel that her work is 
deathless." 

After sending affectionate messages to all his imme- 
diate friends and relatives who were not present, he said 
with extraordinary emphasis, as though he could not for- 
get his absent church and his life-work, " And to all 
else I say, Cling close to Jesus." 

Frequently during his illness he desired Mrs. Payson 
to read his favorite chapters, the fourteenth, fifteenth, 
and sixteenth of St. John ; and it comforted and rested 
him not a little to have her pray with him. When wea- 
ried out with pain, he was oftentimes relieved and re- 
freshed by her reading an old familiar hymn, such as 
" Rock of Ages ;" and for any such little attention or 
kindness in the sick-room he was most touchingly grate- 
ful. It was a very great pleasure to be with him there. 

He was deeply interested in the " Life of Norman 
McLeod," which had been given him at Christmas, and 
oftentimes would have a little of it read aloud when, in 
the early stages of his illness, he wished to sleep or to 
rest. 

"His was a kindred spirit," writes one of his friends, "in his ardent 
love of nature and all beautiful things, in his patriotism, his catholicity of 



THE LAST DA YS. 22.3 

spirit, his energetic, ardent way of presenting his views on any subject 
which he considered vital, and in his devotion to the common people." 

Upon the last day of his life his friends who were 
present sang to him (when their feelings would permit 
them to do so) his favorite hymns. He asked to have 
them sing, "I need Thee every hour," and endeavored 
himself to join them in it, but his labored breathing 
would not permit him to sing more than a word or two 
at a time. "We are on our journey home," " How firm 
a foundation," and " Rock of Ages," seemed very grate- 
ful to him, and at times his expressive face responded to 
them with a glad, bright look which told how much he 
rested in their comfortable truths. One of his brothers 
attempted to repeat the hymn which was a favorite of 
their mother's, " For ever with the Lord ;" but his voice 
faltered before he reached the end, and he was compelled 
to stop. Mr. Payson then took it up and with broken 
utterance and most fervent emphasis continued : 

" Knowing as I am known, 

How shall I love that word, 
And oft repeat before the throne, 
' For ever with the Lord.' " 

Once he said "Brighter" with great earnestness. 
Again, not very long before he ceased speaking, and 
after the doctor had told him plainly that he could not 
recover, he said, " It seems strange that perhaps before 
night I may see father and mother and Jesus." 

To a very kind and much valued friend who stood by 
his side he said, " I suppose the Lord saw that my work 
was done." And at another time, after seeming to be 



224 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

lost in deep reverie for some moments, he leaned quickly- 
forward and said very distinctly and earnestly, " Thy will 
be done, Thy will be done. Amen and Amen." 

About twelve o'clock he ceased speaking, though 

once when his wife asked him, " Dear C , is the 

Lord Jesus near you ?" he answered by a movement of 
his head, and again not long after seemed to hear what 
was said, though he did not respond. But within a brief 
half hour he had gone beyond the reach of human 
voices, and remained unconscious till about three min- 
utes after one o'clock, when with two or three deep 
breaths he passed away. And so he rests in Jesus, for 
evermore at peace, full of joy and holiness, free for ever- 
more from all infirmity or hindrance in serving the Lord 
with perfect liberty. 

"It was deeply touching to me," writes one of his brothers, "to hear 
him once refer to himself in a prayer he offered, half audibly. I was 
standing near his bed and partly bending over him while arranging some 
medicines by his side, when I overheard him say in this half whisper, 
'Lord Jesus, thou knowest all my great infirmities, but thou wilt keep me 
thine.' " 

Such was the end. And as we follow him in our 
thoughts away may we not hear the angelic interpreter 
saying of that " great multitude which no man could 
number," " These are they which .... have washed their 
robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. 
Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve 
him day and night in his temple : and He that sitteth on 
the throne shall dwell among them. They shall hunger 
no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the sun 
light on them, nor any heat. For the Lamb which is in 



THE LAST DAYS. 225 

the midst of the throne shall feed them, and shall lead 
them unto living fountains of waters : and God shall 
wipe away all tears from their eyes." 

"The fond parents and their dutiful son!" exclaimed his sister in a 
letter written not long after — "what a joyful meeting theirs must have 
been ! Now for ever united, how must the three rejoice together and 
praise God as never before for all the way along which he has led them ! 

"This recalls to my mind," she adds, "the last words father ever 
wrote me: 'How exhilarating and transporting the forethought that (as 
we have often prayed) we as an entire family shall at last gather around 
the throne.' May it not be that they will have ' morning and evening 
prayers' together, or some such united service, when they wSl pray in be- 
half of us who are left to struggle on below ? 

" ' At one dear knee we proffered vows, 

One lesson from one Book we learned 
Ere childhood's flaxen ringlets turned 
To black and brown on kindred brows. 

" ' The face will shine 
Upon me while I muse alone, 
And that dear voice I once have known 
Still speak to me of me and mine. 

" ' Known and unknown, human, divine, 
Sweet human hand and lips and eye, 
Dear heavenly friend that canst not die, 
Mine, mine for ever, ever mine. 

" ' Far off thou art, but ever nigh ; 
I have thee still and I rejoice; 
I prosper circled with thy voice ; 
I shall not lose thee though I die.' " 

Mr. Payson's directions were that the funeral should 
be from his own church among those who loved him and 
cherished his memory ; and he wished that everything 
should be as plain and inexpensive as possible, as was 
befitting one whose example was uniformly consistent 
with his teaching. 

It need hardly be said that the loss of such a man 
was keenly felt and tenderly lamented not only by the 



226 ALL FOR CLLRLST. 

larjre con^resration to whom he had ministered for so 
many years, but throughout the church and city, and 
especially in the Presbytery of New York, of which he 
was an efficient and active member. Letters of sympa- 
thy, containing many expressions of personal bereave- 
ment as well as of condolence, were received by Mrs. 
Payson and her family from a very large circle of friends, 
from not a few churches and public organizations in the 
vicinity, and from every religious society with which Mr. 
Payson had been connected.* One friend writes : 

We all loved him ; and as my mind reverts to the scenes of the last 
sixteen years in which he was an actor, his presence lends a light pecu- 
liarly his own — whether it was in religious service or in games in our 
hours of recreation, he was the same enthusiastic man, the same cour- 
teous Christian gentleman. Ah, our human loves have suffered a sad 
loss ; but he is our friend still, and is now a new link to bind us to the 

heavenly and better world I saw many weeping women stoop down 

to kiss the marble brow at his funeral ; and well might they weep, for in 
their pastor they had lost their best earthly friend. Few men could have 
died in New York at whose funeral so many tears would have been shed. 

Says another : lie was such a grand man, so good, so true, so manlv, 
yet as simple-hearted as a little child. I knew of no one whose society 
did me so much good, who I feel was living so completely for God and 
His church. Many sweet hours have we spent together, many times on 
bended knees gone to the throne together. I can never forget the fer- 
vency of his prayers, and the wonderful, faith-full, heart-trust he had in 
God's promises. If ever there was a soul ripe for heaven it was his. Yet 
it seems hard that he should be taken right in the prime of his life, in the 
full tide of his usefulness. It may be that God saw that his death might 
preach louder than his life. He did his life-work well, and the richest 
reward that a true soul can crave he has attained. 

There was that about him that made every one love him. When he 
visited me some time ago he took such an interest in everything, even lit- 
tle things concerning my children, that their hearts warmed up to him at 
once. We all loved him dearly ; our house was a scene of mourning 
when we heard of his death. I never expect to find another with so many 

* Some of these papers may be found in the Appendix, note C. 



THE LAST DA VS. 2 2 7 

good qualities. I know that I have never found a friend so true and 
loyal. 

But what is our loss to yours ? We have thought so much of you 
with your orphaned children around you. We have thought of that home 
which was always so bright and cheerful, the scene of so many delightful 
gatherings, now darkened with sorrow, and have asked our Father in 
heaven to comfort and support you from the very depths of our hearts. 
You have the sweetest memories of the dear life. You have much to live 
over again. Your children have an honored name to bear, and above all 
you have God to lean upon — your God and his. I remember once Charles 
gave me this text to write a sermon from : " His lovingkindness is better 
than life." Lay that text to your heart, my dear sister. I shall always 
associate it with him. I wish it were in my power to see you and try and 
bring comfort to you. I can only write words that are cold to what I feel. 
My wife sends her heart full of love to you, and I assure you that I fully 
join her in it. May God bless you, and "as one whom his mother com- 
forteth," may he comfort you. If it is in my power to serve you in any 
way I will only be too happy to do it. Again, God keep you in his arms 
and surround your little ones with his covenant care. He will. 

Believe me, my dear Mrs. Payson, affectionately and sorrowfully 
yours. 

It is with inexpressible grief and pain and amazement, (writes an- 
other) that I have heard of your beloved brother's death. On the human 
side it looks untimely, but we must be still and know that God is God. 

We loved and admired him far more than he knew, and reproach 
ourselves that we did not give more expression to these sentiments, now 
that it is too late. As for you, the loss is irreparable, and nothing but 
faith in God can carry you through it. And it seems as if the church of 
Christ could not spare him. And then his poor wife — my heart aches for 
her — and your sister in China, coming home to such bereavement, so dif- 
ferent from what she was expecting ! I feel deeply for and with you 
all. 

It is no time to talk of comfort. This is the time for tears ; God 
grant us peaceable fruit afterward. You are overwhelmed with visitors, 
so I dare not add to your fatigue and care by coming to you, save in this 
way. When you feel that you can see me, come and let us talk together 
of the other side; his joy, his beatitude, in the presence of the One he 
loved and lived for. 

With tenderest sympathy and affection. 
New York, Jan. 25, 1877. 



22S ALL FOR CHRIST. 

One of his brethren in the ministry says : 

My Dear Mrs. Payson : I see by this day's paper the notice of our 
brother Payson's death, and hasten at once to write and tell you how my 
heart aches for you and your children. 

If ever there was a godly man, and one thoroughly devoted to his 
work, it was your husband. I have often felt that he set me an example 
that I should copy. His knowledge of God's Word was a matter of con- 
stant surprise to the Philotheans,* and many a time have I heard it men- 
tioned with admiration. In his pastoral duties I do not believe he had a 
superior in this city. What a loss to his church and congregation ! 

May the God who brought him all through his life and gave him so 
many tokens of his favor, comfort your heart now when most you need his 
gracious support. Yours most sincerely. 

New York, Jan. 25, 1877. 

The following is from a friend not connected with his 
church. 

My Dear Mrs. Payson : . . . . God moves in a mysterious way, his 
wonders to perform; and truly it seems to us a mystery that one so good, 
so holy, so perfectly fitted for his work as your beloved husband, should 
be removed in the midst of his abundant labors. 

I cannot believe it yet, and it seems to me I never before realized so 
fully the perfect certainty of an immediate translation to glory as in the 
case of this dear friend. What must the trial be to those who have lost 
such a husband, father, brother, and guide, as he was. Quite lately he 
spent an evening with us, telling us all about his journey to Canada, and, 
with the Bible in his hand as his text-book, explained to one of my sons 
the wrong points in Professor Huxley's lectures. Never did he pay us a 
visit without breathing the spirit of the Christian pastor, and making us 
feel the better for his advice and consolation, and sometimes by prayer 
strengthening us. 

He followed my dear boys through life with his best wishes and pray- 
ers, and would ever have done them good. The inexpressible comfort he 

gave to us all at the time our beloved M died can never be forgotten, 

and we feel bereaved in your bereavement. 

May we walk in his footsteps, treasure his advice and example, and 
so live that we may one day meet him where no suffering, no sorrow will 
ever enter. May the Lord bless you and comfort you, and enable you to 
say, "Thy will be done," and may your dear children be a blessing to you 
and grow up in the steps of their sainted father. 

* The name of a company of ministers with whom he met every Saturday. 



THE LAST DA VS. 229 

Mrs. R unites with me in affectionate sympathy, and believe me, 

dear Mrs. Payson, 

Your sincere friend. 
Orange, N. J. 

Another writes from Italy : 

It seems so strange that one so more than commonly useful should be 
taken away; but "He who doeth all things well" had a "need be" for 
him, perhaps to do a greater work that we do n't know anything about. I 
wonder and wonder why so many of us are left who are of so little use in 
the world ; but He knows. 

The Pastors' Association of New York City and Vicin- 
ity, composed of representative men from various denom- 
inations, forwarded to Mrs. Payson a copy of the follow- 
ing paper, expressive of their sympathy in her bereave- 
ment :* 

In the removal of our brother, Charles H. Payson, from his earthly 
field of labor, the Pastors' Association has lost one of its most faithful and 
efficient members. We desire to record our sense of his devotion to the 
Master's service, of his well-defined convictions, coupled with a large- 
souled charity towards those who differed with him, of his untiring indus- 
try in his pastorate, of his active sympathy with the poor and suffering, of 
his warm affection for his brethren, and of the Christian consistency of his 
entire life. We give this testimony to our dear brother's work on earth in 
the blessed and assured hope of rejoining him in the heavenly rest. 
New York, Jan. 2g, 1877. 

Very many more such testimonials might be given ; 
but these may suffice to indicate the widespread and gen- 
eral sorrow which was occasioned by the news of his 
death. They are the garlands which accompany his 
bier. 

Seldom is a more impressive or solemn scene to be 
witnessed than that at the funeral services of this belov- 
ed pastor and friend. At an early hour of Saturday, 

* Other similar papers may be found in the Appendix, Note C. 
All lor Cnrist. 20 



230 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

January 27, the beautiful Memorial chapel was crowded 
to the utmost with those who came to pay the last tribute 
of respect and affection, while many turned away unable 
to gain admission. Besides his own congregation, there 
were present large numbers of personal friends, including 
almost all of his brother ministers of the Presbytery of 
New York, and not a few prominent laymen, who testi- 
fied by their presence to the high esteem in which he was 
held by the church at large. A conspicuous feature in 
the audience was the Payson Bible class, consisting of 
ninety-one young men. The class was named after the 
pastor on account of the deep interest he always evinced 
in their welfare. 

The services, as he would have wished, were very 
simple. Familiar hymns were sung, short passages of 
Scripture were read, and prayer was offered. Brief ad- 
dresses descriptive of his character as a man, a Christian, 
and a pastor, and expressing the deep affection with 
which he was universally regarded, were made by the 
Rev. Drs. William J. Tucker, William Adams, Howard 
Crosby, Charles D. Helmer, and Erskine N. White, the 
latter two his classmates in the Union Theological Sem- 
inary. A deep and tearful solemnity rested upon every 
face throughout the assembly, and at times the forced 
suppression of feeling, both upon the part of the speak- 
ers and hearers, was "almost painful." Several of those 
who spoke remarked, after the exercises were over, that 
they never before had seen an audience which seemed so 
deeply moved by their own personal grief and sense of 
loss. " There was a sensation of tenderness," as one of 



THE LAST DAYS. 231 

them said, "throughout the house. It seemed as though 
only one word was needed from the speaker to lead the 
whole congregation into convulsive grief and lamentation. 
It required an almost painful effort on the part of all who 
spoke to restrain the strong emotions that were every- 
where visible." 

Most admirable and affectionate tributes were paid 
to Mr. Payson's character by those who addressed the 
assembly, and in such honest, earnest words, that the 
service, though very long, was exceedingly consoling to 
all who sorrowed for his loss. His frankness, his whole- 
souled devotion to the cause of saving men ; his decision 
of character and strength of principle, coupled with rare 
kindness of heart and unfeigned charity for those who 
differed from him in their views of truth ; his self-deny- 
ing service of the Master ; his rule of making no distinc- 
tion between what men call little and great things, if 
only he could serve the Lord and His people : his unfal- 
tering faith and practical views of every phase of Chris- 
tian life — these and other prominent traits of character 
were dwelt upon most lovingly by men who had known 
him long and intimately, and who, it was plain to see, 
revered his memory. 

The most pathetic scenes occurred while those who 
loved him paused beside his bier and took their last fare- 
well. Poor men and women, old, decrepit — friendless 
now — broke down in sobs and tears as they gazed upon 
his dear dead face. Very many of them lost in this man 
the truest friend God ever gave them, and they could not 
restrain their grief. 



2 3 2 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

" For more than an hour they passed by the bier, to the number of 
over a thousand, young and old, rich and poor ; and I never saw in my 
life," says an eye-witness, "such a large number of sincere mourners. The 
most affectionate tributes to his memory were borne by many and many a 
poor old widow and lonely one whom this good man, by his true sympathy, 
had helped to bear life's burdens; and nothing which his friends could 
wish has been withheld to comfort them as they recall his faithful work 
and his rich reward — nothing, I mean, of outward testimony to his 
worth."* 

The following addresses were delivered on the occa- 
sion. 

The Rev. William J. Tucker, D. D.,f said: 

We are brought together by such an unexpected sor- 
row, that our first thoughts are hardly those of faith, but 
rather of doubt and defeat ; even as our Lord and Mas- 
ter once exclaimed in the presence of his enemies, "Ver- 
ily, this is your hour and the power of darkness." 

Well nigh every circumstance is present to give 
meaning to death. A life broken before it had felt the 
strain of years, an unfinished work, of which everything 
about this place speaks to us, a people with heavy hearts, 
waiting if there be any words of comfort to which they 
may listen, and a home with its earthly loves and hopes 
shattered and fallen — what are these but reminders to us 
all that we live and love and do our work under the eye 
of the great enemy ! 

" But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory 
through our Lord Jesus Christ." 

* A graphic description of the services at the chapel, together with a 
glowing tribute to Mr. Payson's character, may be found in the article of 
the Rev. John Hall, D. D., of this city, written for a contemporary weekly, 
and published herewith in the Appendix, Note D. 

t Pastor of the Madison Square Presbyterian church, New York city. 



THE LAST DA VS. 233 

As I sat a little time ago beside the heart that knows 
more than we all the meaning of this hour, and heard 
from her lips the words of triumph in which our brother 
laid down his life, and saw in her eyes the reflection of 
his own faith, I felt, as it is rarely given us to feel, the 
reality of the promise that " death is swallowed up in 
victory." And, surely, brethren of the ministry, if one of 
our number has thus died, lifting up those about him into 
something of his own spirit, we ought not to withhold at 
this time the full response of our faith, " We believe in 
the resurrection of the dead and in the life everlasting." 
Let us speak with one another and to this people under 
the inspiration of our beliefs. Let us also make this an 
hour of grateful remembrance. There are very many 
things coming to us, by the grace of God, out of this life 
for which we may thank Him, and take heart. 

For myself, though so recently a fellow-worker with 
Mr. Payson in this church, let me say that the impres- 
sion which he has made upon me is clear and strong. I 
saw from the first that I had to do with a consecrated 
man. And the more I saw of his purpose and methods, 
the more evident it became that the whole man was in 
his work. Indeed, I never knew one who gave himself 
out more freely, lavishly. There was apparently no dis- 
tinction in his mind, such as men are wont to make, be- 
tween things great and small. All things to him were 
great, as having to do with the service of his Master ; so 
that, whoever came to him in the name of Christ, was 
sure of receiving whatever he had to give, whe her of 
sympathy, or instruction, or time. 



234 ALL FOR CHRIST. 

Here, I think, lay the reason of his success. Cer- 
tainly we have here that last thing, which if men lack in 
their work for Christ, they will fall short of success. 
There was not only no confusion in the purpose of his 
life, there was absolutely no reserve in the expression of 
his life. His love for men was manifestly deep and gen- 
uine, and through it he poured into their hearts the ener- 
gies of his nature and the riches of his faith. 

What we see, therefore, in the sorrow of this congre- 
gation is the simple response to a love which through 
long years had been freely given. These hearts are say- 
ing to us through their tears what God permits to be 
said, in measure, of a true servant, as of Himself, "We 
love him because he first loved us." 

Such is the impression which 'an acquaintance of less 
than two years gave me of Mr. Payson, and which will 
pervade all my remembrances of him. It is that of a 
man who had given himself to Christ years before I 
knew him, but whom I knew in the daily endeavor of his 
life to use himself most generously for Christ. 

We can ill afford to lose a worker like him out of our 
ranks under the necessities of to-day ; but neither may 
we withhold a worker like him from early entrance into 
the Master's joy. 

REMARKS BY THE REV. WILLIAM ADAMS, D. D.* 

No spectacle is more suggestive or impressive than 
the funeral of a Christian minister. Often has he in- 

* President of the Union Theological Seminary, formerly pastor of 
the Madison Square Presbyterian Church. 



THE LAST DAYS. 235 

structed his people concerning the great mystery of 
death. Often has he taught them the only method by 
which they could be prepared for that event by faith in 
Him who has disarmed death of its sting. Frequently 
has he administered consolation to the bereaved, as he 
stood with mourners at the open grave. At length his 
own appointed time has come. There is no official ex- 
emption for any from the necessity of dying. He who 
has been so long familiar with the sight of death, in his 
turn is brought to experience it for himself, and now he 
lies still and lifeless in front of the pulpit where for 
years he had preached the gospel of Jesus Christ. 

In the present instance it is not an aged servant of 
God seeking rest at sunset after a long and laborious life. 
It seems, as we might say, according to the course of 
nature, that such a one as " Paul the aged," having fin- 
ished his course and accomplished the work given him 
to do, should fall on sleep. But here is one cut off in 
his prime and promise, falling prematurely, as man ex- 
presses it, with the best part of his stewardship yet in 
prospect. The suddenness of the event, moreover, is 
appalling. In the very midst of youthful vigor, of 
abounding health, with every reasonable expectation of 
length of days, in " an hour when we looked not for it," 
the summons has come, and the young minister of Christ 
is taken away when he could not be spared by the reap- 
ers. 

This is no time for eulogy. In the presence of death 
the words of man seem poor and paltry. Little need is 
there of our speaking to one another concerning our de- 



236 ALL LOR CHRIST. 

parted brother, when he is speaking to us in such tender 
tones by his cold and pallid lips. Less we ought not to 
say, ere he is borne by devout men to his burial, than 
this : never was any man more earnest, more self-forget- 
ful, more faithful in the work of the ministry, than he. 
We might well and honestly borrow for his epitaph the 
words in the Sacred Annals descriptive of Barnabas : 
" He was a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost and of 
faith ; and much people were added unto the Lord." 
When Dcrcas died at Joppa, the widows whom she had 
befriended gathered weeping about her bier, showing- 
one to another the garments which she had made for 
their comfort. Many are there in this assembly who 
mourn to-day the loss of a true friend who had often vis- 
ited and helped them in times of sickness and want and 
loneliness and widowhood. It is right to "make lamen- 
tation" over such a one, removed when he was most 
needed and most useful. His best eulogy is that his 
death must be and is regarded as a public bereave- 
ment. 

It is recorded of Dr. Edward Payson, the illustrious 
kinsman of our deceased brother, that, by his own direc- 
tion, a paper was laid upon his breast in his coffin, hav- 
ing this inscription : " Remember the words which I 

SPAKE UNTO YOU WHILE I WAS YET WITH YOU f SO that 

as his people passed by in long procession to take the 
last look of their pastor, they might receive another ser- 
mon from him who, living and dying, evinced this as the 
desire of his heart, that they might be saved. If these 
lips now sealed in death could break this strange silence 



THE LAST DA YS. 237 

and resume their articulate language, who can doubt that 
their testimony would be the very same as before when 
he entreated men to look unto the Lamb of God which 
taketh away the sin of the world. If there be any in this 
assembly who have withstood the persuasions of their 
pastor when living, let them yield to his last, tender, post- 
humous appeal, as they shall see his face no more. Last, 
did I say ? I recall and qualify the word. The influence 
of a faithful Christian minister does not cease with the 
vibrations of the air which gave his thoughts and words 
a voice. His thoughts have quickened the thoughts of 
others. His words will echo on in the memories of liv- 
ing men long after he has gone from their sight. Being 
dead, he will still speak ; and the comparisons and judg- 
ments and resolutions which he has stirred in the minds 
of his hearers will reproduce and multiply themselves in 
long succession in many others whom he will never see 
on the earth. A good man may depart, but he never 
dies. Had in " everlasting remembrance," his influence, 
in the best sense, attains an earthly immortality. 

The example of our Lord, when visiting the family at 
Bethany at the time when Lazarus died, is our best model 
on occasions like the present. That He wept at the 
grave of his friend is proof that there is a place, in our 
bereavements, for the expression of our natural sensibili- 
ties. But nothing was said by our great Teacher in the 
way of exciting this class of emotions. His divine act of 
consolation was in holding forth those sublime truths of 
our religion which by their very weight were sure to 
overpower and moderate all fainter impressions. " Thy 



238 ALL FOR CLLRLST. 

brother shall rise again." " I am the Resurrection and 
the Life. He that believeth in me, though he were dead, 
yet shall he live ; and he that liveth and believeth in me 
shall never die." Were we to follow only the " sorrow 
of the world," we should dwell altogether upon those 
aspects of death which move us to tears : the abrupt ter- 
mination of a useful life, the irreparable loss of a young 
family, brightness and buoyancy turned in a night into 
widowhood and orphanage, the disappointment and grief 
of an affectionate congregation, and all the varied cir- 
cumstances, public and private, which impart to this 
event so much of gloom and depression. But, after all, 
these are only the extrinsic and casual associations of 
death. As for all which is essential and instructive and 
consoling, we fall back upon the great and calm articles 
of our Christian faith. Now is the time to lay hold, as 
with an anchor sure and steadfast, of those immovable 
truths which were announced by Jesus Christ to Martha 
and Mary when their brother died. There is a place in 
our grief for hope as well as for memory, for congratula- 
tion as well as for mourning. Death has a twofold 
aspect — the one towards those who survive, than which 
nothing can be more terrible, the other towards those 
who go to be with Christ, than which nothing can be 
more attractive. Let us congratulate our young brother 
that his work is finished and that he hath entered into 
rest, leaving to those who mourn his departure the price- 
less legacy of an untarnished name, a good Christian 
character. " Weeping with them who weep," let us all 
find, as the wisest lesson of the hour, that impulse to a 



THE LAST DA YS. 239 

simpler faith in Him who is the conqueror of death, 
which will be our best preparation for our own de- 
parture. 

REMARKS OF REV. HOWARD CROSBY, D. D., LL. D.* 

It is an April day of commingled cloud and sunshine 
with our hearts when a Christian friend leaves us for his 
heavenly home. Sorrow and joy are strangely blended. 
When we think of the promotion, the glory, how can we 
help echo the cry of praise and thanksgiving for the. sal- 
vation completed in the triumph of heaven ? Ay, this is 
all so sure, that we can afford to give way to the sorrow 
which sees the disaster which has befallen us. . . . And 
then, again, this very sorrow bears a fruit of joy. Our 
affliction works out for us the weight of glory. There is 
an organic connection between our tears and our paeans 
of victory. 

Dear Charles Payson ! now where Christ is ! absent 
from the body and present with the Lord ! We greet 
you as anticipating us in the realizations of our glorious 
hope. We could not wish to call you back to the toils 
and trials of this preparatory life. 

But what a loss is ours ! I belonged to a company of 
ministers who met each week to converse on Bible 
themes, of which circle our brother Payson was a con- 
spicuous member. We loved him with all our hearts ; 
with no if or but ; it was an entire affection. How we 
shall miss his manly counsel, his earnest exhortations, his 
faithful testimony in those weekly reunions! 

* Pastor of Fourth Avenue Presbyterian Church, and Chancellor of 
the New York University. 



2 4 o ALL FOR CHRLST. 

And this flourishing church, how can it ever supply 
the place of its large-hearted and indefatigable pastor ? 
For nearly a score of years his energies and prayers have 
been concentrated on this spot, and here the Spirit has 
put His seal to his consistent labors by building up an 
active and zealous people, the influence of whose exam- 
ple cannot be calculated for its extent and power. Oh 
what heart-wounds are caused here by this departure of 
one so beloved ! 

If I were asked as to the distinguishing traits of 
our dear brother's character, I should say, first, truthful- 
ness. He had no concealment. He said what he felt. 
If he pressed your hand in friendship, you knew there 
was no contempt or sarcasm or doubt lurking behind. 
His character was transparent. He entertained no 

guile Secondly, single-heartedness. I never knew 

a man who seemed so utterly free from all worldly no- 
tions in his ministry. This was made very clear to me 
as we often walked together those Saturday evenings 
and talked of the interests of Christ's kingdom. He had 
the one aim to glorify the Lord by his ministry, and to 
this he brought all his talents and energies with a hearti- 
ness that was enthusiasm Thirdly, gentleness. 

With fixed opinions of his own, and profoundly conscien- 
tious in their bold maintenance, he nevertheless treated 
opposing opinions with respect, never facing in his kind- 
ness and courtesy towards those who differed with him. 
This was the more a credit to him, as his own views 
upon any important question were always very decided. 
It is no special credit to be amiable towards those who 



THE LAST DAYS. 241 

differ from us if we are not positive ourselves ; but strong 
in his own convictions, his gentleness towards his breth- 
ren created a new bond of love. 

Such a character was one to be loved. And he was 
loved, tenderly, devotedly. Oh, what a joy it is to know 
that we are not done with him ! No ! no ! no ! The 
apostle, in the thirteenth chapter of Corinthians, after 
leading us upward far away from earth to the bright, 
golden future of the heavenly world, cries in a holy ecs- 
tasy, " And now (in this heavenly glory) . . . abideth faith, 
hope, love, .... and the greatest of these is love." 

Yes, these tender affections, consecrated in Christ, 
will never cease. The love that bound us and Charles 
Payson together is still potent, and it shall be stronger 
than ever when we join him in the dear home above. 

REMARKS BY THE REV. C. D. HELMER, D. D., A CLASS- 
MATE.* 

The sympathies and desires of my heart to-day would 
place me in the group of those upon whom the stroke of 
this great affliction falls most heavily. But my long and 
intimate acquaintance with this lamented brother furnish- 
es also a reason for a few words to be spoken at this hour 
of farewell over his mortal remains. I knew Mr. Payson 
in his boyhood ; I knew him in his excellent Christian 
home, where a godly father and a saintly mother filled 
the household with the pure and genial atmosphere of 
an earnest piety and consecrated life. I knew him as a 

* Pastor of the Tompkins Avenue Congregational Church, Brooklyn, 
New York. 

All for Christ. 21 



2 42 ALL FOR CLLRIST. 

young man in his earlier and preparatory studies ; and I 
knew him in the whole course of special training for the 
ministry. We were members of the same class in the 
Theological Seminary. 

It was my pleasure and good fortune, also, at the 
close of our Seminary studies, to be a travelling compan- 
ion with him for many months of daily and hourly inter- 
course, and with all the peculiarly close intimacy of fellow- 
travellers, making everywhere the same journey and with 
the same plan and purpose. Since he began the active 
work of his ministry in New York, our acquaintance has 
continued ; but there are others here more competent 
to speak of this later part of his career. 

And knowing Charles H. Payson thus intimately 
over a period of thirty years and more, I can speak of 
him with the delightful confidence of uttering the truth, 
as always and everywhere a positive and genuine Chris- 
tian. I have been with him on many and various occasions, 
that would naturally disclose the qualities of his charac- 
ter, and never knew him to flinch from what he believed 
to be right and duty. He was eminently conscientious. 
Whether in study or work or recreation, in private or in so- 
cial relations, he had one rule of life, which was the law of 
uprightness. So strongly was this quality of his char- 
acter impressed upon my mind, that I never expected 
under any circumstances to see him swerve from what 
seemed to him the path of duty. 

This conscientiousness showed itself, not only in the 
ordinary affairs of every-day life, but was quite as con- 
spicuous in his studies and his work as a minister. He 



THE LAST DA VS. 243 

could tolerate no sham, no make-believe in anything. 
What he believed and what he taught as a preacher of 
the Gospel was the result of his own honest and earnest 
study of the word of God. 

Mr. Payson was a minister of the Gospel by blood, 
by inheritance of nature, and by all the shaping influences 
of his home and early life. He came of ministerial 
stock. The piety, culture, refinement, and moral devel- 
opment, of his ancestry, on both the paternal and maternal 
side, left him a grand inheritance. These forces of the 
past did much to shape his brain and give depth and 
strength to his religious nature. He became a preacher 
of the Gospel by a positive bias almost irresistible. And 
at the same time his own personal feelings, desires, and 
aims, all were in harmony with the controlling influences 
of his life. So that he knew something of what Paul 
meant when he said, " Woe is me if I preach not the 
Gospel." 

No one could come in contact with our beloved broth- 
er, without being impressed by his singular whole-heart- 
edness in his work. His services were as far as possible 
from the dreary and cold style of the perfunctory perfor- 
mer. His soul was in his words and deeds. I should say 
that he was a man of fire. His was a burning zeal, coupled 
with practical discretion and good sense. What a fine 
enthusiasm pervaded all that he did and said ! How it 
blazed out in everything, warming the whole atmosphere 
that enveloped his kindled and enkindling life ! Not 
inaptly nor irreverently may these words, sanctified by the 
holiest application, be borrowed for him : " He was a 



244 ALL F0R CHRIST. 

burning and a shining light." Beneath the glow of his 
nature the chill fled out of the air, the ice ran away in 
singing streams, and the very rocks were melted. This 
peculiar warmth and fervor of soul rendered him great 
service in his work as a pastor. It bound others to him 
with strongest ties ; grappled his friends close to him ; 
made it easy for strangers to approach, and paved the 
way for all burdened and troubled souls to bring him the 
secrets of their suffering lives. His sympathy was cap- 
tivating and contagious ; and was an exemplification of 
that divine compassion for mankind, which so wonderful- 
ly characterized the life of Jesus. 

And now, with all these excellent qualifications for 
the work given him to do for the Lord and for man, he 
has wrought for eighteen fruitful years. With studious 
retirement from every kind of notoriety, always shunning 
most instinctively whatever might seem to be self-seek- 
ing, he has labored zealously and faithfully, doing all 
things as unto the Lord. And in the very zenith of his 
usefulness and power his career has suddenly ended. 
We bow before the unexplained will of God. To us it 
must seem a great and, in some respects, irreparable loss. 

But while he has ceased from his labors, his works do 
follow him. What he has accomplished is not to be re- 
garded as in analogy with the unfinished productions of 
the artist. Many a painter has died with an unfinished 
picture on his easel, which no one coming after could 
complete for him. But this godly minister, working for 
moral and spiritual character, has left behind that which 
will be carried on to perfection. The word of divine 



THE LAST DAYS. 245 

truth, the sanctifying Spirit of God, the gospel means of 
grace, will continue to fill in and fill out that which has 
been begun, even unto " the measure of the fulness of 
the stature of Christ." Look at that regiment of young 
men yonder standing along against the walls of this 
sanctuary, a strong and earnest band that had gathered 
about their leader who now lies here in the pallor and 
silence of death. These are evidence in part of the good 
work accomplished by our lamented brother. And they 
will go forth still to the glorious warfare, " the good fight 
of faith," to do what he has taught and incited them to 
do, to win victories for the gospel of Christ in the world, 
and so to continue his power, his influence, his labors 
among men. How much this involves and signifies will 
never be perceived till the harvest shall be. measured in 
the heavens where all things are known. But these re- 
marks must not be prolonged. I am here chiefly to join 
with others in the tender and solemn service of burial, to 
offer my tribute of honor and affection. 

REMARKS BY THE REV. ERSKINE N. WHITE, D. D., A CLASS- 
MATE.* 

It is very hard for me to realize that the comrade of 
many years, the tried friend, the Christian brother, this 
fellow-laborer in the gospel of Christ, is gone. It seems 
almost impossible to believe that I shall never again hear 
his cordial greeting, never again feel the warm clasp of 
his hand, never again reply to his affectionate inquiry 

* Pastor of the West Twenty-third Street Presbyterian Church, New 
York City. 

* 



2 4 6 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

as to how it fares with me and my work. Doubtless 
as time passes we shall all of us appreciate more and 
more keenly the great loss we have sustained in this 
sudden, unlooked-for departure of our brother : to-day I 
stand here simply to express in as few words as possible 
my own sense of personal bereavement, and to add my 
tribute of respect and love to those already paid. 

I have known and loved Charles Payson for more 
than twenty years — from the time that we were class- 
mates in the Union Theological Seminary. Since then 
we have been in constant communication, laboring much 
of the time side by side as members of the same Pres- 
bytery, and our relations to one another have been fra- 
ternal and intimate in the highest degree. As I have 
looked back upon our long association, I have asked my- 
self what was there in his life that now in this retrospect 
seems most prominent and characteristic. I can think 
of nothing that so entirely marked his words and acts as 
that to which reference has been already made — his self- 
consecration. He was eager, enthusiastic, self-denying in 
his work; he was fertile in expedient, untiring in execu- 
tion, sympathetic and gracious in manner ; but he was 
always and above all a consecrated man. In conversation 
he brought every question to the touchstone of God's 
will and our duty as Christ's servants. In any discus- 
sion in ministerial circles I always expected to hear from 
him a reference of the subject to its bearings upon our 
Christian work and Christian life, and I was rarely dis- 
appointed. In public address the same spirit was mani- 
fest ; his object was always to impress his hearers with 



THE LAST DA VS. 247 

their personal responsibility to God. This it was that 
made him such an enthusiastic, sympathetic worker in 
times of special religious interest. This it was that gave 
him such power to influence men to seek the Saviour 
whom he loved. He spake that which he knew, and his 
utterance commanded belief. 

To our poor human wisdom it seems sad and inex- 
plicable that such a man should be cut off in the midst 
of his days, at the very meridian of his strength. We 
had supposed that his mind was maturing, his powers 
enlarging, his life ripening for still better work awaiting 
him here, and to the pain of our bereavement we are 
tempted to add the fear of loss to the kingdom of Christ. 
Is it not then a precious privilege that we can turn to 
God's word and be assured that such service is inter- 
rupted by death but for the moment ? 

"What are these," asked John, "who are arrayed in 
white robes?" And the answer was, "These are they 
who have washed their robes and made them white in 
the blood of the Lamb ; therefore are they before the 
throne of God, and serve him day and night in his tem- 
ple, and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among 
them." Thus the work of our brother continues ; it is 
only the field that is changed. All the joy that there is 
in faithful service is still his ; it is only the trials, the 
anxieties, the temptations, the disappointments that have 
ended. 

As I have sat here to-day my thoughts have gone 
back to the last occasion when I stood in this pulpit. 
Then he was by my side. It was at the meeting for 



248 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

praise and thanksgiving held last summer at the close of 
special services, and after the ingathering of the harvest 
of souls. Then as now the house was crowded, and 
the chorus of praise was full and grand. You know 
whose face seemed most radiant with joy, whose voice 
most earnestly led that song of thanksgiving. Doubt- 
less few who were then present but are here again to- 
day, but he, the leader, is gone. While we are gathered 
here with heads bowed in mourning, he is with that far 
greater company gathered out of every kindred and 
tongue and people and nation who, redeemed by the 
precious blood of the Lamb, are singing the new song. 
And, my dear hearers, although our eyes are dimmed 
with tears and our voices choked with sobs, shall not 
we, too, in view of our brother's Christian life, successful 
work, and triumphant death, unite in saying, 

" Blessing and honor and glory and power be unto 
him that sitteth upon the throne and to the Lamb for 
ever and ever." 

At the close of the exercises the benediction was pro- 
nounced by the Rev. Martin A. Erdmann, pastor of the 
German branch of the Memorial Chapel, and an opportu- 
nity was then afforded the congregation to take their last 
farewell of the pastor whom they loved so tenderly, and 
who had served them with so faithful and devoted a 
spirit. It is impossible to reproduce in any words the 
pathos and the eloquence of scenes which followed in 
that hour. They formed a "monument of praise" which 
any Christian man might covet, and were an earnest of 



THE LAST DA VS. 249 

that rich reward which all shall have at last to whom it 
may be said, " Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit 
the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the 
world : for I was a hungered, and ye gave me meat : I 
was thirsty, and ye gave me drink : I was a stranger, and 
ye took me in : naked and ye clothed me : I was sick, 
and ye visited me : I was in prison, and ye came unto 
me." 

After the congregation had taken their farewell, the 
remains were borne to their final resting-place at Wood- 
lawn, a beautiful cemetery on the border of New York. 
It is not far from the city, and the many friends who 
loved him there have already learned to think it nearer 
than it is. The plot of ground selected lies almost at 
the summit of a grassy knoll which gently slopes towards 
the rising sun, and has beneath its feet a little sheet of 
water where the clouds and sunshine and the stars are 
mirrored peacefully. In the midst of beauties which he 
loved, where God and nature speak to man of death and 
life, he rests from all his toil. And as we turn away 
from this sweet resting-place, we can but repeat the 
words of a member of his own church who loved and 
honored him : 

" One living a life so consecrated to God and 
Christ, and so full of love for men, is always 
ready for death j and at the end of forty-five 
years has lived long, because he has lived to make 
existence noble." 



"Servant of God, well done ! rest from thy loved employ; 
The battle fought, the victory won, enter thy Master's joy ! 

"The cry at midnight came: he started up to hear; 
A mortal arrow pierced his frame ■ he fell, but felt no fear. 

" His spirit with a bound left its encumbering clay, 
His tent at sunrise on the ground a darkened ruin lay. 

" Soldier of Christ, well done ! Praise be thy new employ ; 
And while eternal ages run, rest in thy Saviour's joy." 

JAMES MONTGOMERY. 



APPENDIX. 



NOTE A. (Page 8;.)* 

MISSION WORK IN NEW YORK PRES- 
BYTERIAN CHURCHES. 

B^ REV. WILLIAM J. TUCKER, D. D., 

PASTOR OF THE MADISON SQUARE CHURCH. 

The success of Mission work in New York City un- 
der the Chapel system, has brought about a state of 
things for which there is no provision in the Presbyterian 
order. Presbyterianism recognizes simply the church 
and the regular pastorate. No place has as yet been 
found for the chapel, or for those who do pastoral work 
in connection with chapels. The difficulties in the way 
of full recognition of this work and of these workers are 
greater than those unfamiliar with church work in this 
city would suppose. It ought to be stated that the 
whole matter is under almost constant discussion in the 
New York Presbytery, with a view to its right adjust- 
ment. 

The first difficulty is in the arrangement of church 
statistics. The column of church statistics in the min- 
utes of the General Assembly is designed to give a fair 

* Con>pare also page 65. 
22 



254 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

exhibit of the work and benevolence of each church du- 
ring the year. But the churches of New York city are 
divided into two classes, those which gather the results 
of their work into one place, and those which gather the 
results of their work in some permanent form at the 
various places where it is carried on. The churches of 
this second class differ from the first, not that they alone 
do work outside themselves, but in the fact that they 
build chapels, gather there permanent congregations, and 
make provision for the ordinances and sacraments of the 
church. 

The amount of church life which flows into these 
chapels varies somewhat. Perhaps a fair statement of 
the present relation would be that the churches furnish 
about one half the workers and about two thirds of the 
means for carrying on chapel work. It will thus be seen 
that it would be very difficult to divide, in any table of 
statistics, between church and chapel. And it will also 
be seen that any comparison among the churches would 
be unjust, which should fail to credit the churches which 
do so large a part of their work through chapels, with 
the results gained there. 

On the other hand, the injustice is evident as seen in 
the case of Mr. Payson, in that there is no official recog- 
nition of those who do pastoral work at the chapels, and 
to whose leadership the success of the various enterprises 
is so largely due. And none deprecate this injustice 
more than those pastors whose names are at present 
used to represent the whole work of the church. 

It is questionable whether any better adjustment can 



APPENDIX. 255 

be made at this point, than that proposed by the last 
committee appointed by the Presbytery to consider this 
subject, of which committee Mr. Payson himself was a 
member. The plan proposed was that the names of 
those doing pastoral work, whether at church or chapel, 
if members of the Presbytery, should be bracketed togeth- 
er, and placed against the name of the church, the statis- 
tics of the church, which follow, remaining as at present, 
undivided. This plan allows the unity of the church to 
remain unimpaired, and at the same time recognizes 
those who do pastoral work without the pastoral title. 

As to the ministerial standing of those working as 
pastors at the chapels, there comes in a second difficulty. 
The plan just proposed, which recognizes them in their 
work, does not meet the question of their official relation 
to the church. Any plan which shall meet this question 
must be matured in the General Assembly, as it might 
affect the order of the churches everywhere. 

As has been said, Presbyterianism now recognizes only 
the regular pastorate in connection with the local church. 
Ordained ministers, not in the pastorate, are known as 
Evangelists or Stated Supplies. The regular pastorate 
allows a Colleague, but a Colleague would not represent 
the duties and relations of a chapel pastor. Here, then, 
lies the real and essential difficulty, if the chapel system 
is to become a permanent factor in the church work of 
New York city : to provide a pastoral office which shall 
correspond to it and meet its requirements. 

It was the misfortune of Mr. Payson — which all who 
know him and his work deeply regret — that he wrought 



256 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

while everything was in the formative stage, or at least, 
before the system itself had taken shape. It is even now 
a question in the New York Presbytery whether what is 
known as the Chapel system shall or shall not be accept- 
ed as permanent and final. And while this question is 
pending, it may not be wondered at that the Assembly 
fails to provide a special pastoral relation for which there 
is little or no demand outside the city of New York. 

The following letter is from the Rev. Thomas S. 
Hastings, D. D., Pastor of the West Presbyterian Church 
of this city. 

New York, August 20, 1877. 

The Rev. Geo. S. Payson — My dear friend: You asked me to put 
on paper some things which I have said about your lamented brother in 
the peculiar relations which he sustained as a Presbyter. It is a delicate 
and a difficult task to treat of those relations, because they were confessed- 
ly abnormal. Your brother was really, but not technically, a pastor. He 
was compelled year after year to see his name appear in the statistical 
tables of the Minutes of the General Assembly with ominous blanks opposite 
to it, as if he had done no work and gathered no fruit for the Master he so 
faithfully served. Sometimes he was entered in those tables as a "Stated 
Supply," and sometimes as a "City Missionary," and sometimes as hold- 
ing no official position. Yet in the twenty years of our Presbyterial asso- 
ciation, I never heard from him one word of complaint about this anoma- 
lous condition in which he lived so long and worked so well. 

There have been and are marked differences of opinion in the Pres- 
bytery on this subject of " Chapel Work." Not a few of the pastors have 
complained openly that the brethren in charge of the chapels are not fair- 
ly treated in the General Assembly's Minutes, and they have claimed that 
the statistics of their work should be put to their credit instead of being 
absorbed in the statistics of the churches supporting these chapels. They 
have held that the technical difficulty in the way of recognizing and record- 
ing these brethren as pastors, and their chapels as churches, should be 
disregarded. 

Others have insisted that it is the duty of the Presbytery to organize 
churches at these chapels and to install the incumbents as pastors. If 
this could be done, it certainly would be the proper way to remedy the 



APPENDIX. 257 

present injustice. Those who know little practically about " chapel work " 
are very confident that this is the proper and only solution of the difficulty ; 
but the pastors who are engaged in maintaining these chapels in connec- 
tion with their churches find it quite impracticable to carry out this idea, 
and that because in many of the chapels there are not found suitable per- 
sons to ordain as elders and deacons, while those in the parent church who 
could be transferred to the chapel to fill these important offices are not 
willing to make the sacrifice of leaving their church home with its mani- 
fold ties. 

Another secret of the difficulty is, that many of our most judicious 
laymen, whose sympathy and support are necessary to the maintenance 
of this mission work, and who have done and are doing excellent service 
in it, are honestly convinced that it is not at present wise or safe to or- 
ganize separate churches at these chapels. They have seen the experi- 
ment tried in some notable instances, where the results were every way 
disastrous, and so their convictions are very strong, and are fully shared 
by a number of our wisest and most experienced pastors. 

This whole subject has been frequently and earnestly discussed in the 
Presbytery of New York, and during such discussions I have often ad- 
mired the discreet and patient silence of your brother under provocations 
which he must have keenly felt. My own position on this difficult subject 
has been so pronounced, that it would have been quite natural that at 
least in the intimacy of personal intercourse he should speak to me freely 
if he had any disposition to complain. But he has never said one word 
to me in a way to indicate that he was annoyed by his anomalous position, 
or that he was concerned about his personal interests. It would seem 
that others have moved in this matter, when it was supposed that he 
inspired their action, and so he was subjected to misapprehension. To 
me it is a pleasure to bear testimony, that, so far as I know, this was never 
the case. He seemed to me too thoroughly absorbed in his work to care 
for the technicalities to which I have referred. His whole heart was in 
the work to which he so nobly consecrated his life. Some of his brethren 
have been jealous for him, but he seemed jealous only for the cause of 
the Master he served. Very truly yours, 

THOS. S. HASTINGS. 



The unfriendly influence of this record of General 
Assembly upon the reputation of mission pastors in New 
York, and the practical injustice which any one of them 



258 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

may suffer in consequence, may be illustrated by the fol- 
lowing fact. A few years ago a prominent church in 
one of the largest cities of the West, was in search of a 
pastor, and among the many names commended to their 
notice, that of Mr. Payson was mentioned, in terms of 
such high praise, that they turned at once to the Minutes 
of General Assembly for the record of his ministry. 
They at once dismissed all farther thoughts of him as a 
candidate for their pulpit. One of the church officers, 
when afterwards questioned as to the reason, replied, 
" We looked at his record, and found nothing but blanks 
after his name for six long years, and we concluded that 
he was not the kind of man we sought. . . . The IV 
C.'s and .S. S.'s," he added, " in our church are a drug." 
( IV. C. is the abbreviation used in the Minutes of Gen- 
eral Assembly to designate ministers who are without 
charge) 



APPENDIX. 259 

NOTE B. 

(Page 136, foot note.)* 



It should be stated here that Mr. Payson was never 
wholly satisfied with the present system of Presby- 
terian church mission work in New York. For many 
years previous to his resignation, he had been ill at ease 
in his own field. He could not reconcile the state of 
things existing there with his views of what was right, 
and his judgment as to the best spiritual interests of 
those committed to his care. The chapel people, as stick, 
were not represented in the Committee by which their 
affairs were administered. In his judgment it was both 
" unscriptural and un-Presbyterian," that a church of 
from 600 to 1,000 communicants should have no voice 
in the councils which determined what should be done 
for them ; and he lost no suitable opportunity of express- 
ing his views clearly and emphatically upon this subject. 
He was especially desirous that at least a deacon or an 
elder, or one or two of the Chapel Committee of the pa- 
rent church, should be elected from the chapel people 
themselves. 

It is true this people were consulted with reference 
to any important step in which their interests were in- 
volved, and as far as possible their wishes were gratified ; 

* Compare page? 128 and 133. 



2 Go ALL FOR CHRLST. 

but still, the power of governing and directing the affairs 
of the chapel remained exclusively with the parent 
church.* This state of things did not commend itself 
to Mr. Payson's approval, and was one of the most effi- 
cient reasons, though not the immediate occasion of his 
resignation. 



With reference to their prompt acceptance of Mr. 
Payson's resignation, it should be also stated, in justice 
to the Committee, that there was an intimate connection 
between this step and the action referred to in the arti- 
cle for the " Evangelist," quoted on page 1 29. Some 
allusion has already been made to this matter on page 
128, but in addition to what was there stated, it should 
be said that "in proposing to his people to raise $10,000 
towards the cost of a new building, Mr. Payson, without 
consultation or authority, took a position far in advance 
of the Committee, and one which they could not see their 
way clear to approve. The Madison Square Church had 
no definite plan or purpose with regard to the erection 
of a new edifice, and the Committee saw clearly that un- 
pleasant consequences might ensue in case the church 
should decide not to build. The money could not be 
returned to the donors, for they were unknown, and it 
could not rightfully be used for any purpose, except that 
for which it was contributed. Hence the Committee 
felt constrained to decline the custody of the money, or 
in any way to commit the church to the undertaking ;" 

* Compare page 72. 



APPENDIX. 261 

and their views in regard to this matter may serve as at 
least a partial explanation of their action in this case. 



It would reasonably be inferred, after all that has been 
said of Mr. Payson's life and labors, that he must have 
reached some important conclusions concerning the 
nature of mission work in New York City as hitherto 
conducted within the bounds of the denomination to 
which he belonged. And it is only doing justice to the 
truth to say that his convictions upon this matter were 
as decided and well-defined as they were individual. He 
had his own views of the problem of city evangelization, 
to which on proper occasions he did not hesitate to give 
the fullest and freest expression. 

And perhaps there is no more suitable place than 
this, where the reader will have obtained a fair view of 
the whole field, to record his clear and pronounced judg- 
ment of the system under which he labored for so many 
years, and in which' his patience and self-devotion were 
often taxed to the utmost. 

At a meeting of the Pastors' Association of the city 
of New York, held March 21, 1875, at the special request 
of his brethren in the ministry, he opened the discussion 
for the day by remarks upon " Mission Chapels as related 
to Christian Work? The bare abstract herewith given 
is only an abstract, and served merely as an outline 
for his address on that occasion, but it is sufficiently full 
and clear to furnish an index of his views. 

The great problem of this missionary age, (he said,) 



262 ALL FOR CHRLST. 

is how to reach the masses with the gospel. Scotland, 
with Glasgow at the head, attempts it by sustentation ; 
Philadelphia, by colonization ; New York, by the so-call- 
ed mission system, commenced, so far as I can ascertain, 
some twenty-five years since. 

First came the Sunday-school, to which prayer-meet- 
ings and church services under theological students or 
ministers were added as the necessity for their assistance 
arose. Sometimes at the parent church, oftener at the 
chapel, the sacraments were administered. All support of 
the work as a rule came from the parent church ; the 
entire management of church, school, and the associated 
work, was in the hands of the session, or, oftener, of a 
committee appointed by the parent church. They ap- 
pointed all officers, even to a pastor, and removed them 
without any action pro or con on the part of the mission 
congregation ; but food and clothing were dispensed with 
a liberal hand until, too often, on the part of those assist- 
ed, it was deemed a favor to become recipients of these 
largesses and to indicate their approbation by conde- 
scending to attend the services. The results of the sys- 
tem after trial for a quarter of a century may be briefly 
summed up as follows : 

Of the three schools first established, one always re- 
mained without distinct organization or the administra- 
tion of sacraments at the chapel. After a long and pain- 
ful illness, continued through most of its existence, it 
died some eight or ten months since. The second grew 
into a distinct organization, but so cramped and hamper- 
ed in every direction that it also miserably perished 



APPENDIX. 263 

within ihe past year. The third, after losing hundreds 
of converts who had united with a church which has 
since moved up town, has taken a new lease of life in 
Emmanuel Chapel. Under the faithful labors of its 
pastor and the sympathetic cooperation of the parent 
church, it has, we hope, great and good things in store. 

Of the chapels since organized we may simply add 
that just in proportion as they have been granted church 
privileges and taught to do the utmost for themselves, 
have they advanced towards a success. Still it must be 
acknowledged that after twenty-five years of trial the 
mission system in New York is yet to produce its first 
self-supporting church. When we contrast these results 
with those of the colonization system of Philadelphia, and 
especially with those of the sustentation in Glasgow, we 
may well ask whether New York has attained to the best 
possible. 



Let me conclude with presenting a summary of the 
advantages and disadvantages of the mission system. 

(I.) The Advantages are: 1. This system is better 
than nothing. If churches can only exist on the high 
lands in the centre of the island, let us rejoice that there 
is at- least some remembrance of those less-favored thou- 
sands who live upon its borders. 

2. It provides a field of labor for the members of the 
parent church. Some of the noblest workers in New 
York to-day have been developed under this system. 

3. It has saved souls not a few ; it has given guidance 



264 ALL FOR CLLRIST. 

to the young and ignorant, has truly aided many a fami- 
ly in destitution, and has added hundreds to our church 
roll. 

(II.) Disadvantages, i. It is contrary to the genius 
of Presbyterianism. This appears in the fact that for 
hundreds and thousands of church-members there is to- 
day no representation It is shown also by the po- 
sition of pastors in these chapels. Presbyterianism, 
after twenty-five years, has no name or place on her rec- 
ords for them. General Assemblies, Synods, Presby- 
teries, and Sessions, have striven sometimes by subter- 
fuges to avoid the dilemma, but it still presses. 

2. Too often this system is against the very Bible 

itself In some of our chapels no contributions 

will be received for the support of home work 

Not infrequently they even foster pauperism and deceit. 
Only the most abject of Americans and foreigners will 
attend places where they are regarded as recipients only. 

3. It prevents colonization. Our Methodist and Bap- 
tist neighbors are continually establishing self-supporting 
churches in the very midst of our missions. Could not 
Presbyterianism do the same if managed aright ? 

4. It sacrifices the middle classes so far as our church 
is concerned. The rich men of New York, twenty years 
hence, are poor men to-day. They are the industrious, 
ambitious boys and girls of our public schools, and the 
young people coming from homes of industry and intel- 
ligence in the country. They will not, as a rule, go to 
our chapels. They cannot afford seats in our churches, 
and so they drift away into indifference, or, possibly, into 



APPENDIX. 265 

some church with which, by education and feeling, they 
have little fellowship. 

5. It is breaking down the weaker churches of our 
city. Churches that for years have done a splendid work, 
that occupy excellent positions, are dying to-day for want 
of assistance comparatively trivial. Since the Reunion 
five Presbyterian churches have died. Six, out of thirty- 
eight remaining, are to-day without pastors 

(III.) Changes, i. Set the premium on virtue, not 
vice. Help only those who will help themselves. En- 
force the Bible rule, " If a man will not work, neither let 
him eat." 

2. Work with these people instead oifor them. Paul 
became all things — a Jew, a Greek, a Roman, even 
"weak" — if thereby he might only save some. Make 
these people helpers and workers in all that is good. 

3. Establish a Sustentation Fund that will give a fair 
support to the pastors of any church that regularly con- 
tributes to this fund, no matter where or what that church 
may be. 



23 



266 ALL FOR CL1RLST. 

NOTE C. 

(Page 226.) 



EXTRACT FROM MINUTES OF THE PRESBYTERY OF NEW 
YORK, MARCH 5, 1877. 

The Rev. Charles H. Payson, for eighteen years a 
minister of Jesus Christ, died in the midst of his work, 
January 24, 1877. He was from the time of his ordina- 
tion a member of this Presbytery, and his entire work 
was within the limits of this city. 

Mr. Payson possessed in unusual degree the qualifi- 
cations for the ministry of Christ. He was responsive to 
the truth. His whole nature kindled under the truths 
of revelation. He watched for the " light to break out 
of God's Holy Word ;" and whatever he saw and felt, 
that he declared with an increasing joy. The pulpit was 
to him never a burden or a weariness, but always a de- 
light. And he was a lover of men. Recognizing in all 
the possible image of the Lord Jesus, he endeavored to 
make the work of Christ real and evident in character. 
He knew no distinctions among those to whom he minis- 
tered, but gave himself with an equal energy and love to all. 

With these qualifications, which are everywhere the 
signs of the ministry, he would have been in any field a 
successful minister. The peculiar success, therefore, 
which attended his work among us was the result of 
adaptation. He fitted himself — it may reverently be 
said "he straightened himself" — to the end before him. 



APPENDIX. 267 

His consecration was so complete that he knew no 
conflicting purposes, and to the work to which he had 
set himself apart he brought all his energies and enthu- 
siasm, all the acquisitions from study and travel and the 
growing resources of his faith. So that his ministry, 
though quickly told in years, has left the impression and 
the power with many of the results of a finished work. 

Mr. Payson was a man of marked individuality. As 
the end which he proposed to himself was distinct and 
personal, so were his convictions, opinions, and habits. He 
held firmly to his own principles and methods, though in a 
large spirit of charity towards those with whom he differed. 

He went in and out among us in all ways of genial 
companionship, always revealing the sympathies of a 
large, true-hearted man. In his death he bore witness 
to the faith in which he lived. He went out from us, as 
he had lived among us, bravely, and in a great trust in 
his Redeemer. 

It is therefore with heartfelt gratitude that we put 
upon the records of this Presbytery our estimate of the 
services and the life of our brother. Conscious of our 
loss as we still work for Christ, we thank God for the 
example which is one of such consecration, fidelity, and 
trust in Christian service. And in our sympathies with 
those most bereaved, the church to which he ministered, 
and specially the household of his care and love, we do 
rejoice in those comforts of God which gather about 
these and all remembrances of our dead. 

WILLIAM J. TUCKER, 
ERSKINE N. WHITE, \ Commit 
WILLIAM ADAMS, 



26S ALL FOR CLLRLST. 

RESOLUTIONS OF THE PHILOTHEAN SOCIETY. 

At a meeting of the Philothean Society, on Saturday, 
January 27, 1877, it was the unanimous desire of the 
members to convey to the widow of our dear brother, 
Charles H. Payson, some expression of our high appre- 
ciation of him, of our grief at his loss, and of our sympa- 
thy for her in her great bereavement. By one of the 
paradoxes of sorrow, his departure has made him unusu- 
ally prominent ; and as his character passes before the 
regard of loving eyes, he seems grand and noble and 
true ; a scholar whose most delightful study was God's 
revealed word ; a minister who plead for the reconcilia- 
tion of sinners to God as though he stood indeed in 
Christ's stead ; a pastor whose charge was any who 
needed or asked his counsel ; a Christian who was seek- 
ing continually a deeper consecration ; a brother friendly, 
faithful, charitable, beloved. 

His decease flings our thoughts back upon the prom- 
ises of God, upon the words of our Master touching the 
resurrection, upon the benediction of the Voice from 
heaven : " Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord ;" 
and we are comforted in the thought that " absent from 
the body" is "present with the Lord." Our sorrow may 
lead us to sympathize with her whose grief reaches 
depths that we cannot sound, and whose loss is the loss 
of a husband, pastor, guide, support — all in one. And 
our comfort in Christ will lead us to pray that the ever- 
lasting arms may be about her, and that she may be 
taught to say with simple, affectionate faith, "The Lord 
is my husband." 



APPENDIX. 269 

It was resolved that a copy of this minute be for- 
warded to the widow of our deceased brother. 

S. B. ROSS ITER, 
E. D. MURPHY. 



RESOLUTIONS PRESENTED TO MRS. CHARLES PAYSON 
AND FAMILY BY THE SOCIAL BIBLE-CLASS. 

It having pleased our heavenly Father to remove 
from his active labors in our midst our beloved pastor 
and friend, Rev. Charles H. Payson, we, the undersigned, 
desire to sympathize with you in your deep bereavement, 
and to express our sincere love for him, and the deep 
loss all have sustained who knew him as a teacher, 
guide, and counsellor. But our loss is his gain. 

" None knew him but to love him, 
None named him but to praise." 

We never shall forget the great interest he mani- 
fested towards us at all times, but especially how, upon 
the last Sabbath in which he was engaged in the Mas- 
ter's work on earth, he visited us, speaking words of de- 
light and encouragement, and leaving his heartfelt wishes 
for our good. The soul of our pastor overflowed, and 
our souls were reached. He spoke truly, and his words 
have been fruitful seeds in our hearts. He was the 
voice of Christ speaking to us words of warning, counsel, 
and tenderness ; and his last words, " Cling to Christ," 
will long be remembered and cherished as the motto of 
our lives. 

Seldom can the bereaved heart reject an expression 

* 



270 ALL FOLi CLLRLST. 

of grateful remembrance in which the departed are held 
by those in whom their past attention and kindness have 
wakened a deep interest and attachment. Therefore we 
are fully persuaded that you will acquit us of all inten- 
tion of intruding upon your deep grief, when we endeavor 
to console you in a measure by directing your attention 
from your great loss to Him who afflicteth not willingly, 
and enableth us to say, in the exercise of our pastor's 
trust and confidence, " It is the Lord's will ; let him do 
as seemeth good in his sight." 

Never was he so dear, so true, so noble, as when you 
now think of him as having but reflected the love of Him 
who is the true Husband of the widow, the Father of the 
fatherless. Through the wonderful grace of God it is 
your portion and ours to rejoice in a blessed hope that 
while he cannot return to us, we all may go to him, thus 

clinging to Christ. 

Signed by A. R. COLTON, Teacher, 
and every member of the class. 



RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY CITY MISSION SOCIETY, 
NEW YORK, JANUARY 29, 1877. 

The missionaries of the New York City Mission and 
Tract Society, at their regular meeting held on Satur- 
day, January 27, 1877, hearing of the death of their 
friend and brother, Rev. Charles H. Payson of the Me- 
morial Chapel of this city, passed unanimously the fol- 
lowing resolution : that having often been associated 
with the Rev. Charles H. Payson in missionary work, we 



APPENDIX. 271 

heartily unite in testifying to our sense of his high Chris 
tian character and of his eminently successful ministry 
among the people for whom he labored ; and we do 
hereby tender our sincere sympathies to his bereaved 
church and his stricken family, and pray that the God of 
all comfort may console and sustain them in this afflic- 
tive dispensation. 

In behalf of the missionaries, 

JOHN RUSTON. 

We cannot forbear adding here a part of a letter of 
sympathy from one of the leading members of the Me- 
morial Chapel. It breathes a spirit which we hope and 
pray may become the prevailing spirit among a people 
so deeply bereaved and so greatly blessed. 

My Dear Mrs. Payson : . . . Yesterday at our female prayer-meet- 
ing, Mrs. prayed for you and your children with so much earnest and 

tender feeling, that it did me good, and I thought — it does not always re- 
quire learning to make eloquence. These meetings have begun well and 
now we want the answers to prayer in a church fully united, and a large 
ingathering of precious souls. I think I mentioned to you that a verse in 
Isaiah was very forcibly impressed upon me, soon after Mr. Payson's 
death, "This people have I formed for myself; they shall show forth my 
praise," and how it comforted me in view of the nvysterious blow that took 
our dear pastor away. Then I realized, too, that the best way I could shcno 
my loyalty to your husband would be to stay in the church he so loved, and 
seek its peace and advancement. 

We have very much to be grateful for in the faithful ministrations of 
Mr. E both in the pulpit and out of it, and very soon, he and the peo- 
ple will know each other for their mutual comfort, I am sure. . . . 

I have written all this because I know that your interest in this church 
can never cease, and that you and your husband are identified with it be- 
yond all time. This thought is very sweet to me. How many ways the 
Lord has of broadening and deepening our best affections. 



7 2 ALL FOR CHRIST. 

NOTE D. 

(Page 232.) 



The following tribute to his worth appears in an arti- 
cle upon the public services at the funeral of Mr. Payson, 
and is from the pen of the Rev. John Hall, D. D., of New 
York city. 

FALLEN ON THE FIELD. 

The day — it was in January— was bright overhead. 
The sun sent his kindly rays down on a frozen land, and 
in the streets of the city, where the pure snow cannot long 
escape the contamination of city life, the walks had be- 
come damp and muddy. It was all fair when you looked 
up — it was slippery and comfortless when you looked 
down. It was like enough the race now ended, that had 
been run in difficult and often disagreeable places, but 
over it, ever shining and warming, all the light of an 
uncreated Sun. The day and our thoughts harmonized — 
all below was unlovely — all above was sunshine. 

For we are going to his funeral. He was a minis- 
ter — it matters little of what denomination. That is the 
reason that the building is already crowded, though 
there is hardly a carriage about the door; and though 
no word has yet been spoken, nor the casket been car- 
ried in, many faces are tearful, and many eyes are red 
with weeping. They have left space for brother minis- 
ters on one side, and as they, with many names, crowd 



APPENDIX. 273 

into it, they too, catch the spirit of the scene, and their 
greetings are silent and sorrowful. The assembly is far 
too great for all to have seats. Round that farther wall 
is a line of young men — such young men as earn honest 
bread with their hands. They too, look as if their 
brother had died. And on the other side, and all around, 
are troops of weeping women ; and mingling with the 
children, here and there, their fathers — not so many of 
them, for they in most cases had to work. Not often 
does one see fifteen hundred persons so moved by one 
feeling ; so hushed in the presence of one great sorrow. 
Why is this ? Who is to be buried ? A popular leader ? 
a large employer ? a famous man ? No : the pastor of 
the congregation. That was his pulpit — his throne. 
This goodly, even stately building (for though it was not 
for the rich, why should it not be rich to lift up the 
worshippers ?) this fair church was his workroom. These 
were his people — more than fellow-citizens, more than 
neighbors, more than acquaintances, more than friends, 
more, even in some sense, than family — his people. 
Those sad-faced youths he called "my young men." 
Those young women he called " my Bible-class." Those 
sobered boys and girls he called " my children." They 
all loved him, for he loved them all, and they knew it 
well. And now they were carrying him into his own 
church to lay him down in death-silence before his own 
pulpit, that devout men might make lamentation over 
him, before they carried him out to his burial. No won- 
der that they wept. 

He was a minister among the poor, and to them. 



274 ALL FOR CLLRLST. 

That man whose ungloved hand is furtively wiping a tear 
as if he was ashamed of it, used to drink, while his wife 
wept and prayed. The pastor used to go to the house, 
cheered the mother, took the children into the infant 
class, (they found some garments on the way,) and they 
learned hymns and verses and bright, good child-ways 
that lightened their mother's darkened lot and room ; and 
one day the pastor happened to see their father, who got 
to trust him and like him, and at length he must needs 
go and see how all this thing is done; and as he got into 
the habit of going, he dropped out of the habit of going 
to " the corner ;" and now he is a man, with a lovely fam- 
ily. He will never trouble the police, nor be a charge on 
the state. He knows to-day that all he is, and all his 
children are, he owes to the brother-man whose body is 
to be carried past him there to the front of his pulpit. 

There is a woman in faded mourning, crying as if her 
heart would break. Her son was her support. You see 
him yonder in the line; and when work could not be had, 
the minister went round to an employer and told the 
story, and said, "I don't want them to lose their self- 
respect by getting charity;" and the boy got work, and 
felt that he ought to do it well, for the sake of him who 
procured it ; and that boy never will beg nor let his moth- 
er want. There is something in him that disinclines him 
to dependence. — And next to the widow you may see a 
homely face, young, but full of distress. She is a domes- 
tic, from the north of Ireland. While her father was 
strong she had not "to go out," but when he lost his 
health she came to America. The minister was her best 



APPENDIX. 275 

friend — her counsellor, her confidant. When she had 
ten dollars to send home, he put her in the way to do it ; 
when she was out of place she consulted him, and he 
found her a safe lodging ; she called to tell him her new 
address when she was engaged again. By his advice she 
had put a little money in a savings-bank. The one ser- 
mon she could hear on Sunday brightened her week. 
And now he is gone, and she feels lonely as the day she 
landed. " Next to my father," the simple creature says 
in her grief, " I loved him the best in all the world." 

Surely, surely, far beyond what Board or Committee 
can give, there are rewards to the workers in the tene- 
ments and lowlier homes of the people — present rewards 
in the priceless love of grateful hearts, coming rewards 
from Him who says, " Ye did it unto Me!" 

A stir and a rustle behind, and a deeper stillness for 
a moment — and then the people rise, not now to praise 
God at the pastor's call, but to receive his silent form. The 
casket is laid down .... The minister was a man — with 
his own home-joys and cares. They realize how near he 
came to them. Mothers there remember how he bent 
over their dead children. Widows, whose stay he was, 
look in pity at that sweet, wondering baby-face that 
father shall not kiss again, and their tears flow amain. 
Minister and people — they are one, according to God's 
blessed plan — one household, an extension of the fami- 
ly, with common joys and sorrows ; and he was a great, 
strong, loving elder brother among them, who led them 
and comforted them, and helped them, and loved them — 
and he is dead ! They are sorrowing most of all for this, 
that they shall see his face no more. 



zfo ALL FOR CHRIST. 

What need of any words now, but of " Resurrection 
of Life V* Fathers, brethren, classmates, companions 
in labor — what can they say so eloquent, so touching, so 
softening as is said by his people there ? No need to 
tell us he was brave and true, and tender-hearted, and 
that love to his Master made him love his charge. Their 
faces, their tears tell it. They in their homes, lives, 
hopes, tell it, and as one studies the scene, his mind 
travels beyond it — beyond the bowed widow and her or- 
phans — beyond the fair structure — out into the crowded 
thoroughfares, and over the land, and one longs to cry 
out — O men and brethren, reforming and bewailing 
crimes, and corruption, taxation, and all unlovely things 
that mar our freedom and block our difficult way — get 
men like him to work, and give them room ; and sooner 
and cheaper and better, than by all your statutes and 
commissions and costly machinery, will you make our 
city — ay, and our town and country life — pure and sweet 
and noble. Charles Paysons, ministers of the Gospel, 
blessed peacemakers, wise teachers, good friends, are 
more and mightier than your costliest array of police 
and your best balanced legislation for pacifying, purify- 
ing, and elevating the people. 



Princeton Theological Seminary-Speer Library 



1 1012 01041 0464 



