Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 






77/. ,^.;5^ >-'^.- 



/^rt 





/nt 





\ 



i 



V ' 



?. 



'4 




,x 



>\>^.;;^ 



^V' 



THE , 

AMERICAN 
THACT KAOAZINE, 

FOB THB VBAR 1639. 

VOL. IV. 



NEW'YORK : 

POBUSHED BY THE' AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETV. 



XlffBBZ 



PAOB. 
. 188 



~f. 



73 
76 
77 
80 
50 
37,148 



61 
96 



EeceiptaO, 



AMrd«aiRel.TrftetSoe. . 
AddrMtMM of— 

Rey.EUBddwin . 

Rev. Daniel A. Clark . 

Rer. Nathan 8. 8. Beman 

Rev. Elon Galuaha 
Aged Fenude Diadirilo 
Agents at the Wett 
American IVaet Sode^— - 

4& Annireraary and Report . 

Recent PublicationB 1^ 48, 60, 

>, 88, 35, 46, 58,83,94,107 
[118,131,149^155 
Agents in the Gfeat Valley, 37,148 
Ezectttive Committee . • 63^ 
Fresent state <^ ... 109 
Operations in the Valley of the 

BffiasiBsippi ..... 
State of the Funds 
Donatioins to the Library 
Circniar of Executive Com. 

American Tract Society, Boston— 
ISthReport 

Ardent Spints, Premium Tract on, 
for the Young . 

Arkansas Territory, wants of 

Arrow thrown at a ymture 

Ashtabula Co. Ohio Auxiliary 

Baltimore Branch, 13th Report . 

Baltimore, usefidness of Tracts in 

Baptist General Tract Society, 5th 
Anniversary . .■ .■ '. 

Baxter's Saints' Rest . 

Burmah, Tracts l&r 

Canada, eagerness for Tracts in . 

Children at the West, Tracto among 

Christian Ahnanac for 1830 34, 144 

Christian Reader ... 96 

Cincinnati Branch, Sd Report 

Circniar of American Tract Soc 

Connecticat Branch, 13th Report 

Danville, Ken. Female Aux&iaKy 

Darien, Geo. Auxiliary 

Destitute mtut be supplied wifli 
Tracts . . • . 

Diaeiple, agedfemale . 

Donation Irom a friend in S. C« . 

Bra, new . • . • . 

France, Seamen's lotearies in. 

Glasgow Religious Tract Soc. . 

Ckwpel a Message 

Cbeece^donitioiifi)r . 

HsnAfll Tracts, preoiimi for 



Heathen, wiiit of dfluatioiis for Tracts 



for 



45' 
56 
13 

133* 
43^ 

131' 



lOi^ 
lU 
118 
145 

93 

57 
196 
6 
141 
106 
198 

45 

190 

136 

53 

17 



106 

145 

33 

46 

117 

95 
50 

9 

91 

99 

137 

1 



HuntsviDe, Ahu Auxiliary . 
India, call from . 

India, Tract cause in 
Ireland, Tract and Book Soc fin- 
Jewelry, donatitm of 
Legacies to Benevolent Societies- 
Importance (^ ... 13 
Letters fitmi— 

Dr.J.Scudder ... 13 
Mr. Stephen- Prust 16^ 

Rev. Mr. Eastman- 38 

Mr. C. E. Furman 39 

Rev. Messrs. Vail and Case . 40 
Rev. Mr. Me Ahoy 41 

Mr. E. Wright ... 42 
Rev. C. S. Robinson . 51 

AClergjrman 131 

A Lady 131 

Miisionaries in Ceylon . . 133 
Lcmdon Prayer Book and Horn. 
Society .... 137 
Lexington, Ken. Fem. Union Aux. 116 
Liverpool Tract Soc. 14th Report 99 
London, Building for Anniversaries 115- 
London Prayer Kwk and Horn. Soc. 137 
London Tr. Soc. 30th Anniversary IIS 
Louisiana 8c Mississippi, Tr. cause in 191 
Lynchburg, Va. Auxulary . . . 141 
Manchester Religious Tract Soe. 137 
Marshman, Dr. testimony of 136 

Mississ^n^ Tract cause in the Val 

ley<rf 90,109 

Monthly Distribution of Trabts 97,110 

[139, 154 
Sketch of the Plan . 96 

Result of Distributions 99 

Practical Suggestions . . 104 

New Era 91 

New-Orleans, Agent for 21 

New Year's Gift ... 48 

New-York Central Branch . 46 

New-York City Tract Soc. 9d Rep. 32 
OneidaPre8bytery,Reaolutions oC 33 
Pennsylvania Branch Tract Soc. 7 

Do. do. 9dRep. 92 

Petenburg, Va. Young Men's Aux. 117 
Philadelphia Montl^lHstribution 154 
Pilgrim's Progress, Ace. in Singalese 135 
' Premiums, Award of 57, 89, 149. 

PremiiraiTracts 19,99,34,57,89,106 

(190, 130, 141^ 
PiihCttqpj N. J. NasBMifHidl Aux. U.T. 



INDEX. 



PAOX. 

PlroTideiice,R.L Auiili&ry 56 

R«d Riy«r, Afeney on 133 

Report, Fourtii Anniud • 9B 

Riclmumd, Rev. Legh, Advioo to 

hisDaugliter ... 5 

Richmond, Va. AazUunry 116 

RtMnan Catholic Book Society 116 

Safe Bank 5 

Sailing Veaaeh eat of Port on tho 

8«bbath, Premium Tract on . 34 
St.GnoEffs'iOkll.Y.FMQ.Aii*' 8 

Seamen's Libraries in Franco S9 

Shepherd of S^Mbmrriaia • Mfii 

Steamboat, Contsibalion aii bowil M 

1WaCo.N.Y.Au3dierjr . . 141 

Tract ami Book Soo. for Ir«lM4 43 

TvactCanse in India . 19& 



aippi 121 

Tract Cause in Valley of Nwoii- 

dppi . 90^109 

Tract wmenbered in dBHih 129 

Tract Sjrstem, nToailaBite of 49 

Tract versus the BaMe • . 152 
Tract woB at Cafda . 153 

Tnu:ts,MoiithlyDi0lribntiDnoC 9T,110 

fU-Z,t30kl»^154 
Tracts to every ftaniiywilUng tore^ 

oeive them 86, 97««.lMk 1 10 

The Plan explained , 86 

Motives for its edoptkm . 86 
Bnoonvafiog Facts 88 

Tike Plan commended toBraH'- 

dMs and Auxiiiari4W 90 

Sketehof thePbn 91 

Tracta to the D«8titHte . 25 

" Biarrea Pig-tree" 6 

« D«iy of JndgmoBft'* 6 

«* Swearer's Prayer" . 6 

To two Heathen ISt 

Granted for the West . . 18 

T^ an intemperate maa in Ohio 19- 

To a Lady in Mississippi . 19 

''WellJdDadaetedFaniL" . 99 

"Progress of Sin" . . 20 

" Rewards of Omakamess" 40 

*< Barren Fig-tntte" . 40 

To two individMals in Va. 41 

"Church Safe" . 48 

" Francis Newport" . . 48 

To a Southern Lady . 44 

'( Day of lodnient" 44 

In a revival or Religioa 44 

"^ Great Question Answered" 4& 



n 
n 
n 
>» 



PAGE. 
TraeU,u8^na3 of-^ 

" Death-bed of a Free-thinker" 
In a Society of Universalists 
On Intemperance . 
To Professors of Religion . 
" a Young Lady 
a Young Gentleman 
a Blacksmith in Va. 
a Lady in Kentucky 
a Mother of a Family 
" a Father w»N.Y^Il city . 
" a Sailor .... 
Among a coiQpiHnr oC 9<M<Mer8 
ToaUmveraaliot . 
"anUltenpeiftftlCiiA 
" a Deist , . . . 
NUre Tracts o« « v^gnge ViJm 
'^PoorSarah" . . . 
"Leslie's Melhod witft the Do- 

if»^ .... 

4«YowigCotMfW* . . 
**Rilinous Consequences of 

QambUng" . , • 
in Vdiey of Mississ^pi 
** Heaven Loot" . 
On. Intemperance 
To. a Lady in a dfcliJW . 

" a Sabhalh-bnakier 4 <?«me- 

stei; . . • • 
" an Aged Mm , 
«<TheW^ytobo8avf4" 
** Death-bed #f a Pree-Oiwkwr" 
" Leslie^ Short ttfit^¥>A" 
"Well-Condjicted Ffl^rvi" . 
Tracts, «Kiao/f** 
In South ^eriea 
the Western States 
Missisai^ . 
Indiann « . 
Ohio . . 

Vermont • 
For tbe Heivthen • 
North CaroUna. 
Canada • 

Louisiana and QfUssisaippi 
Arkanma Torritory 
indiai-^^eylon . 
Burmak • • 
Troy, N. Y. Auxiliary 
17tica,N.Y.A«zttiary 
Vail, Rev. F. Y. Report 
Washington CS(y Auxiliary 
Winchester, Va. Awnliary 
Work , Good , goes on . 



45 
54 
54 
54 
55 
55 
55 
58 

n 

1ST 

128 
198 
129 
129 
129 
199 

138 
139 

139 
151 
152 
152 
193 

153 
193 
154 
154 
154 
154 



4 
4 

. 16 

. n 

17.5]«52 

. 16 

. 45^ 

. 52, 5.) 

53 

19) 

196 

. 133 

. 136 

31 

33,195 

. 121 

7 

46 

117, 130 



THE AMERICAN 
3L.IV. JAinrAB.7, isaft. NC 



Seg " Sblpi' Slong," page 13 



THE GOSPEL A MESSAGE. 

2W TVocf J at leiul (e tiay Familif. 

Tbe two follovnng- propoaitions, we believe, maj be ■uslained by 
the most conelatire cridcnce, and will commend tiiemwlTes to tbe 
approbation of «v«iy eoligbtened Chrialian : 

I. Hitl it i< (Ac thit^ of thoit teha hmt the Goipel, to cuihi loid 
DEl-tiBR tl to oil tcfta hajie il lul. 

9. TAol, in tha teant of other mtaia, it iKduU be carried, mlhovt 
ielmy, tyTsACTd. 

The meaning of the term " Goiptt," a glad tidingt, or a jo^ul 
nUMOgt lent — no! a prize long aoo^t b; those who knev its worth, 
tin M was fmind ; but ■ ouuagt, earritd and tendered to men vho 
iti«r« ifnofaut of it, and would nerer have come after ft. The Son 
of Godhimsdftras jen^ftnmh«aTeii tsbiingloaloilwoild the tms- 

Tot. IV. 1 [Whh* Mo, 37, 



$ TffC GOSPEL A MISSAGC. t^aO* 

sage of salvation, through hit own atoning Uood. He commUsioned 
ApostUi [mestengert,] and sent them forth to cany and delirer this 
mesgage to men, multitades of whom, he forewarned bis diflcipleSf 
must be expected to reject it. "I send you forth/' said he (o them, 
' as sheep in the midst of wolves"— but, however dark the prospect 
might be. He required them to go and deliver the message. This in- 
junction Christ oontinuallj urged upon his followers; and repealed, 
with great emphasis, just before his ascension into heaven : " Go ye 
into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. He that 
believeth, shall be saved ; but he that believeth not, shall be danmed." 
And lest any should possibly so lose sight of the nature of the Gospel, 
as to suppose this command not binding on all his followers in all 
ages. He added, as appears in the Gospel by Matthew, " Lo, I am 
with you akpayt even unto the end of the world." 

The salvation which the Gospel reveals, is through faiih in Jesus 
Christ. " But how," says the Apostle, '< shall they believe in him of 
whom they have not heard ? and how shall they hear without a 
preacher ? and how shall they preach, except they be sent ?'* The 
primitive Apostles and disciptos of Christ, amid persecution and the 
, most appalling otistacles, laboured to convey this message to fallen 
men, as if they felt the import of their Lord*8 injunction, and knew 
that the eternal salvation of men depended, under the blessing of the 
Holy Spirit, on their fidelity. Some, in our age, have felt a measure 
of the same responsibility — we believe it will be felt by all, before the 
millennial day shall Mess our world— and tehy should it not now be 
felt by all? 

Our indifference to this subject. Christian Brethren, does not re* 
lease us from the responsibility which God has devolved upon us. 
We know our Master's will ; and should well beware, lest, in the day 
of judgment, we be found to have been guilty of withholding the 
message of the Gospel from multitudes, to whom, had we been faith- 
ful, it might have been conmiunicated. 

Christians can now no longer be excused from thb duty, because 
preachers of the Gospel are not to be obtained in sufficient numbers 
to supply the destitute \ nor because they feel themselves incapable 
of personally communicating to men a knowledge of the way of life. 
By Tracts f the great truths of salvation may, without delay, be con- 
veyed to all who can read. There is no obstacle to their being printed, 
and means sufficient being furnished to purchase them, and all en- 
gaging in their circulation; and God has shown that he is ready 
abundantly to bless tiiem. 

W« pray the reader, while contemplating this subject, not to fix his 
jnkftd merely on the distant destitute; but to think also of those in his 
own Bfighbourhood, and within the cirde of his own personal acquainti 
A0C9 and influence, who Ci^joy not the Ciospel. It id not enough, that 



tiS.9*] T^E eospjsi:. a me^sac^. 3 

our lellow^ielpp in the midst of us hftve access to the preachiog of 
the Gospel, «nd might hear it if they would. We must, carry the mU- 
90geyof the Qotptl to ikeir firtsidet, and tender it, to every family and 
totU qf them; and we must do this again and again, till our Christian 
%varfare is ended, or it shall be no longer necessaiy, fp|r one man to 
#iiy-to another, "Know ye the Lord.'' 

We doubt whether any Tract Assoeiation or Auxiliary have carried 
these messages of the Gospel to all in the field of their operations, as 
thoroughly and faithfally as their duty has required. Many, because 
they were in high life, or bad imbibed the delusions of infidelity and 
fatal error, or had sunk low in the vice of intemperance, or wilfully 
refused to present themselves in the house of God to hear the message 
of the Gospel, have been passed by in the distribution of Tracts ; and 
have scarcely had the invitations of the Gospel presented to them, in 
any form, more than the distant benighted heathen. Officers and 
members of Tract Societies have kept their Tracts laid up upon their 
shelves, and neglected to supply the periling at their very doors. 
Are there not many who will rise up in the judgment and say, " If 
these, our neighbours, and kindred, and friends, had but, communicated 
to us the tidiogs of salvation through a Redeemer, we would have re> 
pented ; but they gave us not so much even as a Tradf to warn us of 
our danger and tell us of the way of life." 

- How long before it shall be told, that in such a towUt or county, or 
etaUf two Tracts or more have been placed in every family which was 
miUing to receive them 7 How long before (his shall be true of the 
whole United States? The American Tract Society have already 
sent four faithful men to engage in this work among the 4,000,000 in 
the Valley of the Mississippi, and another into one of our most desti> 
tute southern sut^ ; ai|d stand pledged, by the blessing of God and 
the oo-operatioB of the Christian community, to sustain them all, and 
still to carry on the work in all the destitute portions of the country. 
In more favoured portions, it must be performed by the voluntary 
efibrts of the friends of Christ; and eternity, and, in many instances, 
time, there is every reason to believe, will show (he most g|«tiiying 
and blessed results. 

Look at the Rev. Drs. Henderson and Peterson among the desola- 
tions in the north of Europe. In one parish, where, amid the forms 
of a corrupted church, the name of Christ was scarcely known, they 
caused four hundred copies of the *' Chreat Qtieslwn Answered" 
written by the excellent Andrew Fuller, to be distributed. The con- 
sequence was, that that *< Great Question," " What tnust / da tq he 
saved V^ was asked by multitudes. T^hoir pre^phef himself became 
nlanned. They began to assemble in a large ham, for prayer and the 
sincere worship of God ; and the issue was the conveuian of the 
pari^, pastor and people, to the vitality of Evangelical religion. 



•^ WANT OF TRACTS FOR THE DESTITUTE. [JaD- 

Let such means of grace be ased in the towns and Tillliges of our 
own favoured oountrjr— Jet the "Great Question Answered/' the "Way 
to be Saved/' or some other striking, stBrdbmg Tract, be placed in 
eveiy family — and who can calculate the magfnltnde of the results 
which may be expected to follow ? 

We wish every reader of these lines, especially ereiy Officer or 
member of an Auxiliary Tract Society, imnsediately to enter on the 
work of supplying every family in his own vicinity with Tracts, and 
thus to set an example, which may be followed throughout all our 
territories, and may bring down upon unnumbered multitudes in our ' 
extended countiy, the richest spiritual blessings. 



UTAirr OF TRJL0T8 FOB THB BB6VITUTJII* 

Distribution on a Journey in South America. 

Of the Tracts, says a Gentleman, under date of Buenos Ayre^, 
which I received as a donation from your Society, I have distributed 
all the English, and a considerable part of the Spanish. In Monte 
Video, during the ten days I was detained there, I had an opportunity 
to distribute some Spanish Tracts among the inhabitants, and many 
English Tracts among the seamen and foreigners. From Monte Video 
to Las Vacas I came by land, over a part of the Banda Oriental. — 
Though, except in the villages, it was rare to find persons who coulcj^ 
read, I found opportunity for distributing, in the course of 180 miles 
which I traversed, several of the Spanish Tracts with which I was 
furnished. They were received in every instance with readiness, and 
in most with thankfulness, and read with much apparent interest. 
Many had never seen any thing of the kind l>efore, and expressed 
their surprise, when told they had nothing to pay for them. 

I gave away more copies of that little Tract, entitled, " La Saitm' 
tion" than any other; and cannot but hope that, through the Divine 
blessing, it may be the means of bringing to some soul in this land of 
darkness, the light of salvation. 

The region through which I passed, is one of the fairest, naturally, 
in the United Provinces. Well watered, and possessing a fertile soil, 
with a beautlAilly undulated surface, it is exempt from the inconveni- 
ence inseparable from the vast unwatered plains on this aide of the 
river. 



Drom, a Member of a TTieologieal InstihiHon, who had been requested 
to take an Agency for the Soeiety at the West, 

You invite me to a labour of amaaing interest, and magnitude, and 
importance; and I wish I were now ready to mount horse and go into 
that " fertile, forming, growing, swarming" Valley of the Mississippi. 
I do feel, that the prospect of immediate good to be done by such an 
agency, would be incalculable; and that the good efi^cts resulting 
from it would never cease. Though the labour and obstades to be met 
would be great, I wish I could enter upon them next week; yet I feel, 
that I ouaht to prosecute my theological studies another year. [ 
would look to God to guide me into the path of duty. The greatness 



l^0.] I.E6H EICSXOMp^S .i^ftVI^f '^9 SfS DAUGHTER. $ 

of i^e work to be done by t^e ^thfid servants 9C Chrjat m ttils day, 
is argument for thorough preparation; but, since receiving your 
letter, and looking at the quigmtude of the ob^edt proposed, i alnjiost 
feel that I cannot longer be confined within these walls. 

the; SAF£ 9ANiC« 

[Goanmuoicated by Rev. Herbert C. Tboinion, late Agent of the Soelety.] 

A cashier of one of the banks of Virginia, aad for some yean a life 
member of the American Tract Society, Boston, upon my first ac< 

guaintance, gave me so pressing an inyitatipn to ^ueike his bouse my 
ome, whenever I should be in the place, th^t 1 could not with pro- 
priety dedine accepting it. He would not even pernut my horse to 
remain at the tavern. So much of genuine hospitality charaoterized 
his attentions, that It was obvious the invitation was not extended 
from mere politeness. When about to leave his house in December 
last, he tendered me a tVferUy doliar Twie, saying he had determined 
to become a life member of the American Tract Sojciety at ^ew-York. 
I replied, that, as he was already a life member 8,t Bof ton, and by his 
hospitality to me, in my several visits, ha^ contributed no small part 
of the amount that would constitute him a life member of the Parent 
Society, I could not request him to become a life member. He replied, 
tliat be had reflected for some time on the subject ; that the bank was 
safe, the stock good, and he supposed the diviaends would be as great 
as on any other stock ; and that he preferred to take another share. 
The reasoning being conclusive, I could not controvert it, but took the 
note, and wished that the valne of this stock was more generally un- 
derstood, 



REV. LEGH RICHMOND'S ADVICE TO HIS DAUGHTER. 

My dear ■ ■ ' ■ ■, I leave you, in much love, a few fa,rherly hints. 

1. Be constant in private prayer. 

2. Be wise in the choice of books : shun every thing of the romance 
and novel kind ; and, even in poetry, keep to what is useful and in- 
structive, as well as pleasant. 

3. In eompany, show that the principles of your father's house and 
ministry are your rule of conduct, and your real delight, Be con- 
sifltent; cheerffil, but not light— ^onversible, but not trifling, 

4. Keep ever in view, that you are supporting my character and 
oredit, as well as your own. 

6. Show a marked preference to snch conversation » remarks, per** 
sons, discussions, and occupations, as may tend to essential good, 

6. Always think before you speak ; say and do neither hastily or 
unadvisedly. 

7. If any proposal is ever made to you, in which you hesitate how 
to act, first say to yourself— How would God have me to act ? Se- 
condly — What would my parents have me to do, if they were her^ to 
advise me ? 

8. Never lose sight of thk — that the more public my name, charac- 
ter, and ministry is become, the more eyes and ears are turned to my 
children's conduct ; they are expected, in knowledge and circumsp6c>. 
tion, in religion and morals, in opmions and habits, to show where 
they have been educated ; and to adorn, not only their Christian pro- 
fession, but their parent*' principles. 

I* 



/ 



6 USEPHLNEBS OF TRACTS. [Jan. 

9. la music, prefer serious to light oompositioiis ; and in vocal, 
keep close to sacred words. 

10. Fray much for your affectionate father, tEGB Ric^monp*. 



mmTtnamuB or traoss. 

<fTHE BARREN FIG TREE." 

A young man in the state of New-York, who was a professor of re* 
li|rion, and felt the importance of eternal thing^s, had often, in oonver* 
sation and by letters, endeavoured to call the attention of his fhther 
to the subject of religion ; but seemingly without effect : he would 
listen to these exhortations of filial faithfulness, but make no answer; 
nor did he, in any of his letters, for a considerable time, even allade 
to the subject. At length the son was delightfully surprised with the 
following statement in one of his father's letters. One morning, he 
said, as he entered his room, he saw on his mantel the Tract entitled 
" The Barren Fig Tree;" and the question was immediately suggest- 
ed to his mind, ** What am I but a barren fig tree V* In this letter, for 
the first time, the father requested his son's prayers. In another letter 
he says, ** Do pray for me ; I am still a barren fig tree.'' In his last 
letter be says, ** There is an appearance of a work of grace in this 
place. Continue your prayers for me-^I pray for you aJl.^* 

«THE DAY OF JVXH^niENT.^^ 

The Rev. Mr. H— , of the state of New-York, relates the follow- 
ing circumstances respecting a young lady, an orphan, the daughter 
of a Clergyman. She had been piously educated; had often been the 
subject of serious impressions, and had as ^often resisted the influ- 
ences of the Spirit. At length she was taken sick. Dnring her sick- 
ness, Mr. H"— visited her; and, after a solemn and affectionate con- 
versation, put into her hands the l^ract entitled the ** Day of Judg- 
meni" This seemed to have the effect of fastening conviction upon 
her mind. She remained for some time in great distress of min4 ; 
and often, in anguish of spirit, was heard to cry out, " O that Judg- 
ment Tract ! that Judgment Tract !-»it has seaied my doom ! t" At 
last she was led to indulge a trembling hope of having passed from 
'' death unto life.*' She afterwards recovered from si<£nes8, and has 
ever since given good evidence of piety. This Tract Rev. Mr. H-^^«> 
says he has no doubt was among the most powerful means of her 
conversion. 



" AN ARROW THROWN AT A VENTURE '—USEFULNESS 
OF " THE SWEARER'S PRAYER." 

The following curious letter was received by the Corresponding 
Secretary from an individual in Alabama, of whom he had had no 
previous knowledge whatever. It may serve to show in how great a 
variety of methods the distribution of Tracts is the means of good. 

" Dear Sib— I received your kind letter, accompanied with three 
small Tracts called the ** Swearer's Prayer^''* which I have read with 
a feding heart, and must confesjs they have been the means of my 



tHd,] AMEEtCAN tBACT SOCIETT* 7 

abandoning' the vile and profone practice of swearing, and many 
other evils of which I was nabitually guilty. 

" I feel under great obligations to you for your kindness, and I 
Wish I could become more acquamted with you, that I might be able 
to compensate you in some way at least. I should like to have your 
name, as you assigned at the bottom of your letter, ** an affectionate 
but unknown fViend." I am at a loss to know how you ever knew 
there was such a being on earth as me, and would be very thankful 
Sf you would inform me on the subject, as I can no way account 
for H. 

" I presented two of the Tracts to my young friends, and do believe 
they are much benefited by them.*' 

JtOKBBXOAJX TUILCT SOOIBTV. 

Jlgeney for Georgia. 

In addition to the appointment of a General Agent and three other 
Agents for the 4,080,000 in the Valley of the Mississippi, the Commit- 
tee have just commissioned Ma. Abel Hale as an Agent for Georgia, 
The grand object of all these Agents, will be to extend the circulation 
of Tracts into every family, which shall be willing to receive them ; 
and especially to supply that part of the population which is destitute 
of the preached Gospel, and the other stated means of grace. Funds 
for procuring the Tracts will be raised, as far as practicable, on the 
field of labour; but many Tracts must be distributed gratuitously, at 
the expense of the Parent Institution. The aid which has been afford* 
«d on the special effort in New-York City, and by donations from 
friends of the cause, has done much to enable the Society to meet its 
large engagements for paper, but has supplied the Treasury with no 
funds for the future. Efforts for the Society must doubtless be con- 
tinued, till either the Committee become negligent in their work, or the 
' destitute millions of our country and the world are actually supplied. 



AXTKUJiAXLV OF VTASSIXfaTOV CXT7. . 

Ninth Report presented Nov. 5, 1828. Receipts during the year. 
$280 87 ; of which $109 was received in donations for a permanent 
Depository. Amount of Tracts purcliased, 234,556 pages ; circulated^ 
120,570 pages. Purchased since the formation of the Society, 81 1,052 
pages. ^ Rev. J. Laurie, D. D. Prea. John Ks55£dt, Treas. John 
CoYtE, Jun. See, 



This Society has not only retolved to forin a Tract Society in every 
congregation that will grant permissioif, in Pennsylvania and Dela- 
ware, before Jan. 1, 1890, but has for months been energetically prO" 
seeutir^ the work, and has made large advances towards its comple* 
tion. Some of their Auxiliaries have, at their recent anniversaries, 
resolved to raise double the amount of money that was raised by them 
jiuring the last year.— A friend has offered $50, as a donation to the 
Society, provided 39 others will pay the same amount before Jan. Ij 



8 BKASCB JLV9 AVXILIJ^Y SOCIETIES. [Jat). 

1829 ; and when putting this sheet to preii^ vigorous and veiy sac- 
cessful efforts were making to fulfil the condntop. 

The Philadelphia City Tract Society has recently pnt a Tract on 
the Sabbath, comprizing the substance of the Address of the General 
Union, formed in May last, into every family in the city proper. At 
the meeting of the Board of this Society, neiir the end of October, 
229,414 pages had been distributed, since the last stated meeting* 
among the shipping, humane institutions, brick-yards, &ic. Several 
of the Tracts bad been manifestly blessed, among which the Tract 
" To-Day" was made the apparent instrument of the aicakening and 
contersion of an aged mother. 

Mr. Nicholas Murrat, who has laboured so successfully as Genera) 
Agent of the Pennsylvania Branch since the commencement of its 
operations, has now resigned his office, to return to his theological 
studies ; and Mr. George W. Blight has been unanimously appointed 
as his successor. 



FXSM. JSLXnC. OF SV. aB0B03S'S CHtr&OH, ir. 7 

Under the pastoral Care of Rev. Dr. Mtlnor. 

Second Report presented Oct. 14, 1828. Receipts during the year, 
$219 25. Distributed to subscribers and members of the Male and 
Female Sabbath Schools and Juvenile Tract Association, attached to 
St. George's Church, 200,780 pages ; to the Sandwich Island Mission, 
by a donation to the Parent Society, 30,000 pag«s ; to Bishop Chase, 
fo4r Ohio, 20.500 pages ; total 251,280 pages. 

** One instance,** says the Report, " we have it in our power to're- 
cord, of the blessing qf the Lord upon that invaluable Tract, ** The 
Importance of Consideration." This Tract was given by one of our 
Managers to a young man of an excellent disposition and unblemished 
diaracter, but a stranger to Christy and unwilling to have him to reign 
over him. He promised to read it ; but he neglected to do so ; and it 
lay for a long time forgotten in bis desk. At length, while engaged in 
examining some papers, his eye rested upon the Tract. He remem* 
bered his promise, and read it : it arrested bis attention, and he read 
it again, but with anxiety and with ^ayer. From that moment he* 
dates his conviction of sin, his application to Christ, his consequent 
peace of, mind; and many of us are witnesses of his change of life, 
his zeal, activity, and usefulness in every labour of love." 

At a meeting of the Board of Managers immediately after this an* 
niversary, the following spirited Resolutions were adopted : viz. 

*' 1. That, under a deep sense of our obligations to God and to the 
souls of our destitute fellow-sinners, and in dependence upon Divine 
aid, this Board pledge themselves to use their best exertions to con- 
tribute to the funds of the American Tract Society, in the course of 
the ensuing year, the sum of six hundred dollars; independently of 
the amount that may be paid over to said Society for the purchase of 
Tracts for the supply of our own wants. 

** 2, That the Officers and Managers of this Association will exert 
their influence to establish in our sister congregations in this city, and 
in other parts of the United States, Societies or Associations auxiliary 
to the American Tract Society. 

'' 3. That the balance of funds (f23 29) remaining on hand at tbe 
close of the year, be paid over to the American Tract Society, as a 
donation.'^ 



I(t2».] 



EECGIFT^. 



9 



•25 FROM A FRIEND IN S. CAROIillTA. 

The notice of" Avai1iD§^ Sympathy'' in the Tract Magazine for Oc- 
tober, induces me to say, 1 too ** am tarry itoetUy-fivt doUarSt** which 
sum I enclose, with prayer that the embarrassments of the Society 
may be speedily removed.—^ Profeued Follower of the JRtdumer^ 



RECEIPTS 

INTO TH£ TREASUaT OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 
Durimg tk€ month ending Deeemher 15, 1828. 



FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES 

VER — ^Bridport, Hattbcw Cbamben, Tr. 
OorawaU, Truman Pottt, Tr. 

do. Fern. Miu Luclna Bingham, 
Kingston, Dea. Austin, Ag. 
Weybridee, Samuel Jamcf, Bee. 
MASS.— Boston, Amer. Tr. Soc J. Tappan, Tr. 
Iienox, Jolin G. Stanley, Tr. , 

New Marlboroagta, North Soc. Thomas Woodruff, Sec. 

do. South Soc. Dea. Gideon Canfield, See. 

Springfield, 8. Warrioer, Jon. Tr. . 
CONN —Bethel, Fern. M rs. H. Starr, Sec. 
Grassy Hill in Lyme, R. L. Hall, Sec. 

Humphreysville in Derhy, Fern. Mrs. Hannah Thompson, See. 
Newent in Lisbon, Reuben ffishop, Ag. 
New Haven, A. Townsend, Jun. Tr. 
New London, Robert Cqit, Tr. 
Norwich City, F. A. Perkins, Tr. . 
We&t Hartford, Henry B. Porter, Sec. 
West Haven, William Stebbim, Sec. 

N. YORK.— Ancram and Taughcanack, Rav. U. Vedder, Ag. 
Anlnirn, Clark B. Hotcfakiss, Ag. 
Carmel, Putnam Co. Fem^ Miss Elizabeth Belden, SaiC. 
Oolesf ille, Broome Co. Mr. John Pratt, Sec. 
Delhi, Del. Co. George Wight, Sec. 
FidikiH Landing, Feni. Mus M. W. Teller, Sec. 
Olen^s Falls, Ellas Hawley, Tr. 
Goshen, Orange Co. Dr. J. 8. Cone, Tr. 
Baqiwrsfield, l)el. Co. Lewis R. Lock wood. Sec 
Hebron West, Samuel Livingston, Tr. 
Hempstead, Rockland Co. Miss Elizabeth Coe, See. 
Hillsdale, Columbia Co Fem. Mrs. John Noooey, Tr. 
Hopewell, Dutchess Co. John Storm, Tr. 
Hunter, J. J. Stimps«>n, Sec. 
Huntington, L. 1., Mrs. Henrietta Smith, Tr. 
Hurley, Ulster Co. D. Dubeols, Tr. 
Marifoorongh, Fem. Mrs. Spence, Tr. 
Middletown, Del. Co. Asa Grant, See. 

do. Orange Co. Dr. D. Hanford, Tr. 

Mount Pleasant, Fem. Mrs. Eliza Mead, Tr. . 
New Haekensadi, Philip Nagle, Sec. 
New-York City Auxiliary, A. Edwards, Tr. . 

do. African, Fem. Mrs. Mavnard, Directress, 

do. Mulberry-street, Fem. Mrs. Mary Wlnferton, Tr. 

do. St. George*s Church, Feni. Mrs. F. M. lUU, Tr. 

do. Upper ViNage, Charles Wighton, Sec 

Peru, Fem. Mrs. Nan^ 6. Crosby, Ag. 
Sandy Hill, Washington Co R. C. Gibson, Tr. 
Troy, A. LAvieland,Tr. 

N. JER.— Hardwicfc, Fem. Miss Elixabetb Shafer, Tr. 
3«rsay City, Fen*. Mrs. 8- Oleatt, 8ec 
Littleton, Sllai B. Condlct, Tr. 
Lower FVeehold, Dr. James Enjriish, Sec. 
Lyon*s Farms, Fem. Mrs. R. W. Lambdin, Tr. 
Itcadingtown, N. Branch, M. Wyckoff, Jun. See. 
PENN.— Philadelphia Branch, George W. Blight, Sec. 
Pltttbwrgb, Samuel Bahrd, Tr. 
MD^-^Worcester Co« Fem. MlsslteriaBleden, Sec» 



ForTr. 
14 68 

13 26 
1 69 

893 

1 00 
10 50 

760 

7 eo 

560 

300 

10 24 

750 

2 67 
18 00 

400 

92fi0 
24 08 

8S$ 
30 00 

900 

8 81 
10 69 

800 

14 70 

18 00 
260 

3 76 
975 
6 81 

82 60 
200 
108 
994 
160 

16 93 
826 
488 

16 25 
190 00 

19 97 
400 

60 18 

885 

■ 4 74 

16 60 

SO 00 

826 

880 

1 90 

1 73 

900 
900 00 

mss 

606 



Den* 
4 69 
7 92 
66 
200 
897 

360 
260 
260 

1 00 
3 41 
750 

1 38 

.5 00 
HOOOO 

17 sa 

83 70 



300 

04 

366 

27 05 
600 
1 50 
1 25 
895 
896 
7S0 



8 31 
60 

75 
143 



665 

60 00 

75 

1 68 

,5 66 

75 

51 

10 00 
300 

I 1 69 



U18.C0L.-X1ennlrla, Fun. ibuR. 
WuhinriiHi Clt>, John Coybu Jun. Se 
VlS.-7iWiW WUn Cnc. B,rU\j C 
awnnnTsm. ■ 
Indibiirf. Ototrt Birtr, Tr. 
SUaai, WIIUuii O. Baijer.art. . 
BbtybenMomi, R**. Mn MalIliHn,I>. D. Tr 

do- B*iL UfdoDi JfMim HeMunan, Tfp 

tJnliHi, (ai«iw Co. Aui.) Fdnnl B. Bailer, &fc- 
VniKbenn, Duil«l O-iM, Tr. 
SEO — AasoiU, WBIiuB T. GmOd, Sec. 
SatuiakrW. W. Biker, S«. 
ALX— UoeuviUe, 8. Onllut, Af. 



K. CAR.— N. Car. 



FvTr. 





Mn. AmK«iilB,Tr. 




Oo. W'illlin 


Cl.rfc, Sec. . 




1 Dih. Mio. 


MidTr.Soc. Mri.BtTie 


• Tr. 




MinMler, Piw. 






Preili.Ch. J.ra«Cr«ii 




l>.p»i«S-Vi 


■sijjjr&s 


iisofo 



K. YORK.- New- Yo A Ci^T, Abn- 
Imhi tlkubcl)'. . 5 

iNrecfnri /«■£■/< 

MASS — Lee, Rev. AJnn Hyde, 
D. D. br bb CboRb ud Cong'. M 

I(i)clliuMIiiii,Re>. lebalwl S^pen. 
eer. bTiiltcliercliaiidCaaii. fur 
Tncll IxTDid the AHefrban)', jO 

llo. B«T. Bol(nil»Tt™i!:i;:r.i ^ Ua 
Church ud Cmg. fi» Tiacu be- 
reitd tbe AUabani. . . St 

FlinlleM, Ret. Hen. P. Tsppu, br 
bliCK.aMlO<iB*.(liipulal'SMJ35 

CONN,— Nar Hitch, Ro.NalliB. 
nlel W. T-yl.r. U. D. bj ThcoL 
StudeuU of Y>le CoUece. . SO 

N. vcTrR'-n. Yon CiiT, i*a°Wi 

Tlootki Herise*, W 

Wllllun Waliin-, M 

S. C AR—Obirleilaa, Jupir Com- 

liK,Eiq. BO 

Mtnieri for lift. 



VEtt.- 



tr.ayln. 



oftaoij 



liibjjj 

aen.ADi. jr.BfK f id idji oTfStU J 
HASS.~Botu». Rev. It. BrKlKr, 

bf jraBse LadlemrOnbiMn, 31 
UiUHlile.Rev.WimKinA.HawIer, 

by bia Church and OaDErvntloii, 24 
Lenoi, Rev. John Holcbkla, bt Slu- 

deauiallieAari.aiidVillacera, 9! 
He«burT,Rev.ldaiHrdWLLluarlvi, 11 
Feni. Kev. ioeenb M. Bnwne?. bv 



i^.ioM|ibii-B 



ell, by 'bit 



sa«a 



S0a» 
woo 



me.] 




k Sam »IOi"i. . „, 



(3) E. LDrd, (Si JuUa L 

■nnrne, Pi d. neAitbiD 

Jiini«llTcIhlclr,«S;I>r.]i;.l , 

H ; H.MllOv.tt; Ddt.M.Mwh*, 

»», JoLnl- -' 

Mr. (3; Aihn OoUmu 
Phfrr.tiOiJ. H.FiiMo.«»t»m. 

J.A.R. Kti atcbanl Rikir. W| 
C. V. B. BnoHielT, tlOf J, K. 
Siirr.fa^ H.H.SiUaSUin.tg, 

J. Icymwr, U ; Vm. Sbiio, |I ; 

taiWm.Wltor.ISi J.'*-St»- 
Tcns, Cini Jiibn iuncni, (B ; Sl- 
nkUflSl-Juhn.lQiC.R-Bujilpmt 
tSi Abnihimti.TbainpwBillOi 
JoMUhnn TJumptoai, (I0( H. G. 
■■"jrd, ti: T. W Vsoiltibm. 
E.Wab1ffrielit,»S! AihnG. 



J.M.Cl«rk.»SiM , 

CBla,tllli Rsbm O. Cornel,!! _ . 
I>r.AbnkiiBL.Cai,tt:J.CHm, 

8; U.Crw.MclM P.Cni«, 
)Dr.N-n.neerl>r,)3;J.Dt. 



N. JER.-A 


FritDd.U, dD.'ti. 




L<lllcF^>,Wortiiw>, 




Uilliiune, » 


<iL«ll«, 




ell Lliid, 


mliCnek, Brv.FKU- 


ss 


Via—umta 


isCo. Hij.fiaB.'lMI 




SF.O.-S»l 


i.»h,ll. ' . 




OHIO— Cln 


lt>UlF, Lldkl, 




Tkibox 




,_ 


For Tr«tu btjoim ibc Alkitunr' Vt * 


\Vbol.urt 


orD™i.»t.^« 





OF TH£ 

AMmniCAIf TRACT SOCIETY* 

No. 221. AODRKSS ON THE EFFECTS OF ArDERT SPIRITS. Bv 

JoiTATHAif KiTTRSDOB, EsQ. — ^pp. 20. A Striking evidence of the 
excellence of this Tract, is the great demand which has been made for 
it by those who are endeavouring to stay the ravages of intemperance, 
and the influence it has exerted on those who had been in the halntual 
use of ardent spirits. The author presents before the reader the 
character and prospects of the drunkard ; the process by which be 
became such ; the g^eat prevalence of intemperance in our country, 
and its ruinous influence on individuals and on the community ; and 
aD in such a way as speaks to the consciousness of all intemperate men. 
It is scarcely necessary to add, that he contends there is no other 
way of saHety from this evil but that of total abstinence. 

No. 222. A Sermon for the whole World. — pp. 8. This 
Tract, as might perhaps be conjectured from its title, consists of oar 
Lord's Sermon on the Mount. Two individuals have agreed to pay 
the sum of fifty dollars for stereotyping and perpetuating it. We 
think the insertion of this Tract among the publications of the Society, 
will give pleasure to the friends of the cause. 

OceoMonal Tract, Ships' Stores. — pp. 36. The first 12 pages of 
this Tract are occupied by "* An old Mariner's Advice to Seamen ;" 
being an able, interesting, tender, Evangelical address to them. The 
remainder of the Tract is occupied with short artides, under the titles 
•f Divine Faithfulness, the Island Well, Living Water, the Sailor's 
School, Sailor's Mistakes, the Sailor's Resolution, the Sailor's Daugh- 
ter, the Swearer Reclaimed, the Landsman Praying for the Sailor, 
Sailors Praying, Warning to Sailors, and the Sailor's Widow. 



PREMIUM TRACT-— ON THE CHARACTER AND 
PROSPECTS OF THE HEATHEN. 

A benevolent individual has placed at the disposal of the American 
Tract Society the sum of Fifty DoUarSy to be ay^arded by the Publish- 
ing Committee to the author of the best Tract, not exceeding 12 pages 
in length, on " the Character and Prospects of the Heathen" 

The Publishing Committee will receive Tracts on this subject until 
the first day of April, 1829. Communications most be transmitted 
(post paid) to *' William A. Hallock, Cor. Sec. of the Amer. Tract 
Soc. No. 144 Nassau-street, New-York." The author's name mutt 
accompany the Tract in a sealed envelope, which will not be opened 
unless in the instance of that accompanying the successful Tract. 

By order of the Publishing Committee of the American Tract Society. 
New- York f Dee. 11, 1828. James Milvor, Chairman. 

A premium of Fifty Dollars, it will be recollected, is also offered for 
the best Tract, *' calculated to attract attention and secure respect^ 
while it plainly and briefly obviates the trite objections usually urged 
against the Rible, and states the plainest and most forcible proofs of 
its authenticity." 

Also the same sum as a premium for the best Tract on " The Extent 
of Female Influence, and the importance of exerting it in favour of 
Christianity." 

The conditions of each of these preminmg are the same as of the 
first mentioned, except that the Tracts most be presented on or before 
the first day ef M^rch, 1S29; and the lengfh of fhe Trtrct is not 
specified^ 



THE AMERICAIV 
>L.iv. rasmVAHT. ita9. no.i 



an TiMt No. Bt, "Chrlit'i aBmoB OB tk« liMiit." 



Ai our StviMO*, bf d]io( opoii tbe croM, did not deugn Mnrelj m 
benefit iboM lAo w«e itan IMng, imt niUkw in after ego, the Uk 
lowing qaMtioa hu cone borne, with intesM inlerat, to or mind: 
M9 Mt CiWitfioni «Hio (n tmr, )y lAifr «Mrfr#)i<<Mu, eiulBMMuW 
te aote inowM Iht OeqMl, te faifrmwewlaf «• teraf «t wfimw ieS 
nub tiwini, afltr Chm Anne cEontf te Mafk to fit «i atHpttmrt 

VouIV. a [WroliMo.*. 



l4 nfPORTANCS OP LEGACIES TO BXKET. SOCfSTIES. [Feb. 

« 

m the benevolent objedi of the daiy f I find a solntion to thu qaestton^ 
when I look into the records of Bible and other Societies of a religious 
nature, and see the valuable legacies attached to the names of Boudf** 
not, Witfaineton, and others. 

If, through the instrumentality of the 337,277 Tracts distributed by 
the American Tract Society during the first few months of its exist- 
ence, so many as are stated in their First Annual Report, (and pro- 
bably not one half of the good effected has been or will be brought to 
light, until the final day shall be ushered in,) were hopefully born 
into ^G kingdom of grace, what an immense amount of good have we 
reason to believe would be effected in a century, if two persons only 
were to leave such a sum to the American Tract Society f as Boudinot 
and Withington gave to the American Bible Society ! What, my dear 
Sir, would our reflections in the day of judgment be, if God should* 
through the medium of a legacy left by you and me, rescue thousands 
from eternal torment, and bring them to dwell with him for ever? 
Would we not at times almost be lost, even daring the solemn scenes 
of that tremendous day, in praising God for having so largely blessed 
the means made use of by us to glorify him 1 

If all who now contribute to Bible, Missionary, Education, and 
Tract Societies, should order a part of what they possess to be cast 
into the treasury of the Lord after their decease, how great would be 
the aid given to the conductors of these Societies, to fulfil the com> 
mands of the Saviour! 

I do most earnestly wish, that aU the friends of the ever-^blessed 
Jesus, wbd^ by their contributions annually to the different reKgioas 
Societies, have been made his honoured instruments in bringing many 
to the knowledge of his salvation, and who possess property, may take 
this subject into their most serious consideration. I hope they mtiU 
not take it amiss from one of the ambassadors of this glorious Saviour, 
who is endeavouring to plant the standard of the cross in this far dis- 
tant land, and who is surrounded by millions of immortal beings going 
down to eternal wo, if he asks them with becoming respect the fol- 
lowing question : Can they notj vnthoiU any material detriment to their 
heirs J bequeath at hast a tenth part of their estate to promote the came 
of Christ? 

I do not wish this subject merely to engross the attention of those 
to whom God has committed much of this world's goods : I wish eveiy 
member of the Church of Christ, from the richest to the poorest, to 
ask himself and herself. How mucli can I leave to promote the cause 
of my Saviour, when lam no more ? Many a poor disciple will per- 
haps be ready to say, Gladly would I leave my mite, were I possessed 
of any ; but when I die, I shall leave nothing, excepting the garments 
I wore. — ^There is a wav for such to accomplish their wishes. As our 
Saviour said to his disciples, " He that hath no sword, let him sell his 
garment and buy one ;" I say to such, they may order their garments 
to be sold, and thus have their mite thrown into the treasury of the 
Lord. You inay perhaps, my dear Sir, ask, Is this not descending to 
too minute particulars? I answer, when I look at the hundreds of 
milUons of perishing heathen in this eastern world, and the hundreds 
of thousands in the country which gave me birth, who are destitute 
of the religious privileges we enjoy ; and when I reflect what is to be 
the condition of their children, and their children's children, unless 
much greater exertions are ms^e in their behalf, I feel justified in de- 
•^eepding to any particulars. 



1829^ CONVERSION 07 TWO HEATHENS BY T&ACTS. 15 



this subject approve itself to those who '* prefer Jerusalem 
sir chief joy/' I would take the liberty to suggest whether 



Should 
above their 

(as we are momently exposed to be called from time to eternity) it 
would not be well for them to insert in their wilUj or otherwise direct, 
what sums they desire to be appropriated after their decease, as their 
legacy to promote the cause of Him who loved them, and gave himself 
for them. 

Wheiif when toiU the time come, that the Church of Christ shall 
be considered by every Christian as one of the heirs to his estate f 

One word more, and I have done. If among those who act agree- 
ably to the above suggestions, there should be one individual disposed 
to excuse himself from giving jiut as mucht while he is livipg, as he 
would if he were to leave no legacy, to such a one this letter is not 
addressed. 

Conversiori of two HeatJiens by Tracts. 

To those who have heretofore assisted us in making known the 
salvation of Jesus to this benighted people, I say, Beloved in the 
Lord, go on as you have begun. Continue to assist us by your con- 
tributions and by your, importunate and unceasing prayers. Glad 
tidings from this place, where the great Adversary of man has so 
long reigned, have -already reached you. We number among those 
who have been rescued from heathenish darkness in this place, two, 
whose attentioii to the religion of the only true God was first awakened 
by religious Tracts. The circumstances attending these pleasing 
events were as follows :— A Tract, consisting of an extract Trom 
Scripture, was read by some boys belonging to the school at Battiieotta, 
to a youth of high rank in Changane. At that time he became con- 
vinced, as he aftierwards informed me, that there is but one Grod. 
Desire to know more of this glorious Being, brought him under my 
immediate instruction. He now rejoices in Jesus as his Saviour, 
and is almost daily {Grom house to house, or in other ways), making 
known his salvation to others. He is a very important helper to me 
in my work. 

The second is a young man who lives in a village about two miles 
from me. He received a Tract, entitled '* The HeaverUy Way^ or 
History of a Converted Brahmin/' at one of our public bazars, and 
read it again and again with attention. The issue was, the belief 
that his idols were vain. He has forsaken them, and, I hope, found 
the Saviour. For some months, past, he has been anxious to make a 
public profession of his faith in him. He stands a candidate for bap- 
tism and admission to the Church. What I now tell you is an earnest, 
I hope, of still greater things. In the great day of account you wJU 
meet a number from among this people, whose robes have, as I trust, 
already been washed and made white in the blood of the Lamb. O 
what rapture will fill your breast, should you see this one and that 
one pointing to you in that day, and hear them saying. Behold, there 
stands the ixienA, who gave his penny or his dollar to ouy me a Tract, 
and through whose instrumentality, under God, I, who was once a 
poor benighted heathen, have been brought to know Je^us. " Bless- 
ing, and honour, and glory, and praise, be ascribed unto Him that 
gitteth on the throne, and unto the Lamb, for ever and ever/' 

Very sincerely and affectionately, 

J. SccbDtR. 



16 rsoM A HI8SIONART iiT ifisstBsim. [Feb. 

FROM mi. MBPHCR PmJi^» BUSTOI., BUG. 

HaTinf taken the most liToly interest, for above twenty-five years, 
in the spiritual as well as temporal concerns of the United States of 
America, during the whole period of my more than brotheriy con- 
nexion with that eminent man, consistent Christian, and devoted 
patriot and philanthropist, the late Divie Bitbuits, I am delighted to 
watch the progress of our united exertions in transplanting, from 
Britain, whatever was ** lovely and of good report,*' for the benefit of 
the whole family of man. Your Society, among many others, has 
attdnned a maturity which causes my devout gratitude to the Giver 
of all good, that I am permitted to bear and read of its extensive use- 
fiilness, which I hope and trust will increase with eveiy added year 
of its existence. 

Last evening was our anniversary, and a delightful one it was. 
Sceptics and infidels, if any were present, must hav^ been convinced 
that the Divine influence and blessing usuadly accompanies the perusal 
of these little, silent, unobtrusive messengers of mercy, if devoutly 
prayed for: die aggregate of good tbe^r instrumentally accomplish, 
we must be content to wait to know, till the great day, when the 
secrets of aU hearts shall be made manifest, to the praise and gioiy 
of Divine Grace. Go on in your csreer of extensive and extending 
ttsefcdness. British hearts pray for your success, and will be delight- 
ed to hear that it exceeds that of our own Institutions. As South 
America is peculiarly your JUid to culftMrte, in addition^to your own 
immense territory, it is my ardent prayer, that every famiiy may be 
provided with your invaluable publications, and every indhidutU derive 
benefit thcrefirom, if consistent with the Divine will. B^nember aho 
Me poor Sailort, so long overlooked. Provide lor their spiritual be- 
nefit, by twUabie Tracts and ample grants to the Institutions pecu- 
liarly their own. Ko ship should nSi without a supply. 

I am a Life Member of the New-Tork Tract Society. The en- 
dosed draft is to make my son, the Rev. Edmund Thornton Prust, 
a Life Member of th^ American Tract Society. 



FROIH A BETOTED MISSIONARY IN MISSISSIPPI. 

I brought with me to this country a small parcel of Tracts, which I 
soon distributed, and which were greedily received and read. I soon 
after received a larger supply at New-Orleans, part of which were 
distributed among the passengers on the steamboat in which I re- 
turned, and a part of them I have used in a Sabbath school, lending, 
on e^ch Sabbath, a Tract to each pupil. In my Missionary labours, 
and on all occasions when practicable, I have taken these faithful 
monitors in my pocket, and distributed them amona the people. 
They have uniformly been taken and read apparency with great 
avidity. Frequently the question has been asked, ''What is the 
prite ?*' " What is their object T" Many have been circulated in this 
way, upon which t trust the blesring of God has descended. One 
Female Traet Society recently formed here, has been very active. 
Another is about to be formed ; and I shall do all in my power to 
establish them in all parts of the State. Of the greai need there is 
of this kind of information in our State, I can test^ from my own 
observation. Of the anxiety of ihe pfiopU, in many places, to obtam 
them, I also have knowledge, having been frequently solicited to sup- 



H&d,} . CALLS FOR. TRACTS. 17 

ply them with Tracts. Of the good ^ffeeU I have sometimes beard ; 
and I expect most confidently to hear of yet greater good. 

BOUND SETS OF TRACTS REQUESTED FOR NEW 
SETTLEMENTS IN INDIANA* 

Being engaged in preaching in various new settlements in Indiana, 
writes a Clergyman, I have to request of the American Tract Society 
a donation of four or five sets of Tracts bound, each set to be used as 
a library f6r a settlement till it has been genendiy read by the people, 
and then to be removed to another settlement, to be used in like man- 
ner, until the volumes are worn out. This will be the way to lead 
young people to be religious readers, and to found and cherish a reli> 
gious Tract Society in each of these places. There are a number of 
settlements which are^now ready to receive such a library ; and if the 
Committee will furnish them to me, I will do the utmost in my power 
to render them the means of advancing the cause of our Redeemer. 



TRACTS AMONG CHILDREN AT THE WJ^ST. 

You are probably not aware, says one in a destitute portion of Ohio, 
how deep an interest your Tracts excite here. I presume I have seen 
a hundred children present at a Tract meeting, of which suitable no- 
tice had been given. One little boy went to his father, an intempelnte 
man, and asked him for money to join the Tract Society^ He was 
refused. *' Well,'' said he to his little brother, ** come, let us go. I 
have got two cents« and I will give you one, and that will make us 
both members.'' Another child was refused in the same manner by 
his intemperate father; but, the same day, the little fellow found a 
six-oent piece in the road, which he carried immediately to the Agent 
fqr Tracts. — ^In going from a meeting of a Tract Society in the muddy 
seaw), I was much gratified in. overtaking a wagon drawn by four 
oxe^ and having in it between 20 and 90 children, members of the 
Tratt Society, who had been 'a mile and a half to the meeting. The 
little fellows appeared to be enjoying' themselves much.^-To me these 
facts are highly interesting and encouraging ; and I pray you not to 
look on them as too trivial to be mentioned, till you have laboured a 
while here in the mud, and rain, and woods. 



CALLS FOR GRANTS OF TRACTS IN OHIO. 

Considering the circumstances of this country, writes the Secretary 
of an Auxiliary in the northern part of Ohio, we feel, that whatever 
giants of Tracts the Parent Society can make would greatly subserve 
the interests of religion amon^ us. We know the Tracts are very 
cheap, and that our eastern friends have been exceedingly kind and 
liberal in sending uS Missionaries, Bibles, and Tracts, to prevent a 
total moral desolation in this country, which is yet a wilderness. But 
for these exertions, deplorable indeed must have been our present 
condition. We hope your aid will not yet be withheld from us. 

I have been in this country, says a Missionary in the southeni part 
of the same State, only a few days ; but this has been long Plough to 
show me the great want of Tracts. Very few Tracts have yet been 
ctrciidated here, and I fear the prospect Of formuig an Auxiliary here, 



«t praiMt, is SM«U. Itendyt«flO,fironmyown|MKA»t,lbrTnictt» 
and praj yon to grant us atlewt unequal amount in additioB. Those 
Tracts wUl, with the blessing of God» do incalcolable good in this 
legion; they may be the means of salvation to many souls. Dear 
Brother, can you help us f We are po&r and needy, I plead for thou- 
sands around me. Help us, and the Lord will reward and Uess you. 

nrOM A TRACT DISTRIBUl^R IN VERMONT. 

Of the Tracts procured by our Auxiliary, writes a Clergyman in 
Vermont, some were distributed while engaged in efforts to supply 
eyery family with the Bible—some have been left in making pastoral 
Wsits in this and neighbouring towns^— «ome hare been given to school- 
teachers, to be given to their pupils and carried home to their parents 
—some have been enclosed and sent to persons abroad, whose cir- 
cumstances were peculiar, as episUes of consolation and. reproof- 
some have been fssten^d up in places of resort, to be read by loungers 
and customers. The Tracte have been read with profit and delight by 
subscribers ; those read in prayer-meetings have produced powerful 
impressions ; a Tract suited to a bereaved mother greatly comforted 
her under the deep sorrow occasioned by the drowning of a lovely 
daughter. The wrath of the depraved has been provoked, sorr6w 
assuaged, ignorance enlightened, intemperance checked, false hopes 
shatei« error exposed, truth, intelligibly taught, and parents aided in 
their fesponsible duties. But if we knew of no success attending our 
distributions, it would not discourage us. God has o&mmanded, that 
we sow our seed in the morning, and m the evening: sow it upon the 
iMlers, and leave the disposal of it to him. What other warrant or 
inducement can any one desire? 

Till last year, I did tolerably well without Tracts ; in other words, 
I did not feel lost without them, ivhen visiting and jouroeying. I 
knew not but I could get back to that state again, for the tendency of 
human uaiureis downwards; but, at present, I feel as if Tracts were 
mdtspenottble. May I ever feel so; and be ever active, and judicious, 
fOid prayerful, in distributing them. 



vsanrunwii or silacss. 

SPECIASi QIiSSfflLNG OS TRACTS GRANTED FOR 

THE WEST. 

Some months since, I received from the American Tract Society 
3,000 pages of Tracts, for distribution among the destitute beyond 
the AUsghany moantains. I called at an inn near Pittsburgh, and 
gave the landferd, who was pious, the Swearer's Prayer and four 
other Tracts, to be disposed Of as he thought woidd be most useful. I 
travelled a oonsiderable distance in Ohio; and on my return, called 
tkgmtk on the pious landlerd. He informed me, that, soon after 1 left 
him, a pieoCane intemperate man in the neighbourhood came in, and 
with an oath called for brandy. ** Sit down a moment,'* said the 
landlord, '' and i will wait upon you." He then te<^ up the Swearer's 
Prayer and read it to him in an audible and solemn tone of voice. 
The attention; of th« individual was arrested, he forgot his tarandy, 
and wished to buy the Tractr It was given him. He was led to the 



tCI9*] mmrmuiBSS or ivacts. 19 

BiUe, luf chttietftr was cliaiigad, and if is hoped ha firand the peaii 
of great price. He became aasieuf for his wicked and proikne com- 
panions ; carried his Tract aad read it to them, reasoned with than 
and rqNTOTed them ; and no less than /See or mx of them had not only 
ceased profaning the name of CSod, but had hopeftdly become mt 
nneere foUowert of Ckriit, 

I also met another man on my return, to whom I had given Tracts 
on my way westward, who told me, that the Tra/» entitled "A 
Strange 2%tng,*' had shaken the belief of a UniTorsaUst ; and that 
another Tract which I eafre him, had been the means of the hopefUl 
coneernen of two indiotAuah. 

tn other instances, a number of which have come to my knowledge, 
Sabbatb-breakers hare been reclaimed, and souls hopefully converted 
to Christ. 



INTESIPERATE MAN IN OHIO RECLAIMED BY 

A TRACT. 

[Oomitounieatcd by a Qergyman.] 

Of the Tracts received by the Auxiliary in S " , a few were given 
to a child, whose father, it appears, stood more in need of serious 
warning and reproof than was, at that time, generally known. The 
father was opposed to having them in the house, but still did not or> 
der them away. One day, he observed one of the Tracts ** On hdem" 
peranu** lying on the table ; was strode by the tide, and |;ave it a 
serious perusal. Some days, after, ae he was passing a neighbour's 
house, he met a man who was known to be intemperate ; stopped 
and conversed with him, and faithfully warned him of his danger. 
When the man he had thus wamed had passed by, a pious Lady, who, 
as she sat at her window, heard the conversation, said to the other, 
^* I am much pleased to hear you reprove that man.*' " Why ?" said 
the Crentleman. " T am glad>'' ^he replied, ** to see one who will bear 
testimony against intempeianee."^-He passed along ; but, on his re- 
turn, called to ask the Lady what she intended by what she said to 
him. ** I meant no more than I said," she repUed. '* 1 thought," 
said he, ** you meant much more. Ihime mgfnlf, for tome time, been 
4ieeuttomed oecasionidly to drink to easeeu when at hornet tho%xh no 
one knew it. A few dayg nnce, I read a Tratt on the Evils of mtem' 
perance, I have thrown away mp bottle ; and, by the help of we Lord, 
wiU never again drink any araent spiritt, nor dudl any be carried 
into my housed 

CONTERSION OF A LADT IN MISSISSIPPI BY A 

TRACT. 

[From the Secretary of a Female AuziHary.] 

jSot many days since, 1 met with a Lady of the first respectability, 
who told me that she owed, under God, her hope of eternal happiness 
to a few Tracts which one of our Managers sent into her neighbour- 
hood. Her husband has long been pious; but she has heretofore 
resisted and contemned every eiibrt to convince her of the importance 
of religion. " At first," she remarked, " I was vexed that my husband 
would sit np late at night reading little books, which I thought were 
sent to be read to the negroes. At length I resolved to see what the;y 



£0 VALLXT OF THE MISSISSIPPI. [Feb. 

were ; and the first words that met my eye, fimnd their way to my 
heart. They were, ** Pause and thinks am I a Chrittian f" I did 
pause and think ; and the result was, that I found myself a miserable 
sinner, far from God and holiness." She is now a rational and con> 
sistent Christian, and very actirely engaged in the Tract cause. 

THE TRACT, *< WELL CONDUCTED FARM." 

[From the Secretary of an Auxiliary in Georgia.] 

A very distinguished gentleman in this part of the country, who is 
now actively engaged in warning sinners to flee froin the wrath to 
come, received his first awakenings from reading the Tract entitled 
" 7%e well conducted Farm" 



THE TRACT, «« PROGRESS OF SIN," &0. 

_ [From Members of the Theological Sen^aryiAndorer.] 

The Tract, " The Progress of Sin," was given by a Deacon to a 
young Lady, as she was passing from meeting. A soon as she ar- 
rived at home, she seated herself to read the Tract. She was much 
! offended, when she had read a few lines, and threw it upon the floor. 
A few minutes after, she took it, and began to read again ;. but, being 
again and again displeased, she threw it down several times before 
she had finished it. The next morning, on seeing the Deacon ap- 
proach the house, she resolved to express to him her indignation ; 
but, before he entered, the thought that it was done for her benefit, 
and that he was influenced only by regard to her best good, diverted 
her from her purpose; and the conviction of conscious guilt succeed- 
ed her anger, and she is now an exemplary Christian in the same 
church with the Deacon, who reported the 4:ase to me. 

In the same town, a young man accidentally took up the Tract; 
** Serious Thoughts on Eternity" Before he had finished it, convic- 
tion fastened upon his mind, which never left him, till he found rest, 
as he hopes, ip the Saviour. During his serious impressions this 
Tract was read daily ; and he first found peace while on his knees 
reading the Tract, and calling on God In prayer. This Tract had 
been procured about a fortnight before. I was also informed that the 
" Swearer'^s Prayer" had recently been blessed to the hopeful con- 
version of two young men in a neighbouring village. 

TRACT OAUSB I»r TBS VAZiIaS7 OF TBS 

The latest information from the Society's Agents in the Valley of 
the Mississippi, is of the most encouraging nature. Rev. Afp. East- 
man, the General' Agent, and the three other Agents who are labour- 
ing in different parts of the field— viz. Rev. Mr. McAboy, and Messrs, 
Furmah and Wright — all bear a united testimony, that Providence 
has opened loide the door of usefiUness before them. 

" Every day since we commenced our labours here/' says the Ge- 
neral Agent, ** gives new evidence that God designs to make the great 
Benevolent Institutions of the age a permanent blessing to this portion 
of the country. I cannot predict ; but methinks, if God spares our 
lives and prospers us in our work, the year 1829 will furnish an in- 



J 



it29.] AGENT FOJ^ HSW-O&LEANS. 21 

teiMtiiig hisloiy of Tniet opeifttions is th« Valley of the MUslMippi. 
Bttt our number is i mall ; and the field before us is almost boundless. 
We feel that many more labourers are immediately needed.*' 

** I have 1)een confident firom the first/* says another, '' that our 
work can be accomplished. I now see it. Every thing encourages 
me to go on. O that I were worthy of tiiis heavenly employment. 
Almost every Christian here, by whom Tracts have ever been seen, 
testifies to their usefiilness ; and very many I find thankful for the 
opportunity they now have of themselves engaging in this good work." 

We should rejoice much, if the whole correspondence firom these 
our Brethren at the West could, in an its details, be spread before 
every individual who has contributed to aid the Society in its 
pecuniary embarrassments. No one, we are persuaded, could feel 
thai he had contributed in vain ; apd no one, who loves the souls of 
men, would fiiU to pray that God wfll increase these efibrts, sustain 
the Society in its operations, bless the Tracts distributed, and open 
the way for their reaching every fiunily and soul. 

Christians at the West are showing themselves ready to hear theUr 
fitU than of the burden^ if such |t may be called, of supplying them- 
selves and the destitute around them. In Pfttsbuigb, $260 have 
been raised, by a special effbrt, to supply a large Tract Depositoiy 
there ; and in Cincinnati the subscription-' for the same object ex- 
ceeds 91,000. 

In addition to the above evidence of the cordiality with which these 
efibrts are received at the West, the Cmdnnati Branch Tract Society 
have transmitted a special vote of thanks to the American Tract 
Society, for complying with their request to send out a General 
Agent, And other Agents ; accompanied with an expression of their 
entire approbation of all their proceedings. 

We hope the Christian community will engage in the work of sup- 
plying o«r Weslem World, as one, not only arduous, requiring liberal 
contributkms and vigorous eiforte, but demanding iong-conltntceci ami 
persevering exertions. If the infinence of the Gospel can. ever be ex- 
tended over our Western World, it is reward enough. We must ei> 
pect to labour till God calls us away from this world toother spheres 
of Christian enjoyment and Christian action. The contributions 
hitherto made do not yet meet the Society's e^i^ng wants, as claims 
for paper and printing often now come upon the Committeci when 
the Treasury is entirely empQr. 



AOBVT roa nW-OBXiBASrS. 

Friends of the cause of Tracts in New-Orleans have been long 
urging the Committee to send a faithful Agent to that city ; and H 
will be recollected, thai the Branch Society at Boston, some months 
since, made an appropriation of fSOO for that specific object. The 
Committee have now secured the services of Rsv. FBHUKLnr T. Vail, 



^% 



BKCEIPTS. 



[Feb. 



late of Bridgeport, Connecticut, for tliat important station and adja- 
cent parts of the country. He sailed from New-Tork on the..8th ult. 
and we trust God will make his efforts there the means of great good. 



Pa aM IUJM L FOB TBir HA»rDBZX.X. TRACTS. 

f The sum of Fifty Dollars has been placed, by a benevolent indivi- 
dual, at the disposal of the American Tract Society, to be awarded 
by the Publishing Committee to the author of the best ten HandbiU 
Tracts ; each to be not less than onc'/ourth, nor more th^ three- 
fourths of a Tract page tn length. 

The donor expresses the persuasion, '* that, among those whose la- 
bours have been so much blessed in the revival of pure and undefiled 
religion in various portions of our country, there are tho^e who can 
furnish the Society with striking appeals to the consciences of men, 
to be inserted in the Handbill Series, which God may bless in the 
conversion of souls to himself/' 

The Publishing Committee will receive Tracts, in accordance with 
the above proposition, until the 20<A day ofAprily 1829. They must 
be transmitted to *' William A. Hallock, Cor. Sec. Amer. Tract Soc. 
144 Nassau-street, New-Tork ;'' and the author's name accompany 
each communication in a sealed envelope} which will not be opened 
unless in the instance of that accompanying the one to which the pre- 
mium sball be awarded. 

By order of the Publishing Committee of the American Tract 
Society. James Milnor, C/Murman. 

NeW'Tork, Jan, 22, 1829. 

OTH£R PREMIUIHS PREVIOUSLY ANNOUNCED 

BY THE COMMITTEE. 

Fifty DoUars, for the best Tract " which plainly and briefly obviates 
the trite objections against the BtbUf and states tne plainest and most 
forcible proofs of its authenticity ;" to be presented on or before 
March 1, 1829. 

Fifty Dollars, for the best Tract " On the extent of Ftmak h^u- 
enee, and the importance of exerting it in favour of Christianity ;" to 
be presented on or before March 1, )i829. . 

Fifty DoUarSy for the best Tract '^ On the Character and Prospects 
of the Heathen ;" not to exceed 12 pages in length, and be presented 
on or before April 1, 1829. 



BECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETV, 
Dwring the month enMng Jamuary 15, 1828. 

FROM AUXniART TRACT SOCIETIES 

MASS.^Bostoii, Amer. Tmet Soc J. Tappan, Tr. 

R. ISL.'-Paweatoek in Wttterly, Geo. F. Mazson, Sec. 

Providence. Stephen S. Wardwell, Sec. 

CONN.— Bladi Rodi, Capt. 6. Btprges, Pres. 

Bridseport, Rev. F.Y. Vail, Sec ' . ,. S3 63 14 62 

OuUiord, Henry E. Hodges, Ag. . • . . 30 22 14 50 

Bttraphreysviile in Dertqr, Pem. Mrs. H. Thompson, Sec. 4 50 S 00 

If adiion, Jonatlian T. Lee, Tr. .4167 

New Haven, Fem. Mrs. Henrietta F. Whitney, Tr. .37 00 9 00 

Shanm,WiUlainM. Smith, Tr. . . 6 00 3 00 



1. 


ForTr. 




25 00 




450 




100 00 




296 




23 63 




30 22 




450 




41 67 




27 00 




6 00 



Von. 
ISO 



TnatalL Ptm. E*liccra B. Ilnm*.Tr. 

WcntawL Pm. Hn. Inn Md«% Sec. 

N. TOKK — Uba«, N. YsA Sma BnwB, G. OMei, Stc. 

Aiidn.mUuaCBmtdiel.'rT. . 

CmAOI, WUHuB H. C^ Tr. 

FUUU, FMn. Hn- B*r*b P. Dgirisf, Sec . 

FhKfdii Onnn Co. Dr. H. K. Cbumun, Sec. 

BnnpMH^L, RotcnEf"- "^ 

nopcwMiMMaeP.r - 

MmiUhbPtn. Ifri. 

Nnr WlfAar, «1h ConU, Tr. 
NtvT<vfe CKr AullUUT, AMnl BdmrdL Tr. 
do. I'Cm. An. Mn. J. R. Hurd, Tr. 



do. JuV. Au. of B, BthaoL Id ScMck Preati. Ch. 

Ah et. OH>rn>i ChBiflL Pen. Ifr^ P. H. HUl, Tr. 

PsaAkHpri*. I..J.VulCI«k,Tr. 
a«bn dubou, Pern. MIoEUuIi 



Uliec, B. VnBda, B«c pncluAitt I 
frm the AadUwvM CUnttnJ 
do. BrtMrABliBuyatSH^ 

WIattn,an 
" 1" -^" 



iub«ta CHDlpi Sec. 
t3^ a DnAUon to Ibiil BociMJ 



c, PHT nunuw..., c:. Psid, Tr. 
—•wait, QUnn CuBfrr, Sec 
Kn-HoM and Iii*ih«Innie,En«i W. SuddUord. Sec. 
M<w SlAiuHck, NkhoUi WOUuiKm, Tr. 
a(»ien<llle,B«.IUcl>udVuiBleek,pR9. . 
FENN.— IM1i«iy,W>;i>eCo, Jhod Torrtr.Tr. 
HonndM*, Wajae Oo. Stepkao Torrey, Sec 
HU.— B«WiBor» Bnoch, Baomel Tonne, Bee. i 
VIR^-fllodenwr O. H., ReT.Williun &. Ciinu, Ae. 
N.OAR^LuMl HUl, fin. H. Bide, Bee. ' . 

4]B(b-.AatHU, WlUin T. Gould, Bm. 
AIA>— OoKonLUreBwCo. Fem. Mri. Ciuiniiwliani, Tr. 
■MMMmibi Ohntk, OieeDoOo. Hn-HuUia Cniv:eU, Gr 
XEII^DUTllle, Weliul Q. Yonce, J^. . 
OHIO.— QillipolW, (Gallia Co. An.) Rn. Tbomu Cole, Sec 
UarlelU, Ker. Lnllier O. DlDtluiili, Ag. 

aOCIETIE8 NOT AIIXIIJA&T. 
N. JBR. — Hardwick, HarkdnnniEbi and SdJlwater, lHu 

BebK)Rr,Tr. . 
PuKnoD, U, RelbrDied Dntck Okareh, Balpb Doretiiuf, Tr. 
N. OAk.— M. OitoIIdb Beak CoiniMnT, Bar. J. W. Donslui, Ag, 
Tracu lold U Iba Dvpodloijr (alndlridoala, 

Dirtclorifar li/i. 
finK-K ^rtminfUB, P"- KnMh 
Er,Dup._lVl*dJ< 

'"'moo 



a, Rn. Bunnel N.91 



WMIhnn Iff ■ Qn^rt oC POJ 3 

InlPuUBkEH dd. i 

Hukn BmwD, <lo. t 

AiHM Cabb. its. ■ 

llUliuililOi>lt,EN. do. 9 

Sulla W.Fmaiiit, Em- <la. ■ 

Bum^^Morgm, Eii). da. S 
MibMbm,, ^ *>■ a 

Dec Suplwii Jabnuii, do. 3 
lln. tMfy PsRer, do. S 

CvLJabBWUna, dd. S 

Utaon, Batomn QDIicn, SO 

HnmttiUriMmElllahUTde, SO 
Os-Wb. Adni^ pul of 190^ ( 
EmiMAnrill, do. 4 



Dea. L«l CnMb*, do. i 

EUdHUarfu, do. S 

n>liificld,glU Doll* Euan, do. 4 

' Hn. AmrjIUi Fnwlu, do. S 

Hobwl Kcnnedr, do. I 

CaLEkMwtiOieT, do. £ 

EUuL-Wtur, do. 1 

StadactnWMiJI.troodi]rid(E.da. 1 

Tnwtnlli Bcbea B. Bnilon, do. 10 

it. TOBK^AKmn', Mln NancT A. 

1npinDll,(lDfiUart!(l,) 3 
Ammu, Johi a. Knii, (In part of 

KnrloWD, I,, i-i Bcf. John Gnld- 
- — l»Hn anwTnlTard. ' X 
I. unce Tnfliirdi SO 



N. Vork CilT, Mri. 

bTFrl»d^(lniwtaJ 
Rn. J«epk Hurlbiu, 



'Sfew 



BtrotlmOat Obiia't Htr- 
minan IhcMonni, 20 

FUb, W«M mn, Mn. Eliubeth 
Oaa,hiLadlM'aew)iirSoc>elT, SO 

WMtniUe, Rcr. JohnK. Adiui, 
^Fim. Oiar. Soc. SO 

S. CAE-Stw. IIM BUflbrd, br 
Kail or Bnb|>afa ud Tb;s- 
fln OoungulHi. SO 

TBRN— 4^niilBEtaii, BcdTotd Co. 
Kn. Tbonui J. HnU. by bit 
OkMRb and OODRenUiB, SO 

omOh— Wnt DoEn, Aduii C<v 
■Dm Etiu Jh» Mumr, bjba 
IWwr, Mr. D. Udrbt, !B 

£iumai JUanteri, 5* tdcA. 
COHN—WtiUntUB, Uh Fun 

M.OSIT, S 

n. TORK.-Kcir-Tort ai». Dr. b. 

Bofar, Mn. Juki W. flIwdiB, 

MtaiOiiiliulH Do>wt«», Un. 

IXIr Bbhum, SubikI Wud, IS 
WUtabonDrt, Hn. £uum Dai- 

■([.Mn-NuT^I, < 



THE AMERICAN 



9KAB.CB, 1820. 



Ic wu cul a l»ppj man. 1 



One or the most striking chnracterislics of thi* agg of llie church it, 
that Chriatiaiu are beginDing to ferl Ikcir obligation to do alt Ikey erm 
la advance Iht eautt 0/ Chrisl. And while they are ioquiring wha( 
the Lard would hare Ihem do. He is coatiouallj shoirmg them new 
fielda of UKfulneis 

A few yean ago. for example, ChTiitiaas law the ravageg o( IiUem- 
perance; botthej >til] continued la fall in with Ihe cuttoma around 
(bem. Now God hai made them feel their dulj to lepaiste theuuelvei 
wholl; (torn this iniquity and set the eiimple of total abatinenre. 
So exteniirc hu this feeling tiecome, that the writer of theae liae< 
doei Dot know that h single indiTiduBl in all the circle of hit intimBte 
frivAda And acquaintance uaes nny erdent apirita. 

Manj Chditiuu, a few yesn ago, aufl^red themaelvei to intrude 
upon the lacrednui of the SabbiUh by Journeying 1 but God haa now 

Vol. rv. a [W«di:« No. 39, 



26 THE DESTITUTE MUST BE SUPPLIED WITH TRACTS. [Mar. 

opened their eyes to the duty of keeping the day holy to himself. A 
Jarge portion of the Christian community no longer suffer themselves 
to depart or arrive, In stages or sl^ain-boats, cn the Day of God. 

The same may be said of the new interest awakened for children, 
whose parents, fh/oiigh ignofince, or poverty, or crime, abandon 
them to the paths of the destroyer. This interest has exhibited itself 
in Common, Sabbath, and Infant Schools. Christians now see, that to 
let these young immortals alone till the community is annoyed by 
their squalid poverty and infamoifs vices, and the almsljouses and 
penitentiaries, courts and prisons are filled with them, is a gross ne- 
glect of duty. 

So also God has now awc^ened in the hearts of his children a deep 
sense of their obligation to convey a knowledge of the Gospel to fiU 
who are ignorant of it. For this sikiglb object, the whole phalanx of 
our JBvangelical Benevolent Institution^ is engaged. 

And now God is showing his chlldriEiti, that there is a large portion 
of the community who are reachi^ by no &^er ffitaia of grace, and 
who can be reached h^ JVacta — ^multitndes, wti4 never Mtetr the sanc- 
tuary, are visited by no preacher of the €k>8pel, htcre not the Bible, 
and come under the in^neiicB of km sefaeoi, t>f «ir|r sdrt whatever. 
The whole population over the age of l6 or 16 yeftkv, hbtHeVer desti- 
tute they may be of other means bf ittstru^ion, lire, Accdtdlng to the 
present order of things, excluded iTroih the bieH^fits af schools. 

By Tracts, all the destitute portions of our popuhi^on who can 
read, and who do not reject every thing pertaining to the Gospel of 
Christ, can be reached, and that withoiU delay ! Years must roll by, 
before the country can be supplied with the preaching of the Gospel, 
or with the Bible ; but no such delfty is necessary in the printing and 
circulation of Tracts, 

We appeal to this Christian community, and ask whether God has 
not most clearly devolved on us the duty of immediately supplying 
our destltttte population with thcs means of grace ? We challenge all 
denial of this duty. This responsibitity rests on us-«»we cannot throw 
it off — we must rise and meet it. There is no obstacle to encounter 
bat the native settshness and indolence of our hearts ; and if we in- 
dulge ourselves and say, " A little more sleep, a little more slumber, 
a little more folding of the htads to sleep," let us beware of the im- 
)pending " destruction" that will fall upon our feUow-inen, and the 
frown of Heaven that will come down upon ourselves. 

The Committee of the American Tract Society feel, that no ^ft 
mmt be spared thus to supply the dtsit&ute throughovt all ow bmrnda- 
ries ;~-in every one of oar large cities — in every prindpat town and 
village— in every neighbourhood, and county, and state, and terri- 
tory. They do not wish to exclude the whole Valley of the Missis- 
sippi, from the Alleghany te the Reeky Mountains; in which eight 



ISaO.] THE DESTITUTE MtJST B£ SUPPLIED WITp TBACTS. 27 

sUUe$, oontainiAg, according to t^ c^Qsus of 17^0, no fr^ it^hke po- 
piilatioo, »ow embrace upw»i48 of 2^QQO|0|00 of souls. 

In that VjOley, the Commktee of the Aoierican Society are now 
sustaining ax Agmts, including two, labouring in Kew Orleans and 
adilacent parts. They hare every encouragement; and wonder that 
the Cluriatiao coiMnunity could have neglected tbtit portion of the 
country so long. They tell us, that in the single Mate of Ohio are 70 
OQvaliet ; which, flowing an Agent to labour but two weeks in each 
county, would occupy him nearly tlwee yee^s. They tell us, there is 
a wtUingness in the people to receive the Gospel ; to contribute ac- 
cording to then: ability ; to engage m personal efforts ; and to help 
forward the work of carrying Tracts to the whole population. We 
trnst this great work will be carried on, and nothing be ever suffered 
to interrupt its progress. 

But while we ai^ in this work at the West, shull we negkd those 
equaUy dtdUutt of ike priviUgcs of the Qofel in these ol4er states ? 
The work of reaching the whole population by TracU is begun, 
not only West of tilie AUeghaoy, hut Eaat of the Alleghany* The 
Pennsybrania Branch Tract 3ociel9^ is actively engaged in the work 
of forming Tract Societi^ " in every town and in every congrega- 
tion that will grant permission*" We think we see indications in 
some either portion? of tke Atlantic states, thnt f omething more effec- 
fiwl abiiU be done. 

We ask, vhy «haU not all the population of New-York, and Boston. 
aa4 PbiWkddpMn, and Bakkaere, and Charlnston, and even New- 
Orleans, be reached statedly by these mean^ of g^ace f 

Why will not NeiV'England supply her own population ; and the 
state of New-York hers ; and New-Jersey hers ; and every oth^i 
Atlantic state her own ? 

^'Why shall not every Christian feel, that the obligation to supply 
those around him, who are destitute of other means, with this means 
of grace, rests on him as sacredly as the oUigation to visit his closet, 
or to perform any other religious doty 7 

This work is etrduous; for there- ara far more who are destitute of 
othar means, to be supplied with Tracts, than is generally supposed. 
' The work is d^ffUuH ; for multitttdes are so far from all tenderness 
or interest on the subject of religion, that they will not thank ui for 
TracU or any other means of grace. Bot, for Irom God as they may 
be, can we account for it at the day of judgment, if we give them not 
so much as the warning of a IVact f 

The work is MJfkuH ; for it will require nmch personal, persevering 
effort, it will require all the Go»operation of all the friend of Tracts, 
both male and fomale; and will requiin awch Christian grace and 
faith in exercise. When tiie heart grows oeld, we cease such labours, 
just as we cease praying or foithfol personal conversation. 



^^ GREECE. [Mar. 

The work is difficult ; for it will require extensive pecuniary means. 
But how can funds be more economically expended ? Look at the 
record of the Divine blessing on Tracts, wherever they have been 
faithfully distributed. Let the work be once faithfully engaged in, 
and pursued with prayer, and every individual who enlists in it may 
expect to have cause to thank God for directing him to so important 
and successful a means of blessing his fellow-men. 

Followers of Christ, we spread this duty before you. Look it in the 
face, may we not say ? and either find a reason for neglecting it, that 
will satisfy conscience in the sight of God, or else enter upon it im- 
mediately. 

Do any ask, How shall we commence our efforts ? We answer, 
Call together the officers and members of Tract Societies, where 
such Societies exist, and other friends of the cause. Tell them, here 
is a duty, that God has pointed out clearly before them, and that it 
must not be neglected. Let active individuals be designated for each 
nf^ighbourhood ; let every family be visited in a discreet and proper 
manner, and none be unsupplied, who do not decline receiving these 
publications ; and let these visits be repeated weekly or monthly. 
If no Tract Society exists in the fidd to be occupied, let one be formed ; 
or if this cannot be done, let individuals engage in the work. And if 
the place is too destitute to supply its own wants, let application be 
made to the American Tract Society, or to some flourishing Branch 
or Auxiliary in the neighbourhood, for aid by a grant of Tracts. 

The immediate impression created by the Tracts will not be the only 
effect produced. Their distribution will prepare the way for personal 
conversation— for leading those who neglect public worship to the 
house of God, and for directing men to the Bible. It will waken the 
attention to the religious movements of the age, and prepare the way 
for every other means of spiritual good to be introduced and enjoy e'd. 



GR£CiC£i* 

It will be recollected, that $300 was, some time since, appropriated 
by the Committee of the American Tract Society to the Rev. Jonas 
King, Missionary and Agent to Greece in behalf of the Ladies' Greek 
Committee of the city of New-York, the same to be employed by him 
in procuring modem Greek Tracts, especially from the Mission press 
at Malta, for distribution in that country. 

When the Rev. G. G. Robertson sailed, a few weeks since, for the 
same interesting field of labour, under the direction of the Episcopal 
Domestic and Foreign Missionary Society, the Committee appropri- 
ated $150, to be employed by him in a similar manner. 

All accounts agree, that the eagerness to obtain Tracts and other 
religioos books in Greece is now very great. 



« WhUfi ^ M^lp, w F»>P»vy I*8t,'' WW» »^^- Mr. i^>ewer, late 
Ikjji^siop^ry op tt»? Me4i*«^rau^n, " I bwt opportmiMy «f dispoprng of 
m)t a few Bibles, an4 iPWy twn^WuM .<rf Trftctp-^^'rench, EnfUiSi, 
Italian, and Greek. Among the officers and soMiers of the Frene/i 
deftXhpf^ }y'v^e tbpre, 9t a distance fww Ihe re^fjling-rooms and book- 
rtores Joff Aeir ova cowtry, tbpre ^as a great eagerness manifestad 
by jtbem, to obtain bo^Jw of inmost any kind, ^d in any langnai^e.—- 
4j8 tiiere is pow fli large Fre«ch force in the Morea, it occurred to me 
a$ deftir^ble, tixat Bev. Mr. Bobertspo should be f«r»i»hod with French 
j|LP^ Englisb books for theur ben^ AuM^g ibo younger offlcecs, 
f her? w^ .evi4e»Xly a strong iuclinatiom |o iM^oome acquainted with 
t^e IS^sigUsb ajpud other languages ; and Ibey will use, for this f»i]|>«se, 
tb^ 3ible, or my WH which they can obtain." 

In addition to the above appropriation of $150 to Rev. Mr. Robert- 
son, the Committee grafted him 15,CMX> pa^es in English, a^d 10,000 
in French^ Spanish, afid German. 

mAMlBl'S^ IfTBHAmES IN FRANCi:« 

Application having been jmade by the Rev. Mark Wilkes, of Paris, 
to tii0 Connni^e of the American Tract Sociefy ^ for aid in establish- 
ing Libraries for British and American seamen, in the ports of Mar- 
seilles, Honfleur, Havre, and Bordeaui[, in France, an entire 3et of 
the Society 'is Tracts has been granted by theConnninee» for each port. 
About 1900 British and American sailors enter Marseilles every y«ar. 



^^•WBWa 



Fourteenth anniversary, Augnst 11, 1B28. Receipts, during the 
year, $1,411 60. Distributed, during the year, 279,396 Tracts; 
making the distrilmtion, since the formation of the Society, 3,967,375 
Tracts. Increase of distribution the last year, compared with fhe 
prece<;in«, «bQut 70,000 Tr«ctf . 

Many evidences of the work being of God have epme to light during 
the year ; apd " these evidences," say* the report, " have been most 
numerous where the plan of appointing inditddualt to dtattnet diHricis, 
for the purpose of visiting every house in them, and leavisig one or two 
Jiraets to, Ite mod, and to be exchanged on the smne day in every week^ 
has been adopted." Four congregations in Liverpool are particularly 
specified, who have voluntarily entered upon this undertaking; and 
four full octavo pages of the report, in fine type, are occupied with 
interesting details of the success attending their visits and 4istribu« 
tions. One congregation visits weekly about 1000 families, 

" The work of lending Tracts to the ignorant poor," says one of the 
reports, " is still carried on; it is hoped, with increasing usefulness— 
certainly with growing pleasure and delight by those engaged in it. 
The visiters have by this time become personally acquainted with 
most in their respective districts^ and consequently have more free 
access to the people than formerly: this, with the marked respect 
shown them, the attention paid to what may be said, and the thank- 
fulness expressed for the trouble taken with them^ contributes to ren- 

8» 



do tlVERPdOJC TRitCT ^OCtETY. 



[Mar. 



4er the work mow ctelightful; and, at the close of their weekly la- 
bours, inducer them anew to determine, by God*s help, to prosecute 
their labours with increased diligence, hoping and praying for the 
promised blessing. '^ 

•* We commenced risiting our district," says another report, '* Oc- 
tober 14, 1827, and have continued to call upon, and lend Tracts, al- 
most every Sabbath-day, to about sixty families, containing, on an 
average, about two hundred persons ; who, in general, received and 
read them with great pleasure. In our conversation with the people, 
we find all to be professors of the Christian religion, and most of them 
have firmer hopes of salvation than ourselves, although wallowing in 
the filth of almost every abomination, and none of them attending 
public worship. Some, indeed, have the Word of God in their habi* 
tations, but seldom read it; and a few have it not, nor the means to 
procure it, being destitute of employment. 

** In our first visits, we found many in bed, passing away the tedi- 
ous hours of a cold day ; in fact, paying no regard whatever to the 
worship of God on the Sabbath, any more than an African or a Hin* 
doo. Other places we found completely stowed with fruits and sweet- 
meats, the residents making this their principal market-day. 

*< We do not latterly find them, as we did formerly, in bed; ami 
many have come to the evening worship, but not constantly, wi^ the 
exception of three persons, who have taken courage to come in their 
wretched clothing. A man whom we had a good deal of conversation 
with, acknowledged that he had been doing wron^ all bis life, even 
to gray hairs. 

'' At our next visit, we found two ladies of the Established Church 
at the old man's cellar, reading to them, and making a few observa- 
tions : we were delighted to see them so earnest in the work of the 
Lord. When the ladies ceased, we entered into conversation with 
the old man, until he could not contain any longer, and wept much, 
saying, ' I see it is of no use — I cannot make any more excuses ; I 
wUl, with the help of the Lord, go just as I am io chapel, where these 
good men have so often invited us to come. They have often prayed 
with us, and we have been edified, and felt ourselves wretched and 
miserable sinners.' One of the ladies said, ' Since it has been so de- 
lightful to you, and you have derived so much comfort, they will now 
pray for you and us.* We did so, and believe the gracious presencti 
of God was with us. 

'' They have" attended the means of grace in the evenings ; and the 
old man told us, that now, through the goodness and mercy of God, 
by reading the Tracts, accompanied by our instructions, he begins to 
see as he never saw before." 

Spirited efibrts have also been made for the supply of the shipping 
generally, and of the steam and other pleasure-boats, plying on the 
river upon the Sabbath. 

After speaking of the increasing activity and success of the London 
Religious Tract Society, which distributed, the last year, 9,600,0(]^ 
Tracts, the report thus proceeds ; 

" Not less vigorous, in proportion to its age, and vying with it io 
boldness of enterprise, the American Tract Society is pursuing the 
same career of usefulness, and is exhibiting to the Christian world a 
pleasing proof of what may be effected by a determined purpose in 
tlVe pvosecution of an unexceptiomable obj^ict. The second yeat of 



18ld.] JLtXfttAIil£9i 



Si 



Us operations gave an increase upon those of the preceding one, large 
as they were, of three to one : and the third year, which has just been 
brought to a close, exhibits a further incirease, in the proportion of five 
to three — its distribution having amounted, in the last twelve m(mthsy 
to 46,300,000 pages. 

" When it is recollected that more than a twentieth part of the po- 
pulation of the whole globe speak the English language ; and that the 
individuals to whom it is vernacular, are scattered in pursuit of com- 
merce, or of science, or of the loftier and holier aim of advancing the ' 
interests of the Redeemer's kingdom, amongst all the nations c^ the 
earth ; some faint idea may be formed of the importance of the com- 
bined efforts of these two Societies, and of the vast aggregate of good 
likely to result from their labours, if their future proceedings should 
continue progressive as their past have been," 

In a letter from Mr. Samuel Hope, one of the Secretaries of thi& 
Society, he says : " One part of our operations, I mean the system of 
assigning distinct districts to different individuals, that Tracts may, at 
regular intervals, be placed in every family, I think most deserving of 
your attention ; for I know no circumstances which can possibly either 
prevent any one of your Ai*xiliaries or jissocicUions from adopting the 
plan, or which can even exctue them for not adopting it. It gives 
mighty efficacy to the Tract system, and indeed seems to be the nc 
plus ultra of this branch of Christian benevolence — the point, both as 
to economy and efficiency, beyond which human effort cannot go." 

AxnanuLAMvr op trott, arzrw-'S'o&B:. 

Twelfth anniversary held Jan. 19. The Society has 13 life and 171 
annual members. Receipts, during the year, $371 89 ; $254 56 of 
which have been remitted to the Parent Society on account for Tracts, 
and $80, as a donation. Distributed, during the year, 297,900 pages ; 
including 46,000 pages delivered to Tract Societies ; 16,000 to Sab- 
bath Schools ; 12,000 to Common Schools ; and 17,000*to sloops and 
Canal-boats at the wharves ; besides distributions in the Almshouse 
and Prison, and liberal appropriations to the Female Charitable Insti- 
tutions of the city, for gratuitous distribution to the sick and afflicted 
poor. The whole amount of Tracts purchased, since the formation 
df the Society, is about 9,000,000 pages. 

The meeting was addressed by Rev. Mr. Tucker. Mr. CushmftH, 
Judge Bull, Mr. Russell, Mr, Fisk, Dr. Blatchford, and others. 

** I wish you could have been with us," says an esteemed friend. 
^"^ on this interesting occasion. Though the weather was unpleasant, 
the room was tolerably well filled, and more good feeling I have 
riarely witnessed on any occasion. Every address seemed to raise 
the tone of feeling higher and higher. The wants of the Parent So- 
ciety were brought to view, and their enterprise of supplying thp 
whole Valley of the Mississippi with Tracts presented in an interesf- 
iiig manner. A Gentleman at length arose, and proposed that the 
meeting should make an offering, according to what was in their 
hearts, to aid in this important work. * Mr. President,' said one, * I 
am inexpressibly rejoice^ to see the state of feeling which pervades 



8£ AUXiUAEticd. [liar. 

this meeting^. I am afready a life member of the American Trapl 
Society ; I nov» Sir, will ffive you $20^ to make my fpife a life mem-* 
her: It went like ejectrioty : * 1, f 20'— • I, 20*— « I too, Sir'— till 16 
individuals g^ave each a life subscription ! A Committee was also ap- 
pointed to continue the subscription out of doors, withoi)^ d^Iay." 
J. ChichkstkBi Pret, A. Lovsland, Trtat, C Ltman, Cor. $ee. 



The second annual meeting of this Society WM he}d Vf^ the Masonic 
Hall, We^oesd^y eyf niog, Fffb. 4. ^, h^wUii £9q,> 'Bifm^nt, in (j^ 
chair. After prayer by tha B«r. Mr. Mason, of the Cedar-street 
church, and a few appropriate remarks by the Chairman, the u8Uj|l 
reports were read by Alfred Edwards, Trefsurer, and Gerard HkI- 
lock, Corresponding Secretary. From these it appears that the re* 
ceipts of the year, including a small balance in the Treasuxy, haA 
amounted to ^1,547 27; of which sum, $821 60 was receiyed firom 
thirteen Auxiliary Associations in the city— $701 77, as donations 
ftom individuals. Payments during the year, $1,544 36 ^ and there 
remains due to the Parent Society, $258 83. 

The total number of pages drawn from the Depository during th^ 
year, is 2,121,198. Of this number, 44,500 have been distributed by 
the Executive Committee, 330,378 by the Committee on Associations, 
1,060,500 by the Shipping Committee, 44,800 by the Committee for 
the supply of Humane and Criminal Institutions, 239,100 by the Sun- 
day School Committee, 146,600 by the Market Committee, 70,000 by 
the Steam-boat Committee, 174,200 by the Committee for ^he outskirts 
of the city, and 12,220 by subscribers. Tqtal number of pages distd- 
bpted since the Society was instituted, (twq years,) 4,48917"^. 

The report contained very numfirous evidences of the accepti^ble<' 
iiess and usefulnesfi of the Tracts distributed ; several of wb|ch wf 
hope ill our next number to lay before ^v^r ("eiders. 

The meeting wi|f addressed by I(ev. p. Cr. I^udlow, Jer* ^y^^t 
Bsq. pi Boston, Bey. Mr. VermUye, W. ^. H^\1o.c1e» Cor. Sep. ^n^^Xi 
Tract Soc. afid Rev. Mr. Temple, Mi^fuonfiry from l^filta. 

The Board of the Society have now entered wit^ much spirit on 
the subject of attempting to carry Tract^, no^ pnly to the seamen^ t^e 
ivtai^tes of a^e Humane and Criminal Institutions, and others em- 
braced in the fields assigned to particular Cornmittees, but to tf^ 
^hoU population of the city. They feel urred to this by the iiqperr- 
ous claims of duty to thousfinds and tens of thousands living ^ the 
midst of them, as destitute, of the ^ofpel almost 1^ those who ai^ 
fitting in Pagan darkness. 

We trust, interesting reports of the proceedings of this Society, 
with reference to this important object, will soon be received ; and 
we wish many of our other cities woul^ even now, if possiblei .J?^^^* 
pate this Society in commeiK^g the steted supply of fheir enti)'e 
population with Tracts. 



1829.] BHaNCHeS. 9S 

OOZTKBOTZOmP BSAKOB TBAOT 8O0ZBW. 

The thirteenth anniversary was held in Hartford, January 8, 1829. 
Rev. J. H. Lindsley, President of the Branch, opened the meetings by 
prayer. From the report it appeared that, dnring the year, the re- 
ceipts had been f 1,118 38; issues, 75,478 Tracts, 12 copies Rise and 
Progress, and a large edition of the Christian Almanac. The report 
presents an interesting view of the wants of our own country and of 
the world, and urges to increased exertions. 

The meeting was addressed by T. C. Perking, E^q. Wm. A. Hallock, 
Cor. Sec. Amer. Tract Soc. and Rev Thomas H. Gallaudet* The 
existing wants of the American Tract Society were urged, especially 
in view of its attempts to supply the great Valley of the Mississippi 
with Tracts ; and by the Rev. Mr. Gallaudet a very full view of Tract 
operations in France, England, India, and throughout the world, was 
presented. 

After showing minntely the present state of the operations and pe- 
cuniary resources of the American Tract Sotiety, the Rxv. Mr. Qal- 
liAUDST made a very forcible appeal for aid to that Society's funds ; 
urging particularly the obligations of the Christian community, by 
their contributions, to relieve the Committee, whose services are wh(^Iy 
gratuitous, from the necessity of continually assuming large personal 
pecuniary responsibilities, in order te meet the Sdtiety's wants. 

A subscription was opened at the close of the meeting, which, b^ 
subsequent efforts, was raised ta $1,100, as a donation to the Ameri- 
can Tract Society. Mr* Charles Hosker, Cor. Sec. and Ag. 



BSUUrOR TBAOT 800XBTV £LT tTTXOA. 

This Branch has recently been making spirited exertions to esta-- 
blish an ample Depository on a permanent basis, and extend its ope* 
rations over that large and, in many parts of it, very destitute portion 
of country embraced in the operations of the Western 3. S. Union. 
Upwards of $600 was raised in a lew day^ in Utica, for this object 
and for the Valley of the Mississippi ; and an Agent has been appoint- 
ed, to devote himself wholly to the concerns of the Branch. From 
him we have just received a copy of the following 

RESOr.IJTIONS OF THE ONBIDA FRBSBYTERT* 

Resolved^ That this Presbytery view, with feelings of devout thank- 
fulness to God, the manifestation of the Divine blessing which has at^ 
tended the distribution of Religious Tracts. 

^solved. That the work in which the American Tract Society is 
now actively engaged, of supplying the destitute in every part of otur 
land, and especially the rapidly increasing millions of the West, with 
Tracts, is one which demands the eordial co-operation of all who love 
their country, the cause of Chrfot, and the souls of men. 

Retohed, That, in consequence of the wide field for Tract distri- 
bution among the destitute embraced within the bounds of the W. S. 
S. Union, the Churches belonging to the Presbytery can in no wsy 
more effectually further the designs of the Parent Institution, than by 
doing all in their power to give efficiency to the operations of the 
Utica Branch Tract Society. Therefore, 

Retohed, That it be recommended to all the Churches and Pastors 
within our bounds, to take more visorous measures for the circulation 
of Religious Tracts among themselve?, and for extendug the opera- 



34 AME&ICAV TBACT 90CIETT. {.Mar. 

tioas of the Utica Branch Society over the Sixteen Counties to which 
Utica has become a commercial centre. 



AMERICAir TRACT SOCIBTT. 

We inyite the partlcuhur attention of all our readers to the subject 
of statedly supplying^ erery family with Tcacts, especially all thosr 
famiUes who, from necessity or want of inclination, fail of haying 
the messages of the Gospel presented to them in any other form. 
Our first article, and the notices of the Reports of the Liverpool and 
New- York City Tract Societies, present important facts and consi< 
derations relative to this subject. 

The Rev.Wiixiam Casz sailed from N.York on the 8th Jan. to laboui 
in N. Orleans and adjacent parts, in connexion with Rxv. Mr. Vail. 

PRBMXUM FOR A, TBJLCT 
ON SAILING VESSELS OUT OF PORT ON THE SABBATH. 

A benevolent indivtdnal has placed at the disposal of the American 
Tract Society the snm of Fifty Ikdlan, to he awarded by the Pub- 
lishing Coimnittee to the Mithor of the best Tract, not exceeding 
eight paces in lengUi, upon the praetke 9f tmUng VtmeU ^vt ^J 
pwi im the Sabbath, 

The Pnblishinr Ccnnmittee will xvcMve Tracts on tfaii subyeet nniil 
the first day <if Jufy, 1829. Communications to be addressed to 
Mr. WiUinm A. Hallock, Cor. Sec. Amer. Tract Soc. No. 144 Nassau- 
street, New-York. The author's name must accompany the Tract 
in a sealed envelope, which will not be opened unless in the instance 
of the successful Tract. 

Ry order of the Publishuig Committee of 4he American Tract 
Society. JAMBS MiuuMt, Chairman. 

New-Y^rk, Feb, 5, 1929. 

OTHER PREMItJlHS PAJBVIOirSLY ADTirOVIfCEO 

BY THE COMMITTEE. 

Stfy DoUart, for the best Tract '* On the Character and Prospects 
of the Hkathen;^ not to exceed 12 pages in length, and to be pre- 
sented on or before April 1, 1829. 

i^y Vefiart, for the but ten HandHU TVaett, eadi to be not las;? 
than one fourth, nor more than three fourths of a Tract page iti 
length ; and to be presented on or before April 20, 1829. 

OJaEBZSVZAJMT JkVmAMJkC VO^ 1880. 

All Societies or individuals who desire an edition of this work <or 
1880, are requested to observe the following particulars : 

1. It is destmble the Committee should be informed early ef oil the 
editions they are expected to prepare, Tliis wiU save them great per- 
pleaity, and enable them early to procure caleodars, and prepare and 
issue all the editions, and to forward them to their respective places 
of destinatien in due season. 

2. Those edrderipg an edition should accurately conunonicate aU 
the loeai mailer, such as officers of the state* eeurts, he, which they 
wish inserted, or specify the alterations which they wish to be made 
ia the looel matter of the Almanac for 1620. The sise of the edition 
wanted, and the manner ia which it is to be forwarded, abeuld alao. 
bf accurately speoiaed, 



D all Hm ubmubn tbould b« 
a, a nelie* of Rhich will be in- 



RECJBIFTS 

INTO THE TREUDar OF THE AUERICAN TIACT 80CICTV, 

roOH AUXILIARY TRACT BOCIETIEB. 
EL-HbrlbarMif h, F«b- Hn. Balda C. Nanton, Af. 

Boe. J. Thmib, Tr. 
PnneU Wood, B«. . 

B Co. An j' Edwin Ninbui;, 
•1, Tr. 1 



A. P. CbHmpUn, Ag. . 



I WdHKr. At' 

Ouwl, In Sc'oldi P»lb. Churck. Si- 

, -..tei\fim''ibi.'M.VntnrriNi. Tr. 

Si. aRa-fC'iCh. Ftn. Hn. F.M. Hill, Tr. 
U lia, E. Vcmnn, 8k. 
JENM^MMHtUM', I. IjoM, Tr. 
FliiMelpliii BnsrMica. W. BIllM, 8h. 
DEL.— WllmiBgton, BliliDD DanDporl, Sec 
MD.-Biif€wMown, Fenu krt. Uebeea L. HuiId, S«c. 
nR^Buffolo, F«n. . . . . 

Rutwood, Slalbrd Co. Janet Briffn, Tr 
PflK*Bd.Uii.Tb«iLBen. MiDl.Bo7all,S(c. . 
Sktanond, Wllllin F. MlMi, Tr. 
WliaiUM<Z.B.CiiMii,8«. . . . . 



lb E. MfElroi 



OBI(>^-CI>cla«U,HnTTB.FBat,l!. ■ 
OrwnUb. Rn- 'acob Llllle, Prca. 
OiwalHir^ Traisball To. U^ CburcbUI, Sec. . 
>farMU,Sar. Lutfetra.Blii|l»iii,Ar. . 
Wooiter, (Wbjd* Co. Au.) Bamael Qiilnb)', Ag. 



Tneli hM it I^Dapoiii 

Dinclortfnr Lift. 
CONK.— BunrlngUii. Rn. Tbi 



MOO 
S10 

in 88 



MhUlciawn, Bn. JobB R. Oimw, 

N. VURK.-Gewis. He* Hea^ 
DwtEni, In part for iwrpetuiillit 
Baivr'i Sakiti' Kelt, 101 

N. Yort C\tj, Kett AUfD, a 

WllUnin Coned, " 



Memiert/ar Lift. 
R. ISL^PnnidtiKc, B«t. Zalm 

Tob«T. tn UM— 
CONN. — BuTkL 



niddiMMra, NcMi 



■ekiKibani. En 00 
ilib Hiiibard, 30 00 



36 



RECEIFTlS. 



North-HateD, Mrs. Eunice Foot, 20 
Northlngton, Rev. BeU KeUojgrgf 

by Ladies, 90 

N. YOR K.— Brooklyn, Rer. Charles 
P. McUvalne, by sundry Oadets 
of West Point Academy, 20 

N.Tork Oity, Gerard Beekman, esq. 2U 
Mrs. Ellen V. Couch, by Mr 

William Couch. 25 

Miss Helen M. Ooucfa, by do. 25 
Benjamin Douglasb, by hi.s fa- 
ther. Mr. George Douglass, 20 
Rev. Manton Eastburn, by a 
friend, through the Fern. Auz. 
of Su George's Ch. 20 

A. Falconer, 20 

Edward Field, 20 

Joseph S. James, 20 

Miss Ann Mason, by Mr. R. L* 

Nevins, 20 

Miss Julia Mason, by do. 20 

William Henry Milnor, by his 

fether, Rev. Jas. Milnor, D.D. 20 
Mrs. Jane NeWns, by Mr. R. L. 

Nevins, 20 

Rufus L. Nevins, 20 

John Steward, Jun. 25 

Henry Young, 25 

Saeket*s Harbour, Rev. E.H. Snow- 
den, bv Mrs. Susan Snowden, (in 
part of 120.) 5 

Schenectady, Rev. Erslune Mason, 

by Ladies, 30 

Westchester, John B. Fleming, by 
Fern. Aux. Tr. Soc. of Harbem, 
N. Y. 20 

PENN — Salem, Wayne Co. Wil- 
liam Woodbridge, 20 
VIR.— Botetourt Co. Rev. John A. 
Van Lear, by Ladies of Locust 
Bottom Cong. 20 
)GEO — Savannah, Rev. Stephen A. 
Mealy, of the Evangel. Lutheran 
Church, by Ladies, 20 
MlSS.-Jeffersun Co. Rev. William 
Montgomery, by Lndies of Ebeo- 
ecer. Harmony and Union Congs. 20 
Natchez, Rev. Geo. Potts, by Ladies, 40 
TENN — FarmingtoD, Bedford Co. 
Mrs. Emma W. Hall, (in part of 
$20,) 16 
OHIO.-~Cincinnati, Rev. B. P. Ay- 

delott, by Ladies of Christ Oh. 20 
Columbus, Rev. James Huge, by 

Ladles, 20 

MALTA —Mediterranean, Mr. Ho- 
man Hailock, Missionary, by his 
brother, William A. Hailock, of 
New-York, 20 

Annual Director » 
GEO.— Augusta, Rev. Jesse Mercer, 5 

Annual Membersf S^each, 

N. YORK.— N. York City, E. Piatt, 
Jun. 92 ; Mrs. M. Ulshoefler, $2, 



00 S. Smith, |1 10 ; K. StoweH, 25c. ; 

' H. Thompson, 20c. 5 00 

00 (10NN.— A. B. and C. for the West, 1 90 

'Canton, a Collection at monthly 

' Cimcert, 11 SO 

no Chatham, by bands of Rev. H. Tal- 

00 cott, 2 38 

^Farmington, a new yearns offering 
00: to the Lord, for Tr. beyond Alleg. 60 00 
00 Green's Farms, collected at nionth^ 

Concert, 1 47 

00 Middletown, Collection at public 

Meeting, Jan. 18, 57 61 

Mrs. AbigaU Hubbard, $5 1 Mrs. 
Abigail Russell. $5} Mrs.Luey 
AnnShaler,$5;Sam South- 
miiyd, $5 ; Obed Slow, f 1, 21 00 



00 
OO 
00 
00 



00 
00 

00 

00 
00 
00 
00 



00 
00 



00 
00 



00 



00 



00 
00 



00 
00 
00 



00 



00 



4 00 



Other Donations, 

VER.—.Mjftncbester, a Contribution, 23 

Waitsfield, a Friend, 2ac; Isaac 

Hawley, 20c. j Individuals, 60c.; 

Mrs. U. Silaby, $| 85; Elvini 

.Smith, 30c. ; OrviUa Smith, 85c. ; 



N.YORR Bovina, Walter Biggar, 2 60 

N. York City, J. C.Brigham, 05; 
Cash, WRll-st.Ch. $2; J. Chand- 
ler, $5 ; Wm. £. Dodge, $5 ; Wm. 
Fiu-rest, $l0; a Friend, $1; J.R. 
Gibson, fS; Dr. L. Hitchcock, 
91; Lowell Holbrook, $10; Dr. 
Ansel W. Ives, $10; Miss E. A. 
Kear, $1; Rufus Lock wood, $5; 
Thomas S. Nelson, $5 ; George 
Palmer, $5, 68 60 

Perry Centre, avails of a charity- 
box, for Tracts beyond Alleg. 8 OQ 
Watertown, Benev. Assor- Geo. S. 

Uoardman, Ag. for Tr bey. AUeg. 20 OO 
Westford,E. Williams, 60 

PENN.— Braintrim, H . W. Norlbup, 81 
Griersburg, Beaver Co. pious Fe- 
males, 20 00 
Pittsburgh, a Member of Trinity 

Church, 5 00 

Salem, Wayne Co. Luther Weston, 10 OO 
do. Mrs. A. B. Woodbridge, 
for Tracts beyond Alleghany, 5 00 
VI K— Richmond, M. O. for Tracts 

beyond Alleghniiy, 10 00 

N. OAR.— Salem, Jfohn Vogler, 10 00 
8. CAR.— CamUen, W. Vernon, «5 

GEO.— Savannah, Mrs. Lloyd, $5; 
G. W. Goe, $5 ; Cash, $5 ; do. $2 ; 
do. $2; Moses Cleland, $5; H. 
Lord, $6 ; C. W. Rockwell, $5 ; 
W. Easton, $5; A. Smith, Jon. 
$10; G. W. Anderson, $5; Rev. 
Daniel Baker, $3; John Lewis, 
$2; F. Densler, $2; Miss Irvine, 
50c.; Wm.Bee,$l; Miss AdamF, 
50c.; Mrs. McQueen, $2, Mrs. 
Mackav, $2 ; Mrs. Elliot, ^ ; Mrs. 
S. C Noel, $1 ; Dr J. S. Law, $1 , 
W. W. Baker, esq. $3; Mr. Smith, 
$2; Mrs Carutbers» $1 ; T. But- 
ler, $3; Mrs. Holmes, $2; J. C. 
Nicol, esq. $2; Miss Bond, $1 > 
Mrs. Griffith, $1 ; MissCampbeU, 

$lf ^ 87 00 

ILL.— Canton, Individuals, ft 00 



The above list contains donations— 
For Tracts beyond the Alleghany, $94 80 
QQForperpetttat.Baxter'8S«iints*Bc»t,260 00 

Whole am*t of Doiat. $2,21S 96 
Reo. for Tracts gtfid/ -SfTOl 28 

Tot*l, ^$5>1« 6% 



THE AMERICAN 
3L. IV. araiL, isaft. nc 



See page le, Trio No.JT). 



THE AGEKTS IN THE GREAT TAXLET. 

Of the lii Ag«iiU of the Americui Tract SocietJ now Ubenring in 
Ihe Valley of the MisaiSBippi, Ms. Wkihht jb in the Tidnity of Pitts- 
burgh ; Bit, Mh. McAedt in Western Virginia; Mr. Fcnuun in 
Ohio, near CinciuDati ; Rxv. Mb. EisT>t.iTr, the General Agent, 
haviog Tisited Piltiburgh, Cincinnati, Louisville, and Nashville, i» 
now ID St. Louii, Misiouri ; Rxt. Mk, Cm ia in Alabama ; and Riv. 
Mr. Vail, hiTing visited Mobile, is ncnr in Naicbez or NeiV'OrleanK. 

The following extncti from their correlpondeDce cannot fail, we 
think, to iBipieii^on Ihe mind at every reader the conaideratiom : 

That the enterprise of tapplying the Valley of the Miuifiippi wiUi 
TiactB, is among the nost imptniant present object! of ChristUii 
bencTtJeDce, and that our past neglect of Ihst portion of the coimtry 
i* Imlj unaccountable ; 

Vol. IV. 4 , [Whom Mo. «. 



98 RET. MB. EASTMAN, CINCINNATI. [April, 

That an Ag^ent for the Tract Society may now be among the most 
useibl of all the labourerg in the Western World, not merely by pro- 
moting the Tract cause, but prodaiming the messages of the Gospel, 
and rousing the friends of Christ to effort ; 

That the number of labourers for the Society in that field ought to 
be immediately increased ; and consequently, 

That it is very desirable that a number of additional deroted men 
should immediately enlist in this service. 

From Rev. Mr, Eastman^ dated at Cincinnati. 

From the time I commenced my services for the American Tract 
Society, three years ago, I never have been placed in circumstances 
of greater promise, or in a field where my labours were more needed, 
than since I arrived in this city, and never has my lot been cast 
among a people who have manifested a greater readiness to engage 
with me in promoting the Tract cause. One thousand dollars is more 
than I expected would be raised here at once, in free donations. 
More than this, however, has already been accomplished. Nearly 
eleven hundred dollars has been subscribed, most of which has already 
been paid and remitted for Tracts. This money is raised expressly 
to increase their Depository ; not a farthing of it is returned to the 
donors ; and it is exclusive of their annual subscription. One Gentle- 
man, who, but a short time since, felt little interest in the subject of 
religion, subscribed ^50. It is hoped that the sum will still be in- 
creased. 

In addition to what has been done for the Depository, a Young 
Men^s TVact Society has been formed, auxiliary to the Cincinnati 
Tract Society. This Society, I think, promises to do mudi for this 
city. The Board of Officers, consisting of sixteen active youne men, 
have resolved to visit every part of the city, to solicit subscriptions 
and to distribute Tracts. The* city is divided into five wards. Each 
ward is visited by a Committee of three persons, except one, which 
has four. Their subscription is now rising of $100. One of the 
Directors asked a Jew to subscribe: he declined. The Director gave 
him No. 104, (Anecdotes of the Usefiilness of Tracts :] he read it, 
and the next day came of his own accord and gave him a doUar. 

In addition to all that has been done by the Gentlemen, five Ladies* 
Societies have been organized ; viz. one by the Ladies of the Enon 
Baptist Church, one by the Ladies of the Second Presbyterian Church, 
one by the Ladies of Christ Church, one by the Ladies of the First 
Presbyterian Church, and one by the Ladies of the new Baptist 
Church. 

These Societies have all commenced under r^ry favourable aus- 
pices. I know of no reason why they should not be as efficient, in 
proportion to their means and numbers, as the Ladies' Societies in 
any of your eastern cities. 

The people here are not insensible to the interest which is mani- 
fested at the East, in behalf of the western country. The influence 
of the donations mad^ in Boston, New-York, and elsewhere, to pro- 
mote the Tract cause in the Valley of the Mississippi, is already felt; 
and I trust it will be felt more and more. The need of Tracts in this 
country is every day becoming more apparent. An Agent of a Bible 



18S9.] MB. C. E. FURMAN, ITEAR CINCINNATI. S9 

Society, one day, while engaged in his appropriate labours, was asked 
by the Lady of a Magistrate, if he could tell what kind of things Reli- 
gious Tracts were, ** Why, Madam," said he, ** did you never see a 
Religious Tract ?*' "Never!" said she. ''But, a few days ago, a 
Report of the Tract Society was given to me, and since reading it, I 
have been extremely anxious to see some Tracts." 

The work before us is greatt interestingt and important. The field 
is white to the harvest. It is high lime to thrust in the sickle. It is 
to many a matter offbeat astonishment, thai the great national Socie- 
ties shoidd have been tn such profound sleep, in, regard to this countryf 
till the last year. If you will now come up to the work like men, like 
Christian men, you may in some measure redeem the lost time. But 
henceforth there is no time to lose. With all the zeal which has been 
manifested by the most zealous, very little will be done, compared 
with what needs tobe done. One Agent might spend three years in 
the state of Ohio, and labour faithfully, and not have time to occupy 
^the whole state, as it should be occupied. This might be done with 
profit, in behalf of each of the great benevolent Societies. It is not 
sufficient that the country be supplied with Bibles and Tracts a half 
century hence, when the present population are nearly all in their 
graves. Five years ought to be the limit when every family shall be 
supplied. 

From Mr. C E* Furman^ nettr Cincinnati. 

You may have been expecting earlier to hear from me, but I seldom 
find an opportunity tp spend any time by myself; and now even, I 
am in the family*room of a father, mother, and eleven, children, all 
living at home. They all appear willing to hear me converse, but I 
have begged the privilege of one corner of a table, to write a line to 
yon. You must be too well acquainted with the business of a Tract 
Agent, not to know something of his encowagements bsiA discourage 
meiUs. I ought not, however, to talk of discouragements ; for though 
I meet with various success, yet it is all encouraging. I feel some- 
times as if the Lord was evidently with me, and prospered me in my 
labours. I find the arms of good people open to receive me ; and 
many are rejoiced to have the opportunity of subscribing for the pub- 
lications of the American Tract Society. In some instances, hints are 
started, " whether this is not all a speculating business." But the 
simple history of the faithful gratuitous labours of your Committee 
usually dissipates all objections. 

Men need not say that this countiy is not destitute of religious in- 
fitmctions to a very great degree. Give the Methodists, Baptists, and 
Presbyterians all the credit for every inch of ground they occupy, 
and there is yet " much land to be possessed." A student in theology, 
whose father has been settled at least twenty years in one of the oldest 
churches in this country, told me, that, without going five miles firom 
his fhther's meeting-house, he could get into settlements where three- 
Iburths of the families have no Bibles. But, notwithstanding there 
•eems to be a very general interest throughout the country on the 
subject of religion, the fields are already white for the harvest. I 
preach a g^at deal, arfide from my Tract business, frequently to 
crowded, attentive, and scriemn audiences. In five weeks, besides 
travelling 460 miles, I have preached 31 times. In some cases, I 
have preached in placet where I fhould have deii(|^hted to remain 



40 MESSBS. VAIL AND CA8£, UOBILE. [ApfU, 

and preach constantly— people all eye, all ear. In some kistmoes, 
n^bere I have talked upon the subject of Tracts^ not only here and 
there would you see the tear start from the eye, but whole audiences 
have been in tears; and, in two or three cases, I have had the plea- 
9i|re of U^emg the names of every individualf. merit toomenj and chil' 
dretif as sttbtaibers to a lUraet Society. 

TWO TRACTS ESPECIALLY BLESSED* 

Tracts, continues Mr. F. are good preachers, as far as ean be ez- 
pecteil ; they warm the hearts of Christians, and are flreqae&tly the 
means of turning men ft'om the error of their ways. When I was 
coming down the Ohio, the boat touched at the little villages, where 
I distributed Tracts. I gave the Tract, Rewards of DrurUtetmess, to 
a fine-looking young man. " This Tract," said he, " ^as given me by 
a Gentleman in the state of I>iew-Tork, two months and a half since* 
and it has been more than Jiftv dollars in my pocket already, I ke|rt 
it in my pocket, and read it, till it was entirely worn out, and now P 
am glad to get another just like it." He was a boatman, belonging 
to another steam-boat that had stopped there, and, said he, *' all the 
hands on board can testify that I do not taste a drop of spirits." I 
was obliged then to leave him. 

. A few days since, Mr. S , Elder of the Church in B— -, said 

that a ma^ in that congregation had been a moral man, but violently 
opposed to religion. On reading the *^ Barren ^Pig 3Vee," he was led 
to discover that he had been that barren tree too long. He read it 
again and again, and even every day, for a great length of time. His 
conversation with his wife, and his faithful warnings and entreaties 
upon his dying bed, have been the means of bringing her over de- 
cidedly upon the Lord's side. 

J^rom Messrs. Vail and Casey dated at Mobile* 

We are happy to inform you, that we have actttally entered upon 
the great work assigned us in this important portion of our country. 
Having spent several preceding days in preparation, investigating 
the wants of the city and country, distributing Tracts,- and in con- 
sultation with the brethren, &c. we had, on Sabbath evening, a nu- 
merous and highly respectable meeting. Several individuals besides 
ourselves, lawyers and clergymen, were appointed to address the 
meeting, and much interest was excited. We then formed a large 
Auxiliary, and opened a subscription for a Depository, from which 
the interior might be supplied with Tracts. Nearly «200 was sub- 
scribed on the spot, and the subscription has since been raised to up- 
wards of $400. That sum we.forward herewith, and wish the whole 
of it to be immediately returned in Tracts, at discount. 

This state demands most imperiously a large supply of Tracts for 
gratuitous distribution. Perhaps no state in the Union has such ur- 
gent' claims upon the American Tract Society. It is a most palniul 
fact, that» in many large sections of Alabama, it has recentiy been 
ascertained by actual investigation, that from one-half to tw<>thifds 
of the inhabitants are whoEy destitute of the Bible. A very lai^e pro- 
portion of the people, are ateo deprived of the privileges of the sanc- 
tnvy. They are Ui many places thinly scattered over large tracts of 
country, without any Christian prmleges whatever. -^Yes, dear Bro- 
ther, they are literally famishing for the bread and water of life.-^ 



18S9*] HEY. MR. M^ABOY, WESTEftR VIlLOINIA. 41 

Now, as the Church is unable at present tofumUh Minuters for these 
perishing^ thousands of our countrymen, and as the Church does not 
arise in her strength to the work of sending the Bible to every destitute 
family in our land, shall we refuse, without any delay, to send them 
those silent and powerful preachers of righteousness, which, within a 
single year, may ptiblish the blessed Oospel to every perishing immortal 
in our land? But if this work is done, (and what Christian or patriot 
can he willing to see it any longer neglected ?) Tracts must be fur- 
nished by those who enjoy the Gospel and appreciate its divine privi 
leges. And where, I would ask, is the Christian, or the philanthropist, 
blessed with the Bible, its ministry of reconciliation, and all its ines- 
timable benefits, who will not now seriously consider the wants of his 
Iterant, dying, perishing countrymen, and then reflect how much 
he can now do to enlighten and save them, by aiding the Tract cause ? 
Never do I so deeply realize the value of money, as when I think of 
sending, for a single dollar, 100 Gospel-sermons — 100 Tract-preach- 
ers-^into as many destitute families seldom, Hever, hearing a Gospel- 
sermon, and wholly destitute of the Holy Scriptures. In view of such 
a Reflection, who, that loves the souls of his fellow-men, will hoard 
up his money, or thrqw it away for purposes of display, and fashion, 
and amusement? 

Mobile contains about 8,000 or 10,000 inhabitants, is rapidly in- 
creasing in wealth, and promises to be a- city of first importance in 
the southern country. In attempting to efiect the general distribution 
of Tracts among the inhabitants of the city, we have found most 
efficient helpers in the Ladies, a number of whom are truly Mis- 
sionaries, 

4 

From Rev. Mr, Me Ahoy, Western Virginia, 

On the west side of the mountains in Virginia, are 18 counties, 
containing perhaps 90,000 inhalntants, and embracing some of the 
most destitute regions in our whole country. Never before was 1 so 
deeply impressed with the vcUue of cents and moments of time, as 
since I have been engaged in promoting ihe Tract cause in these 
counties. During the last two months and a half, my travelling ex- 
penses have been less than $3. The people, generally, manifest a 
strong interest in the Tract cause, though I find many who had neve^' 
seen a Tract. 

TWO INDIVIDUALS BLKS8ED BY TRACTS. 

When raising the Auxiliary at Newport, Ohio,, a Mrs. G— came 
forward with her husband, and desired that both might become mem- 
bers ; for, she said, a Tract was the means of her conversion, - On 
inquiring the circumstances of the case, she mformed me, that she 
was living in a neighbourhood where there was bo preaching, and 
the Tract on EtemUy fell into her hands. She read it again and 
again. It was the means of bringing her to Jesus ; and she has long 
been numbered among the followers of Christ, walking in the comfort 
of the Holy Ghost. 

At S , Mr. G— — was the only one who ai first felt a djeep 

interest in the Tract cause. He afterwards informed me, that a tra- 
veller, who lodged with him, left in his bed-room the Tract, ** J^ause 
and think, am J a Christian ?" He read it, and also his family, with 
much interest, and, as he hopes, with profit^ he wag induced to in- 

4* 



4i MS. JE. W&iaSTt FITT8BUBQH. [April, 

qttir« wfaera Tracts could be procured, and became aa active Tract 
dJsttibutor, and a pecmaaent firfeud of the Tract cause. 

From Mr. E. Wright, dated at Pittshurgh. 

la aiany counties in Western PennsylTania, I £nd many wbo do 
not know what a 3Vae( is. But, just in proportion as people hare 
read and circulated them, are they convinced of their uselnlness. 
The Tract cause is adapted to the wants of the people. It will do 
more for this western world than all its wealth can erer pay for. 

USEFULNESS OF TBACTS. 

A Mr. A«— -, of P— — ^ who absented himself from public worship, 
and firowned upon the Missionary operations of the day, had the 
Tract, " The Chwxh iSSa^,*' presented to hhn, about one year since, by 
a female solicitor for the Missionary cause, whom he had vepulsed 
with some seTerity. Meeting* her awhile after, he said, ** Did you 
not select that Tract especially for me V* She replied that she did. 
" Well,^' said he, " I am mistaken — ^I hare done wrong.'* He soon 
after established family worship, and joined the church ; since which 
time, four of his older children have professed their faith in Christ. 
" The Chwth Safe" seems evidently to have started this whole train 
of blessings. 

i received fram Rev. Mr. B ■ , a devoted minister, living about 
18 miles up die Alleghany, a very pleasing account of the usefolness 
of « Tract, it «eeurred ia the spring of 1827. Mr. B left with 
an aged man, who seldom attended public worship, the Tract en- 
titled " Death-bed of a Freethinker." The next morning, the man 
rose before day, and called together his family for prayer. The Sab- 
bath following, Mr. B was surprised to see him at meeting, a dis- 
tance of seven miles. In reply to Mr. B - -^ s inquiries, after sermon, 
he said, ** I have for some time been thinking that I ought to attend to 
the caHs of the Gospel ; but, since you left that Tract with me, I have 
had no rest." Mr. B— — affectionately pointed him to that Saviour 
who gives rest to the weary and heavy-laden. Soon he was heard 
speakmg of the goodness of that Saviour; and his conduct has borne 
witness to the sincerity of his faith. He is < an active distributor t>f 
Tracts, and though a man of moderate property, has given ^10 to the 
American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, has paid 
more than his subscription towards supporting the Gospel, and has 
become a constant attendant at preaching.— I passed within the sphere 
of this man*s exertions, and saw their good effects, though, at the time, 

I was not aware of the cause. I found Mr. B 's Tract Society 

actively engaged in raising their annual contribution, (the third,) and 
learned that they had been induced, by reading the Tract Magazine, 
to vote a donation of one half their receipts. 

I hme found fticts which have convinced me more of the usefulness 
of Tracts than any thing I ever read, I have seen a whole family 
reading my Tracts till midnight, by the light of a huge wood fire« 
There was nothing to disturb the feast, but that, now and then, an 
individual must needs read aloud, while not one would drop his own 
Tract to hear ! 



18i9.] T&&CT AND BOOK 80CIXTT. 4S 

mszixcaotra v&jlov aitd boos soonrrr 

FOB ZRBXiAirB. 

We have received, through the kindness of Mr. Benjamin Diobt, 
Secretary of this Society, ander date of 22 Upper SaekvUle, IMdint 
Sept. 22, the following brief and interesting expos6 of the existing 
state of that Institution, accompanied by an entire ut cfall their pub' 
Ueations. The communications were addressed to the Rev. William 
Fatton, of this city, who bad communicated with the Society at 
Dublin, during his late visit to England. Their present has been 
acknowledged, by forwarding them an entire set of iJl the pubtica* 
tions of the American Tract Society. 

The principle, says Mr. Digby, upon which this Society has been 
instituted, is to foUow up the course of rellgiens instraetion whidi 
has been so successfully pursued in frelaad for the last few yean, by 
procuring and priotuig a supply of suitable Religious Tracts and 
Books, by promoting their dicolation, and by aifor<JUng every facility 
for the establishment of Depositories for sale, and Lending Libraries, 
throughottt this portion of the united kingdom. 

The total issues from the Society's Depository, since its fimnation 
on a national footings have amounted to 4,120,000 Tracts and Books. 

Many pleasing testimonies to the usefulness of these pnblicatM>ns, 
under Grod, have been received ; and from them it appean, tbat the 
publications of the Society hare been the means of inducing thoSe to 
read the word of God, who had never beiore perused its sacred pages ; 
and of bringing home to the consciences and hearts of many, the 
principles of the religion of our blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. 

The exertions of the Society have, under the divine blessing, ex- 
cited corresponding exertions throughout the country. Besides seve« 
ral Associations, there are upwards of 270 Depositories and Lending 
Libraries, which haye been established in almost every county in 
Ireland, tiirough the instrumentality of this Society. Many of them 
are in connexion with Sunday Schools, and they have all been sup- 
plied with Tracts and Books gratuitously, or at reduced prices, from 
the Depository. 

The demands for assistance to establish Lending Libraries and 
Depositories in some of the most destitute parts of Ireland, have been 
recently quite unprecedented ; and the present aspect of the country 
indicates that this demand will be still further increased. 

In a country such as Ireland, where the great mass of the people 
are wretchedly poor, and where every facility is given to the circula- 
tion of books of a demoralising tendency, means must be taken to 
provide them with books which will lead diem to think justly. The 
establishment of a "Roman Catholic Book Society^* in this city, for the 
purpose of disseminating publications whose tendency is to subvert 
Protestant principles, is surely a loud caU for increased endeavours to 
keep the stream of instruction, now flowing through the land, pure 
and UBpoUuted. The Society bas therefore brought into sala upmrnls 
of 2,647 kinds of TracU a«d Books, selected with care, «mI bas 
printed and pnblisbed 900 of its own, more particularly adapted to 
the circumstanoes of the ooimtry, but which have also met with con- 
siderable approbation in England and Scotland. 



44 USEFULNESS OF TRACTS. [April, 

Id consequence of beiag obliged to keep up «o extensive and varied 
a supply of Books, Su:. nearly f 2,500 is now due from the Society. 



trsanrumsB or tracts. 

TRACT BLE8S£D TO A SOUTHERN I.ADY. 

f From Hr. Albert Hale, Agent in Georgia.] 

The following anecdote of the usefulness of a Tract in bringing a 
' Lady to the Saviour, was related to me by a young Lady, who is a 
■ collector in one of the Tract Associations in Charleston : 

While engaged in obtaining subscribers, she felt some degree of 
hesitation about calling on a certain Lady who belonged to the con- 
legation, because she was in low circumstances. At length, how- 
ever, she concluded to call ; when, to her surprise, she found the Lady 
entered very cordially into the plan of the Society, and became a sub- 
scriber. She said to the collector, that Tracts had often been given 
ber years before ; but she had given them to her children, and scarcely 
ever read one herself. But, recently, one was sent her by a particular 
friend, with a request.that she would read it. She read it, and the 
Holy Spirit carried the truth home to her heart, and she found no 
peace till she found it in Christ. She is now heartily engaged in the 
Tract cause, feeling how much she is indebted, under Ood, to Tracts 
for all her hopes for eternity. 

'' DAY OF JUDGMENT'^ BLESSED TO THE MOTHER OF 

A FAMILY. 

[Thi4 and the four following instances, communicated by Mr. A. Blanchard, Agent 

in the northern part of New-York.] 

In A , in Oswego county, where there is no church and no 
minister, lived a family five or six miles from any place of -worship. 
They very seldom attended meeting any where, and had grown up 
very ignorant and indifferent as to religious subjects. This continucit 
till a person, some time during the past summer, put into the hands of 
the mother of the family, the Tract entitled the '' Day of Judgment.'' 
She read the Tract, was convinced of her sinfulness and danger, and 
was led by the Holy Spirit to fly to Jesus, as the only refuge from 
the storm impending over the Anally impenitent. When she came 
forward to join the Baptist Church, she referred to this Tract, as the 
only means of calling her attention to the concerns of her soul. Since 
that time, her husband and one other member of the family have be- 
come hopeful subjects of renewing grace. 

1000 TRACTS BLESSED IN THE REVIVAL OF RELIGION. 

A young man in L , being about to remove to Alleghany county. 

called at the Depository in Utica, and obtained about 1000 Tracts! 
These he caused to be faithfully distributed ui the town where he had 
fixed his abode. Their distribution was soon followed by a general 
revival of religion. Between 60 and 60 professed converts to Jesus 
Christ were the fruits of this revival ; and nearly 30 of them traced 
■their firtt teriaus imprestions to the Tracts which had been put into 
their hands. 



1829.] BAPTIST OEBSSAL TRACT SOCIETT* 4& 

" GBEAT QUESTION ANSWERED'' BLESSED TO A TOUNG 

LADY. 

In the reriral of religion in A—-, a young Lady, Miss C. P. be- 
came the subject of deep and pungent convictions, and at length 
sunk into a state of despondency, thinking that herday of grace was 
past, and there was no merc^ for her. She remained in this state for 
some weeks, until a friend put -into her hand '' The Great Q^iAtition 
Answered,'* She retired by herself and read it. While -reading it, 
light dawned upon her muid. She was led to rejoice in Christ her 
Saviour. Her heart was filled with peace, such as God alone can 
give. She has since made a profession of religion, and gives evidence^ 
in her life and conversation, that she is a child of God. -jt 

''LAST HOURS OF A FREE-THINKER" BLESSED TO A 

HARDENED YOUNG MAN. 

-Rev. Mr. B states, that there was in his parish a young man, 
who had enjoyed uncommon religious advantages, but had grown up 
exeeedingly hardened and careless. At l^gth he gave him the ac- 
count of the Death of Francis JVewport The simi&rity between his 
own case and that of the wretched Free4hiidier, whose life went out 
In such utter darkness, deeply afifeeted him. From that time he fottn4 
no peace, till he became interested in the atoning blood of Christ. 

Mrs. 3 informed me, that, soon after a Tract Society had been 

formed in N , one female subscriber was hopefully converted by 

reading the Tract, " Without Holiness no man shall see the Lord" . 



WANT OF DONATIONS FOR TRACTS FOR THE 

BEATHJESN. 

Official and urgent applications have been made to the Committee 
of the American Tract Society to aid the Baptist Mission among the 
17,000,000 of Burmahf and the American Mission at Ceylon among 
the millions who speak the TamvH- language, in their Tract opera- 
tions. These calls ftota our brethren labouring among the perishmg 
Heathen, the Committee feel, that they cannot refuse to answer; and 
they have resolved to make an appropriation for the aid of each of 
these stations,'-though their Treasury is now entirely empty. 

We earnestly wish, that those who feel interested for the circulation 
of Tracts among the Heathen, whether at Burmah, Ceylon, or else- 
where, would transmit their donations to this object. 



BAPTIST amxamjkx» tract soozbtt. 

Fifth annual meeting in Philadelphia, Jan. 7. Receipts, during the 
year, $6,266 76; $2,419 71 being for Tracts sold ; and the remain- 
der in donations, of which $86 06 are for printing Tracts in Burmah. 
The receipts of the year exceed the whole amount received in the 
four preceding years. 

Nineteen new Tracts have been added to the series during the year, 
making the whole number of Tracts 62. Whole number of Tracts 
printed during the year, 428,600, containing 6,442,000 pages, exclu- 
sive of covers. Sent from the Depositoiy during the year, 4,890,600 
pages. Printed since the formation of the Sooety, 947|260 Tiacts, 
containing 10,462,000 pages. 



46 



RECEIPTS. 



[April. 



RemtlUaceB have been recei»ed, during the year, from 136 Aniili- 
ariei, moat of which tne ont hal/oS their funds M a donation to the 
Geaerat Societi. The Societj liii three Branohei, in Rochester 
■ad Ulica, n. T. and in Charleston, S. C. IStW copiei uf the Baptiit 
Tract Magazine are publialied moulhlj. 

Tbe report mentiotu leceral injtances of the uaefulaesi of TracU. 

BHAHOBBS AlTD ATHEXXiIABIBS. 

The Union Female Auxiliary of Danville, Ken. reports, "Dial Tracts 
in a deilitute neighbourhood, vhere there were no FreacherB, or 
Churches, or Bibles, have been the apparent means of awaking a 
desire for religious instruction— a Church ha* been constituted, and 
a niunber, who were sitting in darkness, have profesaed failh in Christ. 

Jluitlun^) of Wineheiter, Va. Anniversary, Jan, 19. Addresses 
^ Rev. Messrs. Ejsler, Eichelberger and Riddle, and Rev. Dr. 
Hill, specially urging the importance of sustaining their Depoiitorr, 
aDd widely enteoding its influence. Received from the Par. Soc. 
daring the year, 284,930 pages Tracts, and remitted $235 06.— 
Dariel Gold, Ebu. TVeiu. and Ag. 

J¥eiD- Fort Central Branch Tract Soeitly, loeattd at Albany. Aoni- 
veriary, Feb. 10. Receipts, during the year, »3,064 61 ; of whieh 
»8B1 40 was remitted to the Parent Sodely for Tracts, and S500 as 
a donation. Circulated, during the year, 619,770 pages Tracts, 4,100 
Broadsheet! and Handbills, and 1340 Christian Almanacs. Of these 
Tracts, 100,000 pagea were a grant for Alabama, and 50,000 for Ca- 
nada.--ThiB Society is now making vigorous efforts to occup* the 
counties embraced in the field of the N. Y. Central S. S. Union, to 
which Albany is (he commercial centre. 

Cf The report of this Society was not received till the precediDg' 
pages were etl in Ijpe. 

RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASDBY OF TBE AMEKICAN TRACT SOCIETV, 
Surinf Ml nwnM tudlng ManA If, 1^99. 
FROM AUXILIMIY TRACT SOCIETIES. j-„j.. 



R. ISL.-Briuo1, Ftm. HlH Hinnl, Ciunh, Sec. 
CONK.— BroDkljD, (Wlndliain Co. Am.) Edwin New 

N. TOttK—Bi^a. Jn^ Bomrt, Tr. 



n. Bf n. Wlitertan, Tr 



I. lin.ko. Nadi,Ai. 
jDMb CnnunSag, Ag. 



18S&.] RECEIPTS. 47 

BOCIETIE8 SOT AUSUART. i j-ur TT.l D«». 

M. YORK— Neii-Utrecht, L.l, F™. Bib, MlH- md Tr. Bee. 

""""""*" ■ ■ 'i'.Dourtoi.Ai. I SSflO 

Glenn, FlH. . M OQ 



^AoiuaJ iJirecCDr. 



T£B.— NiwbuiT, Ah Tannr, Eh. 
in ■art JffT BfTWfk^uv ovp'cr'i 



MASS — jtodiTKr.MmJDbiiAdinK, 
by her dui|rhicrs, by IihdiIb oi 



Mn-DndcrBoigcH, 
AuhM-OoIUm 
Xn. outer nc<»k^ 
Bnrnn D. IHoioeli, 
Mia Buth* DudlaT, 
MIb Hvthi »;, 
WlUtan EI7, 



L«bw»D, Goibtn Soe. Rer. Erutni 

niple}, XT iDiliTldoilf, «l 

N«<r%»e4c.J.B.It«, ao 

Norwilk, Hr<. HU7 B. Boirdlcl, 

PlalDlMdlHii. Either Bsbln, M 

■■ (. Surrfih ainklj, (In purt 

^LnStiwlT, (In full of tSO.) IS 
N. VOKK.~MDiiaI Morrii, Benben 

Bltcnr.OnfollortXU 'O 

N. YorL Oty, HUi Blur Ann B«n, 
l>rbcrhll»r,Blr.G.B«en, 311 
JcrniiMi H. Taylor. U 

L-WMInorcAiii. «1 

Owcco, Hoc* Co. R«. Aum Put- 
DiiTn, Irr ■ rrknd, (in fHU or 
130 «4,) 1 

«lnnUl«, 8»t. Isl. R«. Mm 
Ultr, . SO 

OtAcr Donnlionf. 
MASS.— Bun, R<T. ]olm Sum, 3 
CONri.-CMBilrT,Mii.R«UiPolB- 

^ofd'^Row"Snd^RDn, tsl 
Lconiinj Uicnn, t»i Thonui D. 
Boardmin,ISiS>miielP.Chui^, 
tSi Mnson F. C<>e>~ell. tl: A>- 
rnnljDltDn,t£i Eavard P.Ciwke, 



aWoodtOri, WD, 3U (» 

rbrl eoUMted In • cbuiiy- 
bai,((iTTr.hiViiU.orHlHlHlpcl, SKI 
.[. TORX^OoAa, PrHb. Boc B W 
N. Yort Cllj, ■ Boy, tS; CtalM 
FeuB, tlO ; Ikmben o( iIk Baw- 
err PiMli- Ch. und Cong-, t^i B 
lllle, tlO \ lone S>yn, ff ; Oso. 

ENN.-Phlli3clpld., Br , « OO 



Hn. Bund BprtDi. 

ElMHluTcnT, 

M^nBulbmUaputoffHtJ 10 OOi 
Dnlel Copdu^ d«. 10 06 
JfdiD MDmfkvm, do- 5 W 



R80BNV msziioATiomr. 



No. 177. Institotion ard OBSKsyAUCs of th£ Sabbath.— pp. 16. 
Thb Tract (which takes the place of Prayers for Female Schools, 
thai wiH hereafter be published as an Occasioaal Tract) was- written 
hj Rev. Mr. 0e Vinne, of the Methodist Episcopal Church. It proves 
the Divine origin and perpetuity of the Sabbath, and its change from 
the seventh to the first day of the week ; and then shows the manner 
in which it should be observed : specifying various respects in which 
it is profaned by business, amusements, &c. and diany duties which 
i$a proper observance demands should be performed, in the house of 
God, the family, the closet, Sic*.— A copy of this Tract is, in the month 
of March, presented to every family- in the city of New-York, which 
is willing to receive it. ' • 

Ne. 223. Thb Sabctuart.— pp. 12. This Tract, from the pen of 
Rev. Daniel A. Clark, urges with deamess and force the necessity 
of sustaining the public worship of God in his house ; because it » 
the place where God's honour dwells and^of united and fervent prayer, 
is the radiant point of sanctifying truth, the g^^trnd organ in the for- 
mation of public sentiment, sustains all other civilizing and healthful 
Institutions, and from it God iselects the subjects of his grace. ' 

Occasional Tract. — To a Guardian.— pp. 8. The preparation of 
this Tract was suggested by a venerable Jctdgb of Fbobate, who 
filled that responsible situation with great fidelity fpr more than 
forty years; and who, wishing not only that the property/ of the 
fatheriess should be secured, but also their moral vitlfOEre, has given 
$100, to perpetuate this Triict. It was written by an eminent Coun- 
sellor, at Law, (the author of the Tract *^ To a Person engaged in a 
Lawsuit,") and arges, from the sanctions of the Bible, the fidelity of 
the Guardisin, not only in respect to the management of the estate of 
the Ward, but of his education, and his whole course of life. It con- 
cludes with excellent counsel to the relatives and friends of the Ward, 
and to the Ward himself. 



PSBBCnm VftACTSa 

The Premium Tracts on Female Influence and on the Objections 
usualljr urged against the BiUe, were under examination at the time 
of putting this sheet to press. 

OTHER PREMIUMS ANNOUNCED BY THE COMMITTEE. 

Fifty Dollars, for the best ten Handbill TracU, each to be not less 
than one fourth, nor more than three fourths of a Tract page in 
length ; and to be presented on or before April 20, 1829. 

Fifty Dollars, for the best Tract on the practice of sailing Vessels 
out of port on the Sabbaih; not to exceed eight pages in length, and 
to be presented-on or before July 1^ 1829. 

NEW YEAR'S GIFT OF $50. 

A respected Clergyman in Connecticut has remitted $50 to the 
American Tract Society, which was thrown, into his door on the 
evening .of January 1, enclosed in the following note : 

'' Dear Sir-- Having an offering I wish to make to the Lord, I 
would request you to apply at, where, in your judgment, it will be 
most likely to save seiito from eternal punishment ; and thus obliee j 

'* 0n» or YO0R Ffcocjt," 



THE AMERICAN 



asAT, i8a9. 



azOEItXAZTOB OF TSa TSLAOT ST8TBH. 

[From 1 Clngymmi In Vermonl.] 

The tall for Ministers, and Miiiion^ries, -mid the Word of God, for 
ihe lupply of Ills diilaal bSBlhen, and of the deMitule in countiies 
called Chrislixn, is in load and Ibrilling as justl; to excite the beet 
feelinga of ereiy hearl, and secure Ihe lifaerat charities of all. But 
these noble heaven-born InitiluliODB are too greai to operate raptity. 
Milliona will live uatBught, and die unrenewed, nolwithatanding afl 
-lliejr do. An agenc; leea cooimaading, but more RCtiTS, is needed 
(o enlighten and taie the tgnoraol and deitittite. 3V TVnel Si/item 
it tkat aftncy. Tour missionariei require no eigbl ygkri' course of 
iuatruclion to equip them for tha field. A few hotira are fiufficient 
1o qualify them (o impart, oorrecti; and eloquently, ihe must imporl- 
ant meiaagei of the ChriitlEtD afBlem. Clothed and equipped al the 
laine moiuent in which thejr are fnrniihcd with th4ir message, ihej 
lequire nolbiag but a committlon to open Ihe dqorand direct the waj 
of Ihair egrsii, aad thej—uufed, unwearied, jet sirong and actiTc 
fHenda of trutb— are fouqd instantl; emBlared in iUuitratiue, m. 

VoulV. bT [W«oL»Ko.4l. 



50 AGED FRSIALE SISCXPLfi IV( VAL. OF MISSISSIFPI. [May, 

fordog, and closely applying the g:reat troths which relate to life and 
godliness. Your missionaries are subject to none of the ills to which 
flesh is heir. Want they know not. The praise of men they seek 
not. The wrath of man they fear not. Like John the Baptist, they 
dare to reprove wickedness, thongh perpetrated by kings ; and if, 
like John, their members are severed from each other, they live in 
the recollection and disturb the peace of their murderers. Matt. x4v. 2. 
With a judgment that seldom errs, and with a zeal that never tires, 
they preach the Gospel on the highways and in the dwellings of the 
gospel-privileged ; and with the same spirit enter the footpath and 
cottages of those whose ignorance is not taught, whose wickedness is 
not reproved, whose wanderings are not reclaimed, whose wretched- 
• ihess is not wept over, and whose salvation is not prayed for by a 
Christian Minister. 



AN AGED FExlIALE DISCIPLE IN THE VALLEY 

OF THE MISSISSIPPI. 

[From an excellent Episcopal Clergymnn, enclosing a donation of $5.] 

The intelligence of the pecuniary wants of the American Tract 
Society has given me pain ; but as I trust it is engaged simply in the 
cause of God, I cannot doubt that he will cause its wants to be sup- 
plied, and use it still more largely to *^ the praise of the glory of his 
grace." 

I have great reason to be thankful for the help you have afforded 
me in my labors in the ministry. By taking in my pocket a number 
of your liiUe preachers^ in my walks among this people, I am enabled, 
by their superior richness and power in preaching Christ, to make 
up for the poverty of my own instructions ; and among rich and poor 
I have always found them thankfully received. 

Not long since, as 1 was purchasing some at the Depository here, 
I met with an old woman on the same errand. Thinking, from her 
appearance, that she designed to sell them on profit, to procure her- 
self something toward a livelihood, I let her know my impressions, 
wishing to encourage her in what might do good to others, while 
it yielded her some of the necessaries of life. She gave me to under- 
stand, however, that this was not her design ; but that she was going 
into the country to distribute them. 

'' I suppose," said I, '' you are about to visit your friends, or to go 
upon some business, and .take the opportunity of giving Tracts away?" 

" No," she replied in an bumble manner, *' it is only to distribute 
Tracts." 

Upon further conversation with her, I had reason to believe her a 
woman of the right spirit. She had been very, many years a member 
of a Baptist churchy and was in the jiabit of making little tours through 
these dark regions, to scatter these little messengers of light. 

This incident suggested to my mind very powerfully, the utier con- 
trariety between the judgment of Heaven and of this world. The 
wicked man strides through the earth, spreadiilg death and desola- 
tion — ^we call him great : this poor old female goes about conveying 
light, and peace, and hope, into the regions of darkness and misery 
— she is, however, overlooked and despised by a proud world. The 
day is coming, when this iudgment will be completely reversed : the 
great ones of the earth will .appear m^an indeed^ and hide th^ heads 



1829.] WAKTS O^ OHIO. 51 

in everlastiog shame and contempt; while this poor aged disciple of 
a crucified Savior will " shine as the bxightness of the firmament.'' 



FROn THE LATE REV. CHARLES S. ROBINSON, 

70K SEVERAL YEARS A MISSIONART IN MISSOURI. 

1 thank you for the grant of 10,000 pages of Tracts from the Ame- 
rican Tract Society. For some months past, my health has not only 
been feeble, but I have often been called to look into the grave, and 
to view death as near at hand. In these solemn moments I- could 
thank God that he had directed me to this country, though what I have 
done appeared less than nothing, and I was about to leave my littler, 
family in most destitute circumstances. Though unable to preach, I 
can ride about, visit my people and the various settlements, and dis- 
tribute Bibles and Tracts. I have distributed most of the Tracts the 
Society gave me. Some I gave to a Gentleman who resides in the 
most northern county in the state, for distribution in that destitute 
region, where these messengers of truth have never been. He ap- 
peared very grateful, and gaVc me five dollars, which are enclosed^ 
as a donation to the Society. 

The Auxiliary Tract Society at St. Louis should exert its influence 
throughout the states of Missouri and Illinois. And here permit mc 
to suggest the propriety of having an Agent, who, for the present, 
can take the charge of the Bible, Tract, and Sabbath School cause 
in these two states. Let each of these Societies pay their proportion 
to support him. If necessary, as business multiplies, let him have a 
boy to assist him. Let this Agent be a man of sterling worthy pos-^' 
sessing all the powers o( moral persuasion to excite to action ; let 
him have prudence and wisdom ; let him occasionally visit and fre- 
quently correspond with the various Auxiliaries; and, through the 
medium of the press, let him speak boldly to the inhabitants of Mis- 
souri and Illinois ; and the pulse of life will begin to beai — a new 
spirit will be exerted — dry bones will begin to live. This is what we 
want, and what we must have^ before much can be done to any good 
«fiect. 



Wants of ohio. 

[From an Agent of the American Bible Society.] 

I have travelled through seven counties in this state, but as yet 
have found no Tracts that conld be obtainedy though I have continu- 
ally sought for them. They, are greatly needed throughout the coun- 
ties I have visited, and, I presume, fully as much so throughout the 
state. I meet with aged persons in this eouritri/f who have never jeen 
a Tract, In many townships they are destitute of preaching; in 
others, Universalists and Arians are the only preachers ; half the 
families in a township have, in some instances, been found destitute 
of the Bible— -families, having children- grown up, have never owned 
a Bible ! An actiVH Agent of the American Tract Society, to visit 
each township throughout this state, would be an important acquisi- 
tion. Here the great body of the people may be considered as form- 
ing a eharaetert which must not only influence the destiny of the 
rising generation, but may, ultimately, of our whole body politic. I 
wish immediately to become a Life Member of your Society, and en- 








*^^ 










*r5^>j 



tbc 







18^9.) 'fiAaSKNESS FOB. q^BACTB 19 CANADA* 5d 

4 

diBtribute, in sueb circumstanoes, the Holy Scriptures and Religious 
Tracts. Even a single Tract may publish the great truths of Chris- 
tianity with saving benefit to some immortal soul. 



DESTITUTION OF A SETTLEBIENT IN N. CAR. 

Your grant of 5000 pages of Tracts will be most thankfully re- 
ceived. We are all so pleased with the objects of the Society, so far 
as we now understand them, that we cannot express our grateful 
feelings and sincere wishes for your prosperity. A few Sabbaths 
since, I went over to the house of one of my poor neighbors, whom I 
found reading a few leaves of an old Bible to his wife and children, 
who were sitting around him and listening attentively to the Word of 
God. When he had finished the chapter, *' How I wish," said he, 
" that the Lord would put it into the heart of some of his servants to 
send me a 6ible ! I need one, and I am not able to buy one. 1 have 
Dfow only a few scattered pieces of the Word of God. When do you 
expect your Tracts to come 1 I wish they would come — we ought to 
have something better than newspapers to read on the Sabbath." 
Were I able to write, I could tell you a volume about this poor man 
and others hi this settlement, who are destitute of the stated means 
of gThce. I shall do all in my power -to get them a supply of Tracts 
and books ; and if I had any money worth sending, I would gladly 
S6nd a part of it to the Tract Society. 



INSTANCE OF DEPLORABLE IGNQRANCE. 

[From a Gentleman in one of tlie Southern States.] 

The interesting publicatidns of the American Tract Society will do 
much good in this neighborhood. There i» need of them. On Sun- 
day, June i29th, I attended the meeting of the Hanover Presbytery. 
During the interval of -divine worship, I observed a youth, I should 
think, 16 or 17 years of age : his appearance drew me to him. 
After hearing that he, to use his own expression, " was converted 
last fall, at a camp-meeting," and observmg that he appeared to place 
some dependancc on attending meetings, &c. I asked him whether be 
expected to go to heaven through his own exertions, or through the 
jftierits of the Savior. He said, by his own exertions. I asked him 
if he had a sinful heart. ** No," said he, " my heart is not sinful." 
On his saying that he had a Testament, i asked him if he recollected 
that Christ was crucified. He said, '' No ; I has not heard of that 
yet." Such, Sir, is the ignorance which prevails extensively ovei: 
this section of our country ; and your Tracts can do much, very 
much, to change this darkness into light. 

EAGERNESS FOR TRACTS IN CANADA. 

I have lately received a letter, writes an intelligent friend of Tracts. 
In Canada^ from a Lady to whom I sent some of the Tracts granted 
by the American Tract Society. She lives in a distant and new settle- 
ment, mentions the great dearth of the means of religious knowledge 
in the townships around her, the welcome given to the Tracts, and 
says, two perwn» camt fiflt€i\ miles for some cf them ! 

5» 



a4 USEFULNESS OF TRACTS* [May* 

INFLUENCE OP TRACTS IN A SOCIETY OP 

imiVERSALISTS. 

[fVoma ClergymAn In Mia8aeltii8eitt.J 

I have ever felt a deep interest in the concerns of the Tract Society. 
Your operations are, in my opinion, equally important with those of 
any other Institution in our land. Tracts are now producing effects 
in places which Ministers cannot well enter, and in families where 
their visits would he unwelcome. I could now inform you of a whole 
tJniversalist Society which is beginning to feel the influence of truth 
through their instrumentality. And though many of those in the me- 
ridian of life among them are opposed to Tracts, yet they are read 
by children, and through them are operating back on the parents ; 
and we hope eventually to have important and tangible results to com- 
municate. It is sufficient now to say, that the Society above referred 
to have become m/Zing to hear the truth preached ; and some are quite 
desirous to hear it often. I hope that, through the instrumentality of 
Tracts and of a small Sabbath School, many will eventually be brought 
to forsake their errors, and to receive the Gospel of Christ. 



TRACT ON INTEMPERANCE BLESSED. 

After having preached in L , Mass., says an Agent of the Ame- 
rican Tract Society, I called on a Gentleman to receive his donation, 
when, observing a young mtCn present, I asked him if he wished to 
give any thing for so good an object as the circulation of Tracts 
throughout the destitute portions of our country. He immediately 

kaid, " I have no money now, but I believe niy credit isgood in L 

yet for a dollar, and I will give it ; for a Tract saved me from one of 
the sins you intntioned in your sermon." I afterwards learned that 
he had been in the road to intemperance, but that now he was giving 
satisfactory evidence of the power of grace shed abroad in his heart. 



TRACTS BLESSED TO PROFESSORS OF RELIGION. 

[From a Female Auxiliary in Connecticiif.] 

If no remarkable conversions have been effected by the Tracts we 
have circulated, yet several instances have come within the sphere 
of our observation, where the humble followers of Christ have beeii 
peculiarly benefitted by them. On one occasion, tlic Tract, entitled, 
•' The Importance of distinguishing between true and false Conver- 
donSj^^ was presented to an old Lady, who, about thirty years before, 
supposed she had experiencied a work of grace upon her heart ; but 
afterward Ibst most of her serious impressions, and became unable 
to ascertain whether she had any claims to the Christian character ov 
not. AYter reading the Tract referred to, she exclaimed, " That i» 
the most beautiful book I ever read in my life ; the pleasure I have 
ezperiienced While reading it is beyond description.^' The Holy Spirit 
seems to haVe set home its truths upon her mind, and convinced her 
that she had indeed been renewed by divine grace, and become a 
« fellow-citizen with the saints, and of the household of God." T« 
two other persons the Tract, entitled, " On keeping the Hecfrt" was 



18t9.] OssrvtiSEBS oy qt&acts. 55 

pccuUarly blessed. Other instaiHfes of a similur nature nifbt be meo- 
iioned. 



A YOUNG LADY BLESSED BY A GLANCE AT A TRACT, 

{From a Missionuj to tbe Secretary of th« Ameriean Home Misfdonary Society.] 

I would state, that I have ascertained that a young Lady, who is 
now indulging the hope that she is a Christian, dates her first serious 
impressions from a single glance at one of the Tracts which yoa 
handed me last spring, as a donation from the Tract Society at Bos- 
ton. The circumstances are as follows : After receiving the Tracts, 
I placed some of them in a conspicuous place in my room, so that 
persons- coming in might have access to them. Nor long after this, 
some of the young people of my congregation came to spend the after- 
noon at my house. They soon commenced looking over the Tracts ; 
the young Lady alluded to was present; wild, gay, and thoughtless, 
she also took up a Tract, (what one she does not recoIh»«t^) and a 
-single sentence in that Tract caught her eye, which brought home the 
conviction that she was a great sinner, and in perishing need of sal- 
vation. She strove to conceal her feelings, and for a time succeeded ; 
but the Spirit of Grod had fastened an arrow in her heart, which drank 
up her spirits, and gave her no peace until she found it, as she trusts. 
At the foot of thp cross. She is now a member of the church, and ap- 
pears to manifest evidence of a saving change. 



LETTER FROM A YOUNG MAN TO HIS COUSIN. 
[From an Auxiliary ia -~— , Rhode Island.] 

The scenes of my childhood, which I spent in your father's family ; 
«Oen arise to my view. There I was taught the habit of industry, 
there, too, I received my first lasting serious impressions, and that by 
•a circumstance of which you are probably ignorant. When I was 
about 12 years old, I determined, one Sabbath morning, not to attend 
meeting, in hope of enjoying, at home, some vain recreation very im- 
proper for the Sabbath; I was some time detained in the house by 
your mother, and was very undutiful and peevish, when she gave mc 
the History of " Dinah Doudney'* to read. 1 took the-Tract, and re- 
tired to my chamber. I had not read far, when my hard unpleasant 
feelings were softened, and I earnestly wished to be as that child was. 
Before I had read through the Tract, I was brought on my knees to 
implore divine aid and a change of my hard and impenetrable heart.' 

From that time, I resolved to become a faithful follower of the Lord 
Jesus ; and though I was suffered so far to grieve the Holy Spirit as 
to become for a long season careless, yet I was led again to see tay 
deplorable situation, and at length, if I am hot deceived, to find Christ 
l^ be precious to my soul. 

TRACT BLESSED TO A BLACKSMITH IN VIRGINIA. 

[From the Secretary of an Auxiliary.] 
In August last, Mr. C , being on a tour through one portion ef 



LU JH1H*»3» mat, ATA*. ■\J , wwiUfJ «»»i W *«*•»« «iiavugM v»»« |^v>*«vrii If 

this county, distributing Bibles and Tracts, called at a blacksmith' 
shop to have the sbees on his horse repaired. Whilst the work wa: 



s 
as 



56 aspo&TS ot> AUXfLiAaiES. l^^yt 

doing, the blacksmith ascertained the object of his jonrney, and told 
him of the wonitrful bUtting he had himself derived from reeiding a 
TVaet, It was the History of" Anna Emery/' pnMished by the Ame- 
rican Tract Society, Boston. His own language was, " that the read- 
ing of that Tract filled him with alarm, to think that she, who was so 
young, should receire such a marvellous ehangCf while he, who had 
lived so much longer, was still remaining dead in Hn.*' He could not 
be prevailed on to take any thing for repairing the horse-shoes ; and 
a pious neighbor of his informs me, that he can have no doubt of the 
genuineness of the work of grace thus wrought in his heart. — To God 
be all the glory ! 

TRACT " ON FASHIONABLE AMUSEMENTS'' BLESSED 
TO A LADY In KENTUCKY. 

One instance, says a Clergyman in Kentucky, has. recently occur- 
red, of a blessing bestowed on an immortal soul, through the instru- 
mentality of a Tract, which I think it proper to mention. On my first 
visit to one of the towns of this vicinity, I distributed a number of 
Tracts ; amongst others, I handed the Tract " On Fashionable Amuse' 
mentf" to an intelligent and fashionable young Lady, and, as I have 
since learned, it proved the means, in the providence of God, of her 
awakening and conversion. I afterward had the pleasure of seeing 
her make a public profession of her faith in Christ. Other instances 
have occurred, which I would relate, had I time and room on my 
sheet. 



REPORTS OF AUXILIARIES. 

Aaxiliary of Providence^ R- L Fourth report presented March 6.. 
Beceipts during the year, $708 66. Through the faithful efforts of 
Jlfr. J. R. McDowadlf the number of active Auxiliaries connected with 
this Society is now increased to 30 ; besides which, there are 12 other 
Auxiliaries in the state. Total in the state, 42. Whole number of 
towns, 31. The whole state has been explored, and Tracts very ge* 
nerally dispersed. One Auxiliary is on Block Island, and two or 
more Tracts have been distributed in every family on the island. 
Whole amount of Tracts circulated in the state in 1828, more than 
1,000,000 pages. The report embraces numerous instances of the 
usefulness of Tracts. A very affectionate letter has been addressed 
by the Board of the Providence Auxiliary to the American Tract So- 
,ciety, expressing their thanks for the important services rendered^ by 
Mr. McDowell to the cause of Tracts in that state. 

Auxiliary of Huntsvilkf Ala. Receipts the last year, $426 87. 
Circulated, 80,000 pages Tracts, and 2,000 Christian Almanacs. The 
Society has 90 members. '' Three or four instances have occurred 
during the year, within the knowledge of the Board, in which indivi- 
daals received their first serious impressions from the perusal of 
tracts.** This Society has recently held a spirited meeting, at whici\ 
Aev. Mr. Eastman, the Society's Agent, was present, and a subscrip- 
tion for a Depo8in>ry commenced, which was raised to upwards of 
#800. 

We feel that the Society is under special obligations for the four 
Tcry able original Tracts vbich are announced on the la<t p«g^* 



1M9«] PREMITOS QFV8AES. 5t 

A'WA&B or p&EiflcnrHES. 

ITVad /or ofrrioltng^ the Trite Objection agaiiMt the Bible, 

The Publishing Committee of the American Tract Society an- 
nounce, that there were presented to them, previous to the first day 
of the present month, thirty-one manuscript Tract« for the above pre* 
raium, which were all carefully examined. The choice of the Com- 
mittee fell upon two of the number, between the authors of which it 
was agreed to divide equally the premium of fif^y dollars. On open- 
ing the sealed envelopes which accompanied s&id Tracts, af)er the 
decision of the Committee, their authors were found to be,, the Rev. 
William C. Brownlxe, D. D. of this city, and the Rev. John Dk 
Witt, D. D. Professor of Biblical Literature, &.c. in the Theological 
Seminary of the Reformed Putch Church, New-Brunswick. The 
above Tracts, thus approved and accepted, will be forthwith put to 
press. The Committee deem it their duty, at the same time, to say, 
that several of the remaining Tracts possess great merit, and wen 
deserve to be communicated to the public. 

, New- York, March 24flS29, James Milnor, Chairman. 

Tract on Female Influence. 

The Publishing Committee of the American Tract Society an>^ 
nounce, that there were submitted to them by the CoFvesponduig 
Secretary, as received by him previous to the first day of March last> 
thirty-six manuscript Tracts for the above premium, which were all 
carefully examined. On opening the sealed envelope which accoin>> 
panied the Tract on which the choice of the Committee fell, thfr 
author was found to be the Rev. Nathan S. S. Bemak, of Troy,. 
N. v., to whom the premiam of fifty dollars la awarded.. The Tract 
will forthwith be stereotyped and published. 

NeW'Yorb, AprU 8t 1829, Jamsb Miuxiut, Chmirnum^ 

PftBMniBC OSPFBBSO 

For a T^aet to influence the Young to JJb^inencefiom Ardent SpirUs* 

A lienevolent individual has placed at the disposal of the American 
Tract Society the sum of Fiftif Dollars, to be awarded by the Pub> 
lishing Committee to the author of the best Tract, not exceeding 12 
pages in length, calculated " to influenee the young to abstain en> 
tirely from the use of ardent spirits, and portraying to parents the 
guilt and danger of tempting them to use it.*' 

The Pdblishing Committee will receive Tracts on this subject untH 
the first day of November next. Communications must be transmit- 
ted (post paid) to " William A. Hallock, Corresponding Secretary of 
the American Tract Society, No. 144 Nassau*street, New-York." 
The author's name mast accompany the Tract in « sealed envelope^ 
which will not be opened unless in the instance of that accompanying 
the successful Tract. 

J>rew- York, March 2,7, 1829, Jaxks Milkor, Chairman. 



Also Fifty Dollars, for the best Tract on the '' Practice of Sailing 
Vessels out of Port on the Sabbath ;'* not to exceed eight pages in 
Ifngth, and to be presented on or beibre Jul^ 1^ 18^. 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE T&EABVSY OF TB£ AMEUCAH TRACT S< 

Durtnj lii mml* riHKi* Jpril I^OiB. 
FROM AUZILIAKT TRAOT SOCIEIIEB. 

J(*n TBppoI, Tr. . 
lu. Gideon Canfleld.Ti 



»«:B^i;iKF™M;;rB™™r;Tr. : 




New-To 


'Fei>i.Aiii. Hn.J.R.H«rd,Tr. 
J«. An. e. achwil. 8n>lcfa Pre 






b.Oh.'Ceilw-t 




Swnb E NelLlroy, Sec 
Baformtn Dvtcli Cli. Ownwlct 






VHtogi.WB. 




RwmcSK. . 






SLataru'iCli.Feir. HlHAll■tla■^lllid^T^. 
SinMh^«b.Ck. Ji>bDAl«HHler.B>cr 


8>(I!u 


b«,8u««LPlilUi|«,Tr. . 




Tniy.A. 


L««l.«l,Tr. . 

d-..rJV.nwo,Set. 




N!jSlE-Bl«B.flrtil.J«.. *.D«WIO.)nn.rr 




sa 


Aa«ftfj»r; 





NuHuHMI, Hr-R-Browi 

BKniiipa,ReT.Hr.H^iiki><ip, Ac. . 

IVeiiHjii, Flm Oluirck. Fem. Enbv ItellTslBe. Sec . 

FENH^PbllHlelpbia Snnch, GxirFe W. Bllrhi, Sn. 

DIS. OOL.— AleitiKlrib Fnn. Hn. Rachel tAuEb, 3h. 

VtB^FiTiTTllle. Jokn Rice, Tr. . 

Ooqwl, Nt»l Ani. Rer. E. HcLwieIiUii, Sac. 

WLnelienBr, Mnlel Onld, At. . . . 

H.CAa_S>lem,WIUIaniC.Beinlen, Bk. . 

a£a— Dulen, Aui. Hon. BavsRi E. Hud, Ag. 

ALA — Flonnca, Ftm. Rer.AleuDder A-Cimpben, Ac- 



A. lIi)>blB, E«|, Sec. 



BEN.— DuirUle. UlcbuJ a . Y.w 



N. TOKK-OitbHtne, 
I«.JER.~-IUnlirick,M< 

PENN.-Pbitaifclphii, 



TcKU loM BI lh> Depstllory < 

Diratonfer Lift 

MASS.— PUnfieJd, 

of'IK 



(bitul 



R . tHL « ND.^midHicM,Nlebel« 
Bnwn, Eiq.^iBpvttoriftfptta- 
.Uiig BaileiA. gabilt- Reil,) Id 
HON— Llieha»w,Mr.Wni.Deiiii»ir,l( 
^ewC»^illlll,Ilev.W^l.B^>B■ey,l)I 



S. Sebcwl Union, FrHleri 

a. BeT. J, W. DouglaH, A[. , 

hi.Ch.iinaCai«.(iiipBnof»5fc) H 
GEO.— Augu.n.lte.. Samuel K. 

U 60 Membtrtfor Lift. 

I K. IBt.-Craniian, Re>. Acbard 

Kntflil. by Andrew Hurli, (in 
pinoftHJ I 



No. 192. The Biblb of Ditinb ORiGin.->pp. 40. This Tract 
(which takes the place of the Prisoner's Companion, hereafter to be 
published as an Occasional Tract) is one of two to which was award* 
ed the premiam of fifty dollars for the best Tract to " obviate the 
Trite Objections urged against the Bible;" and is from the pen of the 
Rev. John De Witt, D. D. Professor of Biblical Literature in the 
Theological Seminary at New-Brunswick, N. J. It is in the form of 
a discussion between three Grentlemen, two of whom are advocates of 
Infidelity. It is grave and elevated in its character, and full of 
thought. The Christian will be instructed in the reading of it ; the 
doubtful confirmed; and the Infidel convinced, if he is capable of 
conviction, by the force of evidence. 

No. 224. Reasons for not embracing the Doctrine of Univer- 
sal Salvation. In a Series of Letters to a Friend.— pp. 60. 
for this Tr^ct the Society is indebted to the Rev. Joel Hawes, of 
Hartford, Conn. There were already in the Series several Tracts on 
Universalism ; but it was felt to lie desirable, that the publications of 
the Society should embrace some full and able refutation of so dan- 
gerous, and yet so prevalent an error. The author first presents an 
array of considerations, that should prevent every prudent and con- 
siderate man from embracing this doctrine. He then adduces at 
length the direct testimony of tlie word of God; which is followed by 
a full and able discussion of the manner in which Universalists evaae 
the divine testimony ; and an examination of the leading texts, and 
the more plausible and popular arguments, on which Universalism 
relies for support. The Tract closes with an affecting view of the 
consequences of this error, and a most serious and tender appeal to 
the conscience of the reader. 

No. 225. Do YOU want a Friend ?— pp. 4. Directing the sinner 
to Christ, as the Friend who demands and deserves all his confidence. 

No. 226. Female Influence and Obligation. — ^pp. 12. This is 
a premium Tract, from the pen of Rev. Nathan S. S. Beman, of 
Troy, N. Y. ft shows ike extent of Female Influence, as exerted over 
the earliest periods of rational life, in the family circle, on society at 
large, among- the children of affliction, &c. and urges the obligation 
to exert it in favor of Christianity, as a dutv and a debt of gratitude 
which females owe to God ; depicts the guilt incurred by the neglect, 
and the great good which may be accomplished by the faithful dis- 
charge of this duty ; and describes the present state of the world as 
very favorable to female efibrt. We cannot doubt that the Tract will 
lexert a very exteasive and happy influence. 

No. 227. On the Objections commonly urged against the 
Holt Bible. — pp. 44. This Tract, from the pen of Rev. William 
C Browi^lee, D. D. of the city of New-Tork, is one of the two which 
divided the premium of fifty dollars. It is a conversation, commenced 
between a " Pastor and a beautiful young womai;i, who leaned on his 
arm, as they entered the arbor and sat down under a wide-spreading 
vine." Soon the General, the father of Mary, approaches, accom- 
panied by a voungCadet,two infidel sons of the General, and aFarmer, 
a disciple oi Paine. They all were seated : the principal objections of 
Infidels are broyght forward and ably answered ; a brief outline of the 
authenticity of the Scriptures is given ; time rolls on, the scene changes, 
and the conversation is closed around the death-bed of the General. The 
whole has the interest of an engaging fiction, and yet the author .testU 
fies that ** the characters are real,- and not fictitious." The Tract is 
eminently calculated to accomplish the object proposed by the otTerei 
of the premiumj in removing the Trite ObjcQtions i^ganist the Bible. 



THE AMERICAN 



nrmi, leas. 



FOCKTH ANirUAI. SEETING 



AWSRICIAir V&AOV soozaxT. 

Tbe Fourth Annnal Heetins at the Anicricaii Trael Society was 
lield in the PmbjrteriBn Church in Wall-Kreet, N«w-Toric, on Wed- 
newtaj, M*} 13, 1S29, at lea o'dock, A. M. The President of the 
Soeieij, 

S. V. 3, WILDES, Eiq. 
tsok the ahair, mpported bj Col. Richard Varick, President of the 
American Bible Societj, and Hon. Stephen Van Rennelaer.or Alban;. 

The Meeting na opened with prajei bj the Rev. Jamei Bicbanti, 
B. D. Froftisoi In the .Theological Semioary, Anbum. 

Tha Recording Secretary being detained rrom the meeting by want 
of health, Rar. C. G. Sommen waa appointed Secretary of the meeCiaf. 

The Preiident deliTered a rery appropriate introductory Addreif. 

Tbs Tre«Mii«r,JMr. Moan Allkh, then read the Report o/ the Cam. 



C2 FOURTH ANNUAL MEETING* [Jane^ 

niittee who audited his accounts ; and the Annual Report was read by 
Mr. William A. Hallock, the Corresponding Secretary. 

The following resolutions were then presented, and unanimously 
adopted: viz. 

On motion of Rev. £Ii Baldwin, of the Reformed Dutch Church, 
New- York ; seconded by John Tappan, Esq. of Boston, Mass.; 

RSSOLYED, 

That the Reports now read be adopted, and published under the 
direction of the Executive Committee. 

On motion of Rev. Jonathan Going, of the Baptist Church, Wor- 
cester, Mass. ; seconded by Rev. Jacob Van Yechten, of the Reform- 
ed Dutch Church, Schenectady, New-York ; 
Resolved, 

That the ejctensfive co-operation which has been given to this Society 
by Evangelical Christians of different names throughout our country, 
and the signal success which has attended all. its operations, call for 
unfeigned gratitude to God, and a humUe and prayerful reliance on 
Him for the continuance of his blessing. 

On motion of Rev. £. Cornelius, Cor. Sec. of the American Edu- 
cation Society ; seconded by Rev. Francis Wayland, D. D. of the 
Baptist Church, President of Brown University, Providence, Rhode- 
Island ; 

Resolved, 

That this meeting express their thanks to God for the efforts made 
by this Society the past year in the Valley of the Mississippi, and the 
cordial co-operation which has been given by the friends of the cause 
there ; and that we recognize the obligation, and feel great encou- 
ragement, to continue these exertions, in dependance on Divine aid, 
till the wants of that interesting portion of our country shall be fully 
supplied. 

On motion of Rev. Daniel A. Clark, of the Congregational Church, 
Bennington, Vermont ; seconded by Rev. Nathan S. S. Beman, of the 
Presbyterian Church, Troy, New-York ; ' ' 
Resolved, «, 

That this meeting have learned wii^ great pleasure the systematic 
efforts which have been made, in the City of New-York and elsewhere, 
statedly to convey some portion of the Gospel, in the form of Tracts, 
to every family which is willing to r£<^eive them; and that it is very 
desirable a similar plan of operations should be immediately adopted 
throughout the entire population of the United States. 

On motion of Rev. Elon Galusha, of tbe Baptist Church, Whites- 
borough, N. Y. seconded by Rev. Daniel Temple, Missionary from 
Malta ; 

Resolved, 

That this meeting rejoice, that some aid has been extended by thiv 
Society, the past year, to the suffering Greeks, and the millions of pe- 
rishing Heathen ; and we pray God to enable the Society greatly to^ 
extend this branch of its operations. 

On motion of Rev. Benjamin Mortimer, of the Moravian Church, 
New-York ; seconded by Rev.* George Boyd, of the Episcopal Church, 
PhUadelphia; ' 
Resolved, 

That this meeting rejoice in the friendly relations sustained by this' 
Society to kindred Institutions in this and' foreign lands ; and in tbv> 



I32d»l 



AMERICAN TRACT SOClE^tY. 



6S 



success which has attended their efforts, especially those of the Reli- 
gious Tract Society in London. 

On motion of Dr. John Stearns, seconded by Mr. Thomas Stokes, 
the officers of the Society for the ensuing year were then elected. 

The house was fHled. The Meeting was addressed by Rev. Messrs. 
Baldwin, Going, Cornelius, Clark, Beman, Galusha, and Temple, in a 
very impressive and Evangelical manner : all urging the Society to 
press onward in its important work, with prayer and confidence ui 
God for a blessing.. The Rev. Mr. Cornelius, who had just arrived in 
New-York, from the Valley of the Mississippi, stated the most encou- 
raging facts relative to the great usefulness of the Society's publica- 
tions there, the cordiality with which its Agents and efforts are wel- 
comed, and the almost boundless destitutions which yet remain to be 
supplied. Great numbers of the audience were frequently in tears, and 
one universal feeling seemed to pervade the meeting, in favor of re- 
doubled efforts for this cause. 



EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE. 

PUBLISHING COMMITTEE. 



Rev. James Milnor, D. D. of the 
Episcopal Church. 

Rev. Thomas McAuley, D. D. LL. 
D. of the Presbyterian Church. 

Rev. John Knox, D. I>. of the Re- 
formed Dutch Church. 

DISTRIBUTINO COMMITTEE. 

(.Thomas Stokes, 
Dr. James G. Bliss, 
Timothy Dwight Williams, 
Marcus Wilbur, 
Dr. Marinus Willett, Jan. 



Rev. Samuel Green, Boston, Mas- 
sachusetts, of the Congregation- 
al Church. 

Rev. Charles G. Sommersj of the 
Baptist Church. 

FINANCE COMMITTEE. 

Arthur Tappan, 
Dr. John Stearns, 
Moses Allen, 
Elijah Pierson, 
Richard T. Haines. 



ABSTRACT OF THE FOURTH ANJTUAIi REPORT. 

The Executive Committee, in presenting their Annual Report/feel 
that they never before were called on so urgently to erect a memorial 
to the praise of the glory of Divine grace. The simple story of the 
growth and progress of the Institution is, that its receipts, the first 
year, were $10,000; the second year, $30,000; the third year, $45,000 ; 
the fourth year, ending on the first day of the present month, $60,000 ; 
and its issues were, the first year, 3,000,000 of Tracts; the second 
l^ear, 3,000,000 ; the third year, 6,000,000; and in the year which has 
just now dosed, 6,000,000. What God designs for the Society in future, 
is known only to him ; but, surely, " Hitberto hath the Lord 

HELPED us.'* 

Daring the year, nineteen new Tracts in English have been publish- 
ed, two in French, thirteen in German, ybur Broadsheets, and thirty 
Handbills. 

Tract No. 226 completes the 7th volume, which is bound ; and the first 
thirty German Tracts are bound in a volume of 400 pages. Baxter's 
Saints Rest has also been stereotyped, and will be sold at 37jl cents per 
copy. 



6^ STATE OF TB£ FDN0S. [JttOe^ 

At the sngg^Biion of several Teachers of Touto, aud among them 
the late jRev. Mrl BameSf principal of the* High School in this city» 
who have long felt that a Reading Book^ that should at once be inter- 
esting and of a pure moral and religious tendency, has been a deside^ 
ratum in the Schools of otir countiy, the Committee have also pre- 
pared» stereotyped, and published such a volume. It embraces thirty- 
two of the Tracts, which, in point of style, interest, and moral and 
religious cbbracter, were judged liest adapted for general use, together 
with a brief selection of Divine Songs; is suitably divided into chap- 
ters, lessons, and paragraphs; and entitled, The Christian Header, 
intended for the mt of Schools in tht United States. As this volume 
has but just now issued from the press, the Committee have no cer- 
tain means of judging what will be the extent of Us circulation ; but 
they indulge the sanguine hope that it will be introduced into great 
numbers of Schools, and thus b6 the means of producing the most 
salutary impressions on the minds of multitudes of the rising gene- 
ration. 

Of the American Tract Magazine, 6^000 copies are regularly pub- 
lished in the form of a half sheet, monthly ; and the Christian AIvmL' 
nac for 1829 was published in 21 distinct editions. 

Whole number of Tracts printed during the year, 6,208,000 
Whole number printed since the formation of the Society, 15,102,000 
Whole number of pages of duodecimo Tracts printed du- 
ring the year, 61,052*,00Q 

Whole number of pages of do. printed since the formation 

of the Society, 114,719,000 

Duodecimo Tracts remaining in the General Depositoiy, 
May 1, 1829, Including the Tracts in 14,472 bound vo- 
lumes, « pog^f 39,914,946 

Whole number of pUges of duodecimo and Children's 
Tracts, Rise and Progress, Broadsheets and Handbills, 
circulated dmring the year, .... 48,^896^2 

Total circulated since the formation of the Society, 123,596,778 

Gratuitous DiBlribuHona, 2,016,628 pages, of which 817,114 were 
West and South of the Alleghany, and 251,920 in foreign lands. Fo- 
reign appropriations in money ; $150, for Tracts in Greece; $200 
for Ceylon ; and $800 for Burmah. 

StaJte of the Funds. 

Received, during the year endmg May 1st, 
For Tractssold nearly at cost .... $34,980 80 
Donations , . 25,173 18 

Total receipts during the year $60,153 98 

Paid, during the year. 

For paper 26,181 74 

For printing, stereotyping, engraving, folding, stitching, 

binding Tracts and Christian Almanac . • 25,904 56 

All other expenses . . . . 8,067 68 

-.^■— ~~^"— ^* 
Total paid during the year $60, 153 ' 98 

Thus it appears that, notwithstanding the enlarged benevolence 
which lias been manifested towards the Society the past je^r, ir% 



• 



18S9.] riXLET OF TOE MISSISSIPPI. 65 

operations hare been folly as extensive as its receipts ; leaving its 
treasury y on closing the accounts for the year, entirely emp^. Bills 
were also then due to the amount of $1,212 53, which the Society^ 
having no permanent funds whatever, had no means of liquidating, 
except throu^ the provision made personally by members of the 
Committee. The Committee were also at that time under obligations 
for paper, on which the Tracts are printed, to the amount of $12,609 73, 
due within the period of six months. The fact deserves also to be re- 
corded, that, during the whole year, the treasury has been frequently 
«mpty, and has at no time contained funds enough to meet the ciuerent 
expenses of the Society for ten days. 

The Committee have continually felt it to be their duty to conduct 
an the concerns of the Society on principles of the strictest economy. 
No pecuniary compensation has ever been received by any member 
of the Committee fbr any service rendered the Institution ; and your 
Treasurer has not only discharged all the duties of his office gratui^ 
tously, but has converted all the uncnrrent bills received by the Soci- 
cty since its formation, except on banks broken, into bills current at 
the banks, and made a donation to the Society to the full amount of 
the discount. A comparison of the amount of receipts, the past year, 
with the number of pages of Tracts and occasional volumes printed, 
will show that eleven and a half pages have been printed for every cent 
s'eceived. 

Number of new AuxUiaries formed the past year, 112 ; whole num- 
ber of Branches and Auxiliaries now immediately connected with the 
American Society, 630^ 

Operations in the Valley of the Mississippi. 

Among the various departments of the Society's operations the past 
year, there is no one, perhaps, of deeper interest than the effort which 
has been commenced for supplying with Tracts the immense popula- 
tion of the Valley watered by the Mississippi and its tributaries. The 
growing importance of that portion of our country claims the serious 
attention of every philanthropist and patriot, and especially of every 
Christian. It now embraces more than 4,000»000 of inhabitants, being 
more than one-third of the whole population of the United States, 
though in the year 1790 it scarcely contained 160,000 souls. While 
the population of the States east of the Alleghany mountains is scarcely 
three times as great as it was at that time, the population of the Valley 
of the Mississippi has, during the same period,, increased almost thirty- 
fold ; and it will soon, ar':ording to every probable calculation, be so 
large as, on the principles of our free government, very powerAiUy to 
influence the operations and interests of our country. In twenty years, 
it will probably contain 12,000,000 of inhabitants, who will then be 
the majority of our whole population ; and many a child now in the 
midst of us, may see the day, when it will embrace one of the most 
powerful nations in Christendom. 

There is a majesty and solemnity in this march of population, which 
cannot fail to affect every considerate mind. He who wishes the tem- 
poral prosperity of those increasing millions, wilt wish them to enjoy 
the cheering li^ht of Christianity ; and he who regards their eternal 
ii^lfare will wish that precious *' Name" to be made known to them, 
than which there is "none other under heaven, given among men, 
whereby we must be saved.'* And he who regards the welfare of hi$ 

6* 



tQ DISTRIBUTION OF TIUCTS. [June, 

• 

countiy, of his cbtldren, and his children's children; wha is unwilling 
that the tide of this nation's prosperity shall roll back, and the light of 
her free institutions and civil privileges be put out in darkness, per- 
haps before his own short life shall be closed, will not fail to pray and 
labor, that a knowledge of the Gospel may be diffused throughout all 
our destitute population, and its saving influences be felt by every 
heart. In the republics of South America, nominally free, and yet 
convulsed with civil revolutions and dissensions, the tumult of arms, 
' the confiscation of property, the sacrifice of life, and the perpetual 
hazard of every thing that earth holds dear, we have now before us a 
molt instructive and dear-bought lesson, which may ail be summed 
up in a word : Without knowledge, and without Christian in- 
tegrity AND VIRTUE, FREE INSTITUTIONS AND PRIVILEGES CAN NEVER 
BE SUSTAINED. 

The Report proceeds to mention the appointment of a General 
Agent and five other Agents for the Valley of the Mississippi ; and 
gives a very animating view of the success which has attended then: 
efforts, 

SysUmc^e disiribtUion of I>ac/«, to the entire populadon who are wUh 

ing to receive them. 

White these efforts have been made for the Valley of the Mississippry 
the attention of many has been directed to the spiritual wants of vast 
multitudes in these older states; and it has been felt that some means 
must be employed for conveying the truths of the Gospel in the form 
of Tracts' to the entire population of our country. With reference to 
such a resHk, a plan has been adopted, in the city orNew-York,. by thcs 
New- York v^ity Tract Society, and elsewhere to some extent, for the 
8ystema,tic and stated distribution of Tracts to every family which i^ 
willing to receive them. The plan, whatever modifications it may re- 
ceive from the results of experience, certainly deserves the serious 
consiileration of every friend of the Tract cause. It rests on the grand, 
principle, recognised on almost every page of the New Testament, and 
enforced by the whole history and labors of Christ and his Apostles, 
that THE GOSPEL IS A MESSAGE, which U is the duty of Um 
follower 8 of Christ to carrt and deliver to all who have it not. We 
are not to wait till our fellow-men, ignorant of the way of salvation, 
perishing for lack of knowledge, and feeling nothing <^ the inestimai- 
ble value of the Gospel, shall come after it — ^we must carry it, an4 
tender it to them, that if they will hear and believe the message, they 
may be saved. Thus Christ sent out his original disciples, " as she^ 
in the midst of w^ves;" thus, just before his ascension to glory, he 
con^manded his followers to " Evangelize all nations ;" thus his apos- 
tles labored, till God removed them to that glorious " rest,'' which he 
designs, not for his children whilQ here in. the midst of their Christian 
warfare, but only for **the dead, who die in the Lord." 

The Committee are aware, that our Lord, in his instructions, to pub- 
lish these glad tidings, had an especial reference to their being pra* 
claimed, from the lips of the living teacher ^ nor would they hide from 
the view of any, the solemn obligation devolving on the churches of 
Christ, to send forth '* into all the world*' the commissioned ministers of 
Christ, thus extensively to preach the Gospel.' . Yet it cannot e^capQ 
ob^ei^atiQP; tbdft o\iir Lord gav^ his inslructiofiS when thi& pr,eMs^^\x<st 



I8$9.] SSSTRIBUTIOH OF T1UCT9. 67 

most powerful engine, perhaps, whicfa Grod has ever entrusted to the 
use of mortals— was unknown; and when the general and rapid diffir* 
sion of knowledge through the written page was impossible without 
a miracle. Nor can it fail to be observed, that our Lord, in the various 
epistles to the churches, and in the other divinely inspired writings, 
preserved pure by his own special interposition, and handed down for 
the use of all generations to the end of time, has conferred on the |^rit- 
ten and printed page pecnllar honor. 

This argument would seem to be complete for the circulation of the 
Bible ; and why, the Committee would ask, when living preachers are 
so few, compared with the lUmost boundless destitution ; when the 
sending of the fiible to all is a work so arduous, and the attention of 
thousands who have it, and sinfully neglect its sacred pages, is often 
arrested and drawn to it by the short portion of truth in the pages of 
a Tract ; why, when Tracts can be printed and circulated without de* 
lay, till they shall meet the eye of all, and when God has shown him- 
ftelf so ready to bless them to the salvation of men ; why shall they 
not be conveyed to all who are bound to the scenes of an unchanging 
eternity 7 

The plan to which the Committee have referred is peculiarly sIm* 
pie: it is merely to divide any portion of the country into convenient 
Districts, and assign each District to a pious individual, male or fe- 
male, who, in a kind and Christian manner, will present a Tract per- 
sonally, and at stated periods, to each fomily in the district which is 
willing to receive them. 

<* The several Wards of the City of New-Tork," say the Board of the 
ffew-Tork City Tract Society, in a Circular addressed to some other of 
the principal Branches and Auxiliaries of this Institution, " have been 
divided into about 500 Districts, which are assigned to an equal number of 
distributors, nearly one half of whom are femafes, and almost all of whom 
are not only professors of reliaion, but appear to have a sincere desire to bid* 
mote the spiritual and etemu welfare of the families the^ are called to 
visit. The Districts contain, on an average) nearly 60 families each ; the 
whole number of families reported in the month of March being 28|771. Of 
these families, 28,383 were supplied with one Tract each, and tiie remain- 
ing 388 declined receiving a Tract; the Tract being refused in only about 
1 family in 75. 

'' In obtaining the entire occupancy of a Ward, it has been found most 
advantageous, nrst to obtain a perfect map of the Ward ; then to explore 
it, and divide it into Districts, embracing, as nearly as practicable, an equal 
number of families ; then to number uie Districts, and draw an accurate 
map of each, to be put into the hand of the distributor to whom it shall' be 
a3sign6d ; then, at a meeting of auch active friends of the cause as can be 
collected in the Ward, fuU^ to explain the nature of the object, and let each 
person present^ who is willing to occupy a District; select one which, in 
respect to its location and the character c»f its inhabitants, it is convenient 
and suitable for himself to occupy. In a similar manner, it is believed, that 
any town> or portion of the country) large or small) may advantageously 
be districted. 

'* In the City of New- York, thus far, some particular Tract is selected 
fl^r each month, and a copy of the same Tract placed in every family which. 
IS willing to receive it. The Tract on the '* Institution and Observance of 




Importance of Consideration*' for June. A large edition of theses 
Tracts was ordered ftom the American Society for this especial purpose ; 
and »ny olb^r Branch or Auxiliary caa avail lU^f of thp sam^pfmlegey 



C8 DIVINE nLESSING ON THE [Juiie, 

by selecUog and orderiDg the Tracts lo earlj as to ^ve sufficient time fur 
their preparation. This course bein«p pursued) W series of the beet Tracts 
may, from month to month, be circofatedy with an assurance that the same 
Tract is not twice presented to the same family." 

The Board, aAer stating many encouragements they have received 
in the prosecution of their work, thus urge their sense of the solemn ob- 
ligation derolving upon Christians to use this means of grace with those 
among whom Divine Providence has placed them. 

« How, dear brethren, shall we, in the day of judgment, meet with joy 
the raimortal spirits of our fellow-men, among whom we have passed this 
briefpilgrimage to eternity; manv of whom do not attend on the public 
worship of God, have not the Bible in their houses, or neglect its sacred 
pages, and perhaps are never addressed by any one on the subject of their 
own TOrsonal salvation; if we will not do so much as even to supply them 
with Tracts, when God has placed this interesting means of access to them 
in our hands, and opened our eyes to the light of our dut^ ? 

'* Even if the object were solely personfd conversation, to present a 
Tract to each family would be one of the best possiblemeans of introducing 
it; and the spirit of Christian activity which the effort will be calculated 
to awaken, the impression it will convey' toeverv family of the reality and 
importance of religion, the blessing it will bring down on those who engage 
in the work, and the aid it will indirectly afford to every other Gospel In- 
stitution and means of grace^ all conspire to urge that this duty be no 
longer neglected. 

''Let it not be said, we have no right to offer the message of tlie Gospel 
to all. The message is salvation through the atoning blood of Christ, in 
whom he that believeth not must jperish ; and it is his command * that it be 
proclaimed to every creature.' Should any fail of salvation because the 
message of the Gospel was not tendered to them again and again, how 
bitterly, in the day of judgment, will they reproach us for our neglect of 
duty and our want of fidelity to the cause of our Redeemer." 

Divine Blessing on the Society^s PMications. 

The Committee would rer.ogm'se their obligations to labor ibr this cause, 
even if all the manifestations of the ^>ecial blessing of the Holy Spirit 
were reserved for the revelations of eternity. But God has not seen fit to 
call them to such a trial of their faith. In his sovereign mercy, and, the 
Committee trust, in answer to the prayers of thousands of his people, he 
has continually cheered them in tiieir labors, by rendering the Tracts evi- 
dently instrumental in the salvation of multitudes of souls. Many results 
of this kind the Committee have recorded in their previous Annual Re- 
ports ; and they are now permitted to record many otners, to the praise of 
theelory of Divine grace. 

The following have all been communicated to this Society during the 
past yeary either by individuals friendly to the Institution, or by the Socie- 
ty's Branches or Auxiliaries. There is reason to believe that all weregiveu 
with a strict and honest regard to truth, and they are recorded with scru- 
pulous accuracy. They have been communicated from almost ever^ por- 
tion of the country; and have occurred amid such a diversity of circum- 
stances) that they strongly corroborate each otlier, and chalknse eoen inJidelUy 
ilidf to deny the reality of that moral transformation of character, which 
God delights to honor himself in effecting through the instrumentality of 
his truth. 

Fourteen closely printed pages of the report are occupied with these in- 
ieresting testimonies. We select from them the follewingy none of whicK 
have been before inserted in the Traa Magazine. 



18£9.] dOCIETT'd PUBLICATIONS* ^9^ 

We fine insert three instaneesy reported by the JiuxUiary at Providertce^ 

Presenting a few Tracts, says ooe, to a youngs Lady in Previdence, I 
perceived a tear starting in her eye, when she said, ' My brother, on hts 
death-bed. attributed his hope in Christ to the reading of the £rieear«rV 
Prayer i which was placed in his hands a few months previous to htsdepar* 
ture.' 

<* One of the Directors of this Society 9 who, a few years since, was with* 
out God and without hope in the world, had bis attention arrested by hear* 
iae a Tract read, which powerfully affected his mind. He saw himself a 
vib sinner, Justly exposed to the wrath of God. After a few days of pun- 
gent distress on account of his sins, he was enabled to cast himself on the 
mercy of God, through faith in a crucified Redeemer.*' 

A widow in a neighboring villaf o gives the following relation : '^ My 
husband, on the 15th March, left Home at 10 o'clock in the morning, ana 
in the afternoon of the same day, fell into the ocean near Block Island, 
and was drowned. He went so very unprepared, death seemed to stare 
me in the face. The very next day after 1 heard of it, I was brought 
to my knees. My mind was very uneasy. I felt I was a great sinner. A 
voice seemed to me to say, ** Seek religion note*** Mrs. S— handed me 
some Tracts. That entitled Serious Tnou^hts on EtemUy^ I used to read 
over and over. Every time I read it, it appeared to be new. 1 also read 
the Tract entitled, A Persuasive to Public Worship. The excuses made 
for neglecting public worship, seemed to come home immediately to myself* 
When 1 came to these words, '' Delay no longer j and however long you 
mau have neglected his service and forsaken your own mercies, let the nes^ 
SahheUhJlnayou in a Christian assembly,** I thought I would go to meet* 
ing uid try to obtain religion. I had not the clothes I needed, but I went. 
For twelve or fourteen years I had not been to a religious meeting in the 
day time. I had no inclination to go. I used to work on Sunday;:, to gain 
time in the week. Since I have found Jesue^ I have kept the Sabbath day 
and gone to meeting, and got aiong better than I did when I staid away« 
To this communication, says the Parent Auxiliary, we would add, that her 
case was the ^st fruits of a pretious outpouring of the Holy Spirit upon 
the village in which she lives. 

The New- York City Auxiliart Tract Society, among a great 
variety of encouraging circumstances which have occurred in their distri- 
butions, particularly among seamen, report the following : 

A Tract being efftred to a yonn^ woman, she replied, ** I receive it glad* 
ly, I assure you.*' Being asked if she had received any Tracts before. 




heart appeared to be full of the k>ve of Christ. 

As a distributor was passing down the wharf, he observed a man watch- 
ing him closely, and recollecUKl that on a former occasion he had given 
liim some Tracts. A conversation ensued, in which he said be had been 
living without religion, neglecting his salvation, disregarding the Sabbath 
and &e laws of God. On receiving the Tracts, he read them through at- 
tentively, and became distressed in view of his condition as a sinner. He 
could not rest. His sleep was disturbed ; he dreamed about the Tracts, 
and the final ruin of his soul. He soon visited his family, related his feel- 
ings to his wife, who is a pious woman, and conversed freely with the pas- 
tor of the church, bv whom he was a^in directed to Christ, the only Sa- 
vior of lost sinners, lie has since obtamcd pe^ce in believing. He r^ards 
the Sabbath, and intends to spend the remainder of his days in the service 
of God. 

Ope distributor being at — — > in this Statei ivhere there was an imtuu&l 



70 DIVINE BLEsrsiN€( ON the' (June, 

Attentioa to religiooi but violent opposition from a company of Deists, had 
tlie satisfaction to learn, that four Tracts, one of which was Leslie's Method 
mth the Deists, were presented by a pious Lady to one of the ringleaders, 
who immediately sat down and read them through, which occupied him 
till a late hour at night. At the next religious meeting, this man was pre* 
sent; and. instead of cavillbg, became a teachable listener. He afier- 
wards declared that the Tracts had produced a change in his views, and 
Ihat fav believed everv word the minister uttered. 

The Auxiliary of the South Baptist Church, New-Tork City, reports 
the following instances :— The Qrecd Question ^Snstpered was blessed to 
a hadjf, who was convinced of her sinfuhicfis, but ignorant of the way of 
salvation, and under fearful fbrebodiags of eternal wrath. The Holy 
Spfrit accompanied the reading of the Tract. Her doubts, and fears, 
and agony were removed ; and there is every reason to believe she be- 
came ** a new creature." 

A young woman, when relating her religious experience before the 
church, stated, that the Tract entitled tho Day o/Jadgment was one among 
other means of her conversion. 

A female member of the AuxiiiaT3% who has also recently joined the 
church, dates her first serious impressions from the reading of a Tract 

The Auxiliary in the Methodist Church, Chrysiie-stieet, reports, that 
a young woman was convinced of her lost and undone state by reading 
The Young Cottager. Another voung woman was brought to feel herself 
a sinner and cry for mercy, who continues to give evidence of a real 
change of heart, throu«rh the influence of a Tract ; and a man was con- 
vinced, by an appropriate Tract> of the awful consequences of Lipng, 
• One persoHf tne head of a family, says an Evangelical Cleirgyman of 
Boston, has been examined for admission to our church, and is soon to 
be received as a member, whose attention was first awakened by reading 
TAe Way to be Saved. 

The 8toearer*B Prayer, says a Clergyman in M , Conn, was put 

into the pocket of a profane journeyman carpenter, by a pious appren- 
tice. It was soon observed that he had entirely broken on the baa nabit 
—he became serious, obtained a hope in Christi and joined an Evange- 
lical church. 

In the same town was a journeyman tailor, who was an ^avowed Unl- 
versalist. On the morning of the day of the annual Thanksgiving, a 
pious younff woman, who worked in the same shop, asked him if be should 
attend public worship that day. He replied, "No." <<Will you read 
some Tracts," said she, <' if 1 will put them into your hands ?" He re- 
plied in the affirmative ; and she gave liim the Tracts, To-IXiv,, The 
Danger of Delay ^ and Hopes for Eternity . He became seriously alarmed 
for the welfare of bis soal ; renounced the soul-destroying error by which 
he had deluded himself; professed his faith in Christ, and gives decided 
evidence of real piety. 

The Tract Poor JosephfBzyB the Secretary of an Auxiliary on Long- 
Island, was given by her Physician to a Lady who bad long been siek. 
As she lay upon her bed engaged in reading if^ in great anxiety of mind, 
the words of the Apostle^ " It is a faithful savmg and worthy of all ac- 
ceptation, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners/' arrested 
her attention, and she found joy and peace in believing.-*The Tract, 8in 
no Trijle, was also the means of awakening a young female here to a 
sense of sinfulness. 

At a Tract meeting in the Western District of New-York, says an 
Agent of the Society, a Gentleman rose and saidy with manifest emotion, 
that he had abundant reason to love, and pray, and labor for the Tract 
Society ; for his own brother, once a confirmed injdelf was now a meek 
and faithful follower of the Lamb, through the instrumentality of a Tract 
thoughtlessly thrown upon his chair by one of his children. 



I8£9.] SOCIBTT^S PUBLICATIONS. 7l 

An A; ent of the Society also itated, that) some time since, a ped]ar« 
^i(b a pack on his back, called at the Depository, and selected a quan- 
tity of Tracts, all an Intemperance. On inqair}', it appeared, that the man 
'>&d formerly been intemperate himself; and havmg been reclaimed 
tbr ugh the luflnence of a Tract, had, for several years, improved every 
opportunity of reclaiming others by the same means. 

It was also stated, that a Tract, presented to a Lawyer^ in the County 
of O— ^ — , was blessied to his conversion } and, indirectly f to that of sixty 
others in the neighborhood. 

A man, says an Auxiliary in Chenango Co., New-York^ who for some 
years had been resting for salvation upon the doctrine of Unwersalism, 
<]uarrelling with his Bible, and sometimes almost on the point of buminjg^ 
it, coming in from threshing one day, saw a number of Tracts upon the' 
ehelfover the fire, among which was The Death-Bed of a Free Thinker. 
He took it down and read it Uirough. His mind was distressed about 
two weeks, when he found relief, erected the family altar, and in our so- 
cial prayer-meeting has taken an active part. Now, he thinks, he shall 
never have any thmg more to do in favour of Universalism } thanks God 
that he has a Bible that he can read ; and believes he shall spend the re- 
mainder of his daj's in the service of that gracious Being who did not suf- 
fer him to ^o on to the last, and finally terminate his life as Sir Francis 
Newport did. 

The Female Auxiliary of Lyon*s Farms, N. J. report, that the Friendly 
Visit to the House of Mourning was made the instrument of the conviction 
and hopeful conversion of one individual ; and that to another individual 
the Helps to Self- Examination was especially blessed* 

The Secretary of the Auxiliary in Washiugton City, writes, that one of 
the Tracts circulated by them, has been the means of a remarkable conver- 
sion. 1 cannot, he adds, but hail the recent wonderful improvements in 
^' the press," as a harbinger of increasing ten fold the power of dissemi- 
nating truth. 

The Auxiliary of the Union Theological Seminary, Prince Edward, 
Va., reports one instance of hopeful conversion f through the reading of a 
Tract.; 

A Lady in North Carolina says : One instance I can record, of a family 
deeply infected with infidel sentiments, to whom I sent a number of Tracts. 
The perusal of them shook their principles, and led them to see they were 
building on a wrong foundation* 

I have, for several years, writes a merchant of the same State, bought 
and sold ardent spirits as I have other articles of merchandize; but since 
perusing The Christian Almanac for 1829, 1 have had very serious doubts 
of the lawfulness of the traffic, in a moral point of view ; 1 have resolved 
to abandon it altogether. 

The good eflTects of Tracts in this county, says a gentleman in a desti- 
tute part of Illinois, are very evident. There has been, for some time 
past, a general excitement here on the subject of religion. Numbers 
nave come out on the Lord's side. Among the means used, Tracts ap- 
pear to have been greathr blessed. And what a blessing — while some 
are crying," What shall I do to be saved?*' and others rejoicing in hope, 
and faithful laborers are few^to have Tracts suited to the wants of 
us all! 

An Agent of the Society informs, that Tracts which were extensively 
circulated in a very destitute parish in Connecticut, exerted a manifest 
influence in promoting the revival of religion. One woman ascribed her 
conversion to the Divine blessing on tiie reading of the Conversion of 
President Edtoards ; and her faiibTulness was blessed to the hopeful con- 
version of her husband. 

The Report of the Anxiliarv of Providence, R. I., says : The Super- 
intendent of a Sabbath Scihooi in this town, presented each of ten young 



72 t>XVINE BLEissiire OS Yfi£ [Snn^i 

)ftdies v^ib a copy or Doddridge*s RUi and Progrias rf JUligi^ in the 
Soul, and says there is reason to believe it was the means, under the 
agency of the Holv Spirit, of leading each of them to the SaVioh He 
ialely purchased eleven more for a similar distribution. Who will not go 
and do likewise^ seeing they afe now furnished by the Society at thirty- 
seven and a ball ceuts each? 

A Life Member of this Society, a nntleman of much respectability, 
and actively engaged in promoting the cause of Cbristi informed your 
Secretary, that be ascribed his own conversion to the blessing of God on 
the reading of the same excellent volume. 

We have circulated, says the Secretary of an Auziliaiy in Broome 
<sounty, N. T., about seven thousand pages of Tracts, and have reason to 
iMlieve they have been signally blessed. About one year since, a church 
was formed in this place ; but it consisted of only ten members, and we 
)iad no minister. By the exertions of a few, a Sabbath School had been 
^ened, and Tracts were introduced and extensively circulated by the 
scholars. They were also read in oar meetings. In the month following 
the formation of the church, some indications of a revival of religion ap- 
peared, which were followed by a copious refreshing from the presence 
«f the Lord. ForUf persons have since been added to the church, on the 
profession of their ftnih. Some of them are youth, who it is expected ^ill 
prepare for the ministry. All classes have shared in the Work, from the vi- 
lest profligate to the profound moralist; and from the yootb of twelve to the 
boary sire of sixty. JIdany date their serious trnpressions from the reading 
€f Tracts^ and have been led through their inetrumentfdity^ as they hope^ to 
the Savior, 

Tract blessed to the Mother of a Family. 

A Clergyman in the State of New-Tork, says: I had frequently urged 
fipon the mother of a family in my congregation, the importance of a new 
heart, in order to our acceptance witn God ; but she manifested great 
indifierence to the subject, confidiiug^ in the efficacy of a mere external 
morality. Af\er repeated and inenectual efforts to convince her of the 
deceitful and dangerous ground on which she was resting, I one day 
placed in her hand the Tract, On Keeping the Heart, and left her. From 
this time 1 found her a very attentive hearer of the word of God. Calling 
^n her again a few weeks a'ter, I was received with unusual expressions 
of kindness : they were the anectionate expressions of a new convert 




siner that, I felt that I was vile, and that 1 must have a new heart, or be 
\mdone for ever. Now, through the mercy of God, I hope 1 know what 
it is to have a new heart.'* She has since manifested the character of a 
meek and humble disciple of Christ; and^ to say nothing of the blessing 
slie may yet prove to her husband and nsing family, her example and 
pious exertions, I have reason to believe, have been made instrumental In 
the conversion' of two tfther females in the neighborhood, who are now ex« 
«rting around them the healthful influence of piety. 

Tract blessed to the Father of a Family in New- York City* 

In 

now 
rem 

Bible, ..^ r^ ^ 

for mv visit, and her general deportment confirmed me in the opinioii, 
that she had seen days of prosperity. The father was a day-lat>orer, but 
honest, sober, and industrious. The children were sent to the Sabbath 
STchool ; and, for some time, 1 obscfrved, at ahnDsl every vi^t, aume addi*- 



XB£9.] Ktrv. ELI fiALBWlR. 73 

tion tt tiieii^t)ni«stie oom^iUy and a jjleasing improvement in netttnen 
tad tifBeciion m the cbtldr^n^ Abocrt ibe coikititettt<iBient of l'^, the 
AMMtor's health dedibed i <69cpeMes "wert increased j wid iq teniptele 
ibeir wtetehediiesS^iAc /into' toMu^ed hi» «tmdt#« o/cfte ifram-^Mp; 
and, as ni^t be expected) often persoBalJjr abtuecTdie family which he 
bad already to much iiyured by his base cratri^sation* The little fitrnv 
torejlltey bad eot by honest induairy was tMien from tbem for rent ; and| 
when I left the ci^y the sacceeding April} the femily Were reduced to 
wretchednesss. 1 called to take leave of them, and left for the father, as 
a parting present* The itnoards of Drunkenness. On my return to New- 
iFork, last spring, I ascertained where they had moved, and expected tt> 
iiod a scette of misery. But, on entering the room, t should have thdught 
myself mistaken in the place, had I not seen and recognized my old friends. 
Keatness and comfort characterized the dwelling, and peace ftmiled on 
tivery countenance. It was Saturday eveaini^, and evident t6 me, that 
fbe aacred rest of the Sabbath had been amrcipated in the arrangeneitts 
of the family. The mother discovered my pleasing surprise, aftd ejidMrn* 
ed, '< 0/ ike Tmd'^^ihe Tract*-4he Tract has eel all these nine thmgs! 
My husband never drank after you fave him the Traiet. He seems to be a. 
r^ormed man; and says vie Tract has inade hiin happy ^ and brxn^ht peace 
and plenty into his house,- ' 

C0Nei,U910N» 
Thus have the Committee repoftcl the dealings of God with this So* 
ciety through another year :— results far more cheering and animating tfaaa 
V^ere anticipated b)r the most sanguine of their number at the time of tbe 
Society's formation^ and for which they would never cease, with true hu- 
mility of heart, to give the glory to Him, " who worketh all things ac- 
cording to the cowasclof Ms own will !" To His continued benediction and 
blessing, through the atoning blood of our onee cmcified, but now ascend- 
ed Lord, the Committee would commend the Society, and all its in- 
terests and concerns ; confiding in Him still to crown its efforts with all 
the. success which he sees necessary to bis own glory, to the honor of 
Christ in the sah'ation of men, and to ilih heaven with everlasting songs of 
redeeming love and mercy. 



At the Society's Annvvergaryt Mity 13, 1829. 
Address of Rev. Eli Baldwin, of tbe RBrossfED DtrrcB Catmcu, 

IfEtV-YoHK. 

Mr. Prssident— I move that the Report how read be adopted and 
published under the direction of the Executive Committee. — ^If to teU 
how the smiles of Heaven have beamed and clustered ground an en- 
terprise of human benevolence ; if gratitude 1o Gfod is the noble and 
cardinal duty of the Gospel system ; if to incite our felk>vr-men to 
deeds of ptulaatbropy, piety sund mutual love ; — if these are lauda- 
ble and imperious, then publish to the world the proceedings of your 
Bzecutive Comflaitteeibr the past year. God has evidently blessed you 
with no common nor ordinary blessing ; it has been like <' the dew«f 
Hermoa, and ai (hjB dew ^at descended upon the mountains of Zien." 
He has inclined the hearts of the benevoleat to sustain all your efibrts ; 
and tBis day our hearts born, our souls sweD, with the recttal. The 

7 



74 'KKV' EI«I BALDWU7. [JunC^ 

moral 'condition of man is improred, the glory of God is prt^moted, 
than which, nobler ends tie not within the range of the discursions of 
mind. Doubtless it has been the Spirit of the living God, operating 
upon the minds of the friends of the Redeemer, that has caused them 
to increase your strength, in a six-fold proportion, on the fourth year 
of your existence. And to what other cause can we attribute the faith 
and the zeal of your devoted Committee, who, to aid this sacred ob- 
ject, have, from time to time, assumed, without a murmur^ the per- 
sonal responsibility of from 10,000 to 20,000 dollars. Hence it is, that 
six million Tracts, six million little heralds of truth, have travelled in 
every direction throughout our country, finding their way into those 
remote and sequestered dwellings, whore the praises of Jehovah ne-^ 
ver broke the stillness of the woodland scene, and where the bright 
rays of truth never shed their benignant beams. Publish — tell the 
interesting story in a thousand towns ; and may Heaven bless the good 
tidings, helping many to <* go and do likewise." 

But, Sk, I have one or two reasons in particular, why the Report 
should be published. I wish this Society to go on and prosper, be- 
cause there arc points of moral improvement that cannot be reached 
so happily in any other way. Where ignorance prevails, misrepresen- 
tation easily creates a prejudice against every species of knowledge, 
however advantageous, or sublime. Hence men refuse to believe the 
most important truths, merely because thev are unacquainted with 
their value ; and will not yield to their influence, because they are 
absolutely fortified against instruction. Apply these facts to the Gos* 
pel, and we can at once account for the astonishing circumstance, 
that the messages of Jehovah's mercy are weekly proclaimed in our 
cities and towns, while thronging thousands pass them by, as regard- 
less of their import as of the idle wind. Here then is a case to be 
given up in hopeless despair, were it not that, guided by a long-suf- 
lering and gracious Providence, some faithful servant of the Lord 
carries, to the very door of his dwelling, a Tract, that may at once 
dissipate the darkness of ignorance, disarm prejudice, and direct a 
prodigal to his Father's house. 

Infidelity, connected, as it so frequently is, with talents and science, 
i^ not so much an error of the mind, as a corruption of the heart.; 
hence intelligent men labor by argument to refute their own under- 
standing ; genius is employed to subdue conscience ; and a desire to 
make proselytes is as legitimately the efiect of a bad faith, under the. 
impulse of fear, as it is the generous dictate of a true one, under the 
influence of love. The hopes of piety, in such a case, are necessarily 
limited ; and the Gospel can have little access, where the ear is im- 
bittered against its sound. Even there, however, I have hope from 
the simple and unpretending Tract. It may find its way into the study 
of such a man, and form a part of his toilsome lucubrations. Armed 
by Jehovah, it may subdue his heart, enlighten hir understanding, re- 
form his will, and save his soul! It may point him to the sacred ora- 
cles of God, make him feel their pungent truths, and constrain him to 
profess his faith in a Savior. A Tract may find its way, where the 
herald of the Cross never trod ; and discovering the desolate Chris- 
tian in his lonely habitation, may administer that instruction and com- 
ft»rt which is peculiar to the Gospel. 

The eye wanders with delight over the wide-spread sea-board of 
our country ; and the bosom heaves with praise for the prefiAlonp ^ 



tS29.] EEV. fiLI BALDWIS. 75 

phrine bounty. There the temples of God raise their heaven-direct* 
ing spires ; the shepherds of Israel lead forth their flocks ; and the 
harps of Zion vibrate with pious melody. There the enjoyments of 
the social compact are refined by truth ; devotion b favored with all 
the varieties of form, or shades of doctrine; and the Angel of Mercy 
smiles on the various circles of the church, as so many (amilies of 
God. But this happy state of things has not yet covered the face of 
our nation. The mountain-barrier and the river-flood separate us from 
our fellow-men and fellow-Christians. The forest t<^ waves along 
the valley where your Agents are now employed to spread light, and 
truth, and joy; and the village bell has never yet summoned, fron> 
their scattered tents, the recent adventurers to a western world. 

Benevolent indeed were your Committee, when they ventured to 
assume the responsibility of sending thither six. Agents— Godspeed 
tliem ! — mine eye follows them with deep solicitude]; and now it rests 
upon one, who is, providentially, in the midst of a family trained to 
piety, and formerly enjoying all its privileges. It is not, however, for 
xne to describe the happy recollections, the cordial greetings, the tears 
and the transports, the prayers and the thanks, which make up that 
family scene. Long since had they " hung their harps upon the wil- 
lows" — long since ** bad they wept when they remembered Zion ;'* 
but now a faint emblem of other days returns. Would you, Sir ; would 
this audience deny a repetition of the cordial ? If not, the Angel of 
the Covenant stands ready at the door, to bear on his pinions the bur- 
then of your alms, the token of your love. 

Tracts are admirably adapted to form the youthful mind, and train 
it to godliness ; .they aid in pastoral visitation, by furnishing an ave« 
nue to the heart, such as is seldom met with, even from the heights of 
Zion ; and In this way it is that they are to affect, not only the pre- 
sent generation, but all the future, to an extent that defies the utmost 
power of human calculation. Sir, did Heaven permit you to look into 
the future ; might you, with the wings of an Angel, plant your feet on 
the arch of the rainbow, and thence survey the ages to come; you 
would ascribe, under God, much of the prevalence of morality, of 
the maturity and beauty of religion^ to the labors of this Society — ^to 
the agency o£ Tracts. 

I have one other motive for urging upon you this resolution. The 
labor in which you are engaged is a labor of active benevolence, well 
suited to the anticipation of the second coming of Christ. If at that 
time "aJU shall know him, from the least to the greatest" — it is a work 
to be brought about by means. If " every knee shall bow, and every 
tongue shall confess to God" — this also must be brought about through 
the agency of means. If ''they shall not hurt oor destroy in all his 
holy mountain" — this must equally be effected through the uistrumeo^ 
tality of means. But what means more appropriate than that of which 
we are speaking-— the circulation of Religious Tracts ? Ere that day 
arrives, you and I, Sir, may be gathered to our fathers; but our rest 
will not be less sweet becaupe we have labored in the cause of Millen^ 
uial glory. Happv, thrice happy that man, whom *' his Lord, when 
he cometh, shall find so doing." His toil shall not cost him one tear 
of sorrow in yonder world, where immortality smiles back on tb« 
^riire la all the beauty of eternal morning. 



76 KEV. PAiriEL ▲. CLARK. [JUQC, 

AvOJMCSfl oar Rxv. Das»i. A. Ci^rb; of trie Cpngbsoatiqica^ 
Cbubch, BiHjfiHOToiir, V^bhoht. 

** Mr. FacBiBEirT-4 thank God, Sir, that he Mnt that brother* to look 
at, and petum and (ell us of, that Western Empire. The irapuUe his 
remarks have given, is worth the journey there. I will not say, as 
some hare, that I regfret to speak because one has sat down who was 
eloquent : I speak, though I did not intend t0,for this very reaton. He 
bas given us an eloquent tisibn of the 4,000,000 that n^d your Tracts 
in the Valley of the Mississippi. But, Sir, there is another 4,000,000 
this side the Alleghany, that cad scarcely be considered evangelized. 
The Society in this city have begun to look up such as have here 
found a retreat ; and for their encouragement let me say, that many 
of those who stionld feef their kindness, are the children of prayer. 
Some incident brought them to this city : here they could hide 
from public view, while they departed grossly from the habits in which 
they were reared. When the Sabbath comes, they meet it with no 
expressive welcome. The sound of the church-going bell has no mu- 
sic in it, no tones that chime with the palsied affections of their hearts. 
They have prepared themselves no Sabbath attire, nor pew in the 
sanctuary, nor have any sabbath-keeping associates ; but issue out, 
it may be, to spread moral contagion through the suburbs of your 
city. Those who are employed to look them up and put into Uieir ha- 
bitations your Tracts, have a sweet and honorable employment. They 
are td&ing the gage and dimensions of human misery, degradation 
and contempt, and i e answering most timely the prayers that have 
been lodged for the lost in heaven by a pious parentage. We could 
tell you, Sir, most of us, interesting facts to this point. 

Let rae state one. A man came to this city, some years since, who 
had been educated in a house of prayer. I used to hear his mother 
pray for him. Here he concealed himself from distinct view, formed 
the basest friendships, was employed in shameAil oectt)>ations, and 
has lived, for years, a life of sin, and mnery, and shame. That'mother 
it now in heaven ; but her prayers are to be answered, and in an- 
8W«r to them your Tracts are thrown over hi* threshold. 

And I know another case. A young female, of elevatQd parentage, 
allied herself, in an evil hour, to a youth pf dissipation. He came 
with her to this city, and hid himself in one of its dark lanes, and 
thence issued to glut his appetite and lay waste his character. He 
starved his family, till his wife, with her little ones, were seen 
begging bread ft^m door to door. A consumption carried her to an 
early grave, and scattered her fttmily ; and he, who had vowed te be 
her friend tilt death, was farnished, not long since, a coffin from your 
tdms-house, and now ie with the dead. TOu have, I hope, looked up 
thehr chlMren and placed them in your Sabbath Schools, and given 
them your Tracts, and are thus answering the prayers of a pious 
grand^parent. I had feared that that precious text would ^1, " I hove 
been younr, and now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous for- 
saken, nor his seed begging bread.'* But though the covenant had 
seemed to be broken, and one generation was lost, God has again re- 
membered it, and sent your Agents to ratify it, and the elect may yet 
be found in the Kne of that mother's race. 

But not merely in this city are to be ibiHid the uiierangeliKed. You 
have probably your sixty or eighty thousand that receive no help 

•Rov. Mr. Cornelius, 



U£9.] imv. IT. S. s. BEUAJS. 7-7 

from the sanctaary, and you will supply them with your leaves of sal» 
vation. And a aimtlar supply is needed throughout all the better por* 
tions of Christendom. From the one half to the two thirds of the popu- 
lation of most of our country parishes are wholly destitute of the 
Gospel. Seldom, if ever, are they associated with the Sabbath assem^ 
bly ; and it may be, have no Bible in their house, and are forming 
their character more from the pages of some vicious almanac, than 
from the word of the Lord. These should all have your cioimbs of 
spiritual bread, if perchance they may be sustained in their famine, 
till some incident of Providence may bring I hem and seat them at 
the table of the Lord, where they may be nourished to everlasting life. 

Send your Tracts abroad. Sir, as the leaves of that tree which will 
heal the nations. Load with them every boat on your inland waters, 
and every coaster on your shores, and every baggage-wagon that 
crosses the Alleghany. Freight with them the wings of that Angel 
that is flying through the midst of heaven, having the everlasting 
Gospel to publish " to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and 
people." But let that Angel drop some few of the leaves of salvation 
among every cluster of benighted beings that are hidden among the 
churches of favored Christendom! 

We cannot suffer them to perish. They are under our very eye, un- 
der the eves of our sanctuaries, they lie fainting at the head of all our 
streets. We shall be accountable for their blood. They will sink, if 
thev are allowed to peri.sh, to a deeper and darker hell than the more 
distant heathen. They will rot by our very side, and rise with us when 
we rise and go to meet the Lord in the air. And what can we then 
say to them, when they ask us, why we did. not remember them in 
our distributions of the bread of heaven. Sir, they must be earlyi sup* 
plied. And these systematic efforts, that throw to them regularly some 
page of heavenly truth, is the very means of g^ace they need. Scat* 
ter them, and you will see the fruit. I knew a young man, five-and* 
thirty years since, who fell in with one of your Tracts, then printed 
in another form. He had neglected the Savior, and pressed through 
ten thousand prayers to reach perdition. But that Tract, the Death of 
Lord Newport, arrested him. He went away to pray, and .found np 
peace till he hoped that he found it in Jesus Christ. He is now pre- 
sent, a minister of the everlasting Gospel, and is feasting hi» soul tA- 
day on the life-promising success of your Institution. 



Address or Rxr. Nathav S. S. BEifAir> op tbb Pbbsbvtxrian 

Church, Trov, N. T. 

Mr. Prbsidzitt — I rise, Sir, (o second the reselntion now before yutt> 
and to afford it my feeble support. But suppori^it does noty and cannot 
need. As it meets the eye, or falls upon the ear, it must of itself rivet 
conviction upon the understanding, and seiae upon the great main^springs 
of action in the heart. 

With regard to the first part of this resolution, ** That the meeiif\e 
rejoice tn the sysUmatie efforts made in the city ofjfew York and elsewherfu 
statedly to supply with Tracts every fanUly that u toiUing to receive them^^* 
there can be no division of sentiment ; there cannot exist a discordant 
feeling. This, Sir^ is one of the happiest schemes ever devised by the 
fiends of your Society. It stamps a new character upon the Institution 
itself; it imparts a new and vig^orous muscle to its arm. As it is carried 
Itato execution, a purer light will shine, and a holier fire will bum. I'l 
Has illfttfdy tteen mttti « appears from your Roporl) (htt OQ energy ttii« 

7* _# 



78 RET. Zr* S. S. BEHAll. (Jlltie. 

thotifrht of, which has been sTnmheriog* Tn them Ktlle 8g*«Bt«, hat been 
developed iir the majestic nereaieBts ef this anderiakmg Aad, naaid- 
tng' npoft th» eleva'tieii which wa are iwrautted ibis day to dirab, and 
easliag our eyes arouad apon this gr«at cit3% and upon elher places 
where the same work has. heeB prosecuted) whal tongue^ Sir, cmi* ho 
chaiaed iosileace; what heart can beat with a feeble^ or intermitting^ 
Fttlse ? Wby> Sii , if wc were to hold our peace, the very paving-stonoi 
iUk y«Hir streeu ** would try wt*" 

The facts this day disclosed^ in relation to this subject, speak volumes 
in Cavor of a systenialic and tliorough ptan in th& disirix^uUon of Re> 
Tu'ious Tracts. This enterprise has created a new band of Domestic 
jmssionaries ; who, by the help ofyoor Society, without encroaching upon 
the rights of the Ministry, are preaching tlie Gospel te thousands of our 
dyins race, i mean, Sir, the DieTRiBUTUia of these Tracts, Having 
fifgh $ their tampa at the fire whieh bum* upon the altar, they have 0oae 
aooadd^ pouring the sfdeadors of evangvlical: truth rqwn tfaeae shaJowa 
of death which have settled down upon oar lost world. Ueroa Sir, is that 
meccy whieh ia *^ fwtos Meved ;" 

"■ It UoieUfe him that gives, and bim tbat takes." 

The recapiien which these dislrtbuters and their Tracts ha^'e met) a^ 
fords another testimony that God is ready to biets, when his people are 
wiUiag t»ac& The amount of good which has been secured, we shall be 
able to conuHite only at tbe iudgment bar, and when the records of this 
wocid shall be read in the clearer light of another. We shall then, and 
therC) more folly learn what influence this truth has excited upon human, 
hearts, and life, and destiny ; what weeping saints have been comforted, 
what careless sinners alarmed and saved. Oh ! Sir. I have no donbt 
but Uod*8 angels have followed the footsteps of these cttstributers,as they 
have ^one about the city, in the proseeotion of this holy work ; and my 
heart IS with them; and every heart in thia meetiaff is- with them. 

True, Sir) we have heard of the refection of a Tract here and there ', 
and we have listened to the low murmur and the distant echo of oppo* 
siHen to> this thorough and vigorous scheme. But there is no cause of 
dLarm. Move onward, and the God of victory ia with you. But let no 
man. Sir, whether friend or foe of this undertaking, cherish the thought 
for one moment, thai an £vangelical Tract creates the evil in question. 
It carries with it onhr the strong powers ofexcilement, Your Tract, Sir, 
isIthuriePs spear — of" celestial temper"— the touch of whose point arouses 
the concealed and lurkinp^ fiend. It forces moral evil, whatever its garb 
or disguises, to reaume its own shape, and to take back and wear its 
own complexion. Opposition from this quarter we are to regard only as 
Another testimony that the work is of God, and that it ought to be urged 
forward by tbe untiring energies of the Church. 

But I dare not pause, in thMp!ace,<to rejoice in what has already been 
done. I*fo, Sir. There is an object> before na, which is paramount ; it 
ought to abaorb tha deep feelings of every heart ; it ouehi to enchain the 
spmt of everv child of God, till it is actuaUjr accomplished* And do you 
ask what it is ? The remaining part of ibis resolution shall answer the 
inquiry. It ia this — Thai tbe taeetmg " think it highh/ importofU UuU 9 
similar plan of cmeration sJwuld be adopted througliotU tlte tniire populiUifi/f 
of these United Stoies.'' 

Carry the letter and spirit of tbia resolalion into effect, and conse- 
quences, full of life, and happiness, and heaven must follow. Thousands 
of both sexes would b» reouured in the work of distribution, and the first 
blessing would Kght upon them. They would beeome* from the \wy na- 
turn and habits of tneir en4>loym«u, more elevated and more active 
Christiaoa. While imparting to others, their own resources would muiti* 
iply, and their own cup would run over« The beariaga of this enterprise 
upon vitail v^igion viA the slQivatioii cf iKMfls, w^toQ okviout to require 






I8S^9.] Bur. K« S. 9. BEMAS* 79 

ladlndoaY Ulustration. Let *^ifac •ntirv p^i^latiaftof theie UaiMdStfttes" 
rettive a cooauai supptr of Hicb Traete a* iomft fnm yoor Depoutory, 
beariagr " grtce and tratb" opon Uiair wings as tbejr fly abraad, and ihe 
Chufeh would mob put on her beaotifol garments ; and converts would 
soon be moltipliad as drops of iba nornii^ dew. 

ttat, waving these ceosideraiso»9 there ia one ouot^ Sir, whictr I must 
here lake the liberty to press. It is this : Someibio^ more pompii and 
mope efficient must be done, to furnish tbiacoaniry with religiovs iesinxe- 
tioir, w we cannot long exist as a natioil. This cnavietion ought to fasten 
Bpen every oonecience, and earry home athrlHiag interest to tho centre 
of every heart. Oiur poptti«Kion.i9 nattiplyjngr ns by megic^ or by mira- 
cle ; and we outstripy every year, the means of correct spiritual trainrag* 
A torrent oC evils is poariog ia< upon us, which threatens to s«weep away 
the strong props «f national existence. Ifttempevaacet Sabbath*bieaking, 
aad infidelity, ace *' three unclean spirits,*' which are scouring the land« 
and beating' op for volunteers m the wovfc of moral and political desola" 
^on. These and other evils most be< arsested, or this land of our naiivi* 
ly, this blessed house of oar social andrdigioosendearmeiHsy instead of 
beiag the •S^taoOianrofeaaal rights and human freedom, wiJt sooa become 
Mieir Sspvlghre : Withoot public vhrfoe, your government will fall,— 
and take away evangelical troth, and both government and virtue are 
without a basis. In Uiese fearlU circnmstaaoesy Sir, what shaU be done; 
what eon be done ? I haily in this resolatieo, th« hart>iogerof good ; I see 
the star of pronMse; 1 seize upon the anchor of hope; 1 trace the chart of 
eur national salvation. Here, Sir, is just such apian as our exi^ncies 
require— a plan that will give the Gospel to '* the entire populatfion" of 
this country. Every other great charity is limited in its action, or, at 
least, retarded in its movements,, by ph^'sical impossibilities. But not so 
with this. Undertake to give a preached Gospel to <* the entire pojmlation 
of these United States" the ensuing year, and you wQUId utterly fail, for 
the want of MinUters. Instead of throating in the sickle, and reaping an 
immediate harvest, a tenth part of ** the fallow ground'* could not be 
thrown into furrows. Let the Education Society undertake* in seven 
years, to train a phalanx adequate to plant batteries, and to put to flight, 
or beat down, every spiritual foe; ana ibey might drain our Churches of 
youn^ men, and collect together the gleanings of every precious revival ; 
and. instead of an amiyt they would hardly find men enough for Captains 
in the service. Even the National Bible Society would necessarily expe- 
rience some delay, before they could command and wield the entire means 
to place tlie Word of God in every family in the land. But this scheme 
may go into immediate and unobstructed execution. I9ot a straw Ties in 
the way. Do not understand me, as decrying these kindred fns^tutions. 
No, Sir. My plan is this — adopt this resolution, and send forward these 
light troops to anuoy the enemy, till your strong m«n, with their heavy 
armor and their munitions of war, can enter the field, and perfect ana 
secure the victory. Only let the plan contemplated in the motion now 
before vou go into eflbct, from the Canadas to the Southern Gulf, from 
our Atlantic borders to the Kockv Mountains, and it would require anew 
dialect to express the delightful consci^ences. Tlie scene that would 
smile around us, would be altogether unearthly in its character. It would 
need an angeVs pencil, and heaven's coloring, to make it glow upon the 
canvass. U would demand a seraph^s lyre to tell its wonders. On ! Sir, 
if it were necessary, there would again be silence in heaven; its inhabi- 
tants would pause from their harp« and their hatlelujabs, to lend an ear to 
the sonffs which would go up from our rejoicing world, were this plan 
adopted and executed '* throughout the entire population of these United 
States." 

Time, I perceive, is on the wing, and I must hasten to a dose. Bui 
Itow can I sil do\>ii4 Sir^ fUl iho<{Be8th>a ii here sculed^ whether tbu na* 



^0 &EV. CLON OALUSHA. [Jttlie« 

iion is to be saved or lott ; whether it shall continue a naiioo offreemeni 
or become, in the first instance, a nation of insurgents^ nnd sabseouently a 
nation of slaves ? This appeal, Sir, is not enthusiasm. The problem must 
soon be solved. It seems even now tu be referred to this meeting for 
ultimate solution. Yes, Sir, this great nation, with its accumulating 
millions, is now suspended before your e^es ; it hangs here in doubtful 
and trembling balance^i ; and this resolution, and the acts that shall rest 
upon it» may turn the scale for weal or wo ! But something must he, 
done as well as devised* Execution must tread in the very footsteps of 
purpose. Annual Resolutions and Annual Speeches will never save 
this country. No, Sir. If this resolution, which I hold in my hand---after 
its momentary life of sunshine, on this public anniversarj^ — is to lie and 
slumber in the volume of your Annual Report s if it is there to moulder in 
the marble solitude of its tomb ; belter. Sir, if it '< had never been born.'-' 
Its biography, when it shall be written and published, will rise up in 
judgment and condemn us. The spirit of this resolution ought to fill ten 
thousand hearts, and move, in prompt and willing execution, twice tea 
thousand hands ; and the work can be done : must be done ; %oUl be done. 
And then. Sir, vou have not lived ia vain. This nation is saved ; this 
broad world is blessed ; and these approving heavens are glad. Yes, Sir, a 
multitude of deathless souls, which no man can number, are plucked away 
from the burnings of an eternal hell ! Oh ! Sir, this is the plan. Blessed 
is the heart that conceived it, and blessed is the hand that shall drain its 
last energy to execute it. I have never seen it before. I have never 
been overwhelmed with the rapturous conviction till this moment. This, 
Sir, is the strong lever that is to raise the world } this is the golden chain 
that will bang the earth on heaven. 



Address of Rev. Eloh Galusha, op the Baptist Churcu, 

Whitebboroiigh, N. Y. 

Mr. President— I rise to oflTer, for the consideration of this Meelingi 
the following resolution—'* Resolved, that this meeting rejoice that some 
aid has been extended by this Society, the past year, to the suffering GreekSj 
and the millions of perishing heathen ; and we pray Grod to enable the So- 
ciety greatly to extend this branch of its operations.'* And permit me to 
eay, Sir, we have just occasion to rejoice, that this Society, by commit- 
ting a portion of its charities to the distribution of other hands, has proved 
itself an affectionate and unsuspicious member in that lovely family of 
kindred Institutions, which has been produced by the kindly spirit of this 
wonderful age. In such a brotherhood of benevolence, how delightful is 
harmony, sympathy, and reciprocity !-^It is an additional soorce of joy, 
that by applying apart of its funds to the- relief of foreign sufferings, the 
Socicur has developed a noble trait in its infant character, which is mdica- 
tive of the dignity and glory of its future manhood. It has virtually said, 
the field of its operations is the world. It must be grateful to every feeling 
heart, that, while the numerous states and territories embraced in our fe- 
deral compact, while British America, the Southern Republics, the Islands 
of the Pacific, the Atlantic and the Indian Ocean, have shared in your 
beneficence ; Greece — bleeding, agonizing Greece — has come uptoremem* 
brance before you. Over her sufTeriogs and her interests, ever^ generous 
soul broods witu unntterable tenderness and solicitude. And while the Sa- 
maritan band of American charity has poured the oil and wine into the 
wounded bodies of her mangled populace, and clothed their withering 
limbs, it has been yours, with a softer hand, to pour the precious cordiars 
of the Gospel into the wounded soul, and wrap the ' unclad spirit in the 
OPbes of the Savior's righteousness. 

It affords me pleasure to notice, that you have heard the unceasing anti 
Heart-rejuBng graoss of ni*fated j^riea^Africa) Co whom we ewe ten 



%BS^9.] 



HEY. SLOn QAtVBUA. 81 



tboii4«»d ud«m<^w» can aever ttone Tor ih« mtaeriei wUh which we have 
lUBictgd her. Bui it hat bec«ne ywir deUchted Mnp)nv»io aiHriy the Balm 
of GUead to the tacerited aod anguiibea boaem of ner injured tons. It 
!• A>iidljr to be hoped that aoolher NaAioual lofltitutioo, hy its beaevoleot 
el!brts, will spreaa over that vast couotry r population speaking our own 
language* ana teaching it to the millioas of aatives They will thus furnish 
the greatest faGUitles for the exteaiion of your operatioas ia that impor*' 
tant field of labor. 
Burmah-^} rejeiee to say, benighted Burmab has not escaped your 




highest cultivation) possessed of the keenest penetrationi yet enveloped ia 
the deep and sullen gloom of moral night. But a star of hope arises, the Bur« 
mans have a written language. It has bi^en conaucred by our Missionaries. 
The translation of the NewTestament iafinishea, and that of the Old near- 
ly eompleled. Tracts have beea distributed, schools -established, zayats 
erected, the Gosfxsl preached, aad soulaoeo verted. Already about 60 have 
joined the sacramental host, and united with ransomed millioos in swell- 
inff the anthem of praise to the Savior of the world. 

rraets have been blessed to the salvation of Burmaos. They have led 
the reailer to inquire (or the teachers, whose instructions have pointed out 
to them the way of life. Allow me to mention a single case, m which a 
Tract appears to have been the sole instrument of conversion- An interest- 
ing individual presented himself and solicited baptism. Ue was rejectedi 
from the consideration that he had never been seen at the savats, and was 
entirely unknown to all the Missionaries. But on the renewaiof his solici- 
tatiojDS, and on thorough examination, it was found that he had a coirect 
knowledge of the leadior doctrines of the Qospel, had imbibed its spirit, 
renounced the claims of Uaudama» and become an humble follower of the 
Lord Jesus Christ. And this was i^e effect of a single Trad. How accu- 
rate the judgment which formed it, and how signal the blesung that crowa- 
ed it '. 

Allow me here. Sir, to say a word of the Karens, whose history is not 
3*et before the public. They are a numerous race, inhabiting the mountains 
and vallies of Burmah^ Pega, Aaracoo and Siam. They Uve in the most 




tation to inquire of him about the true God, and a much revered book, 
whose unknown pages they hod fin* twelve years kept ia sacred deposit, 
and to which they had been taught to pay divine adoratioa. According ta 
the Misiiionarv's advice, a company of J^arons, after three days* journey, 
reached the Missioa House The two most interesting parsers among them 
were a chief, of mudi native tatont, and a soldier, who had received the 
venerated book Iroro a Mussulman Joger. The chief paoted for know- 
ledge, and while the bright fire of hfs rude intellect fla.shed through the 
darkness which enveloped his untutored soul, lie exclaimed, " Give us 
books ! give us books in our own laaguago L Then all the Karens will learn 
to read. We want to knew the true God. We have been lying ia toul 
darkness. The Karaa's mind is like hie nativa jungle." The old soreerer 
stood up before the Misstonary, while at bis feet was a pitched basket of 
reeds containing the sacred deposit,, wrapped in many saeeeesiv« folds 
of muslin. ** Show me the hook," said the Missionary; « I will tell you 
whether it be good or bad. " Att wa» sUeat as death, while tlie venerable old 
nM uaoovared the precious- vehMuu ^^ presented it with the most pro- 
fouud sttlemaity^-ljo, it was as eld Sngtiak Pf ayer Book ! '< It ia a good 
hook/' said the Misstouary. <^It teaehes thai there is a God in heaven, 
whom akme weshoold worshf^ Yb« haveheea ignoraatly worship^ag'ifae 
book. I will teach yimlowobUp the CM whom the book r«Tm«** fhe 



Z% Asy. ELON OALUABA. [Jiloe^ 

eye ot every Karen beamed with joy. They tarned two days listening: to 
religions instnictioDS, with the deepest internt. On leaving^, the conjurer 
resumed his jog[er dresS) and fantastic airs. He was informed that) if lie 
would be a disciple of Christ, he must lay aside all his former habits and 
airs. '* If," said he, *^ this dress is not pleasing to Qod» I am ready to send 
it afloat on yonder river." He instantly disrobed himself, put on nil com- 
mon dress, and resigned. his cudgel, which hkd been for years the badge 
of his authority. At their departure, they exclaimed, '* We will no loneer 
worship any but the true God, and Jesus Christ his Son !" Here, Sir. oy 
co-operating in the distribution of Tracts, you may impart to thousands of 
poor Karens, and millions of the wretched Burmans, the bread of eternal life. 
Other extensive fields abroad, lie open to your view, and imperiously de- 
mand your culture. Let us feel our obligation to the heathen. Did our Sa* 
vjor sanction the conduct of the shepherd in leaving the ninety and nine of 
his flock in the wilderne!«) to seek the solitary sheep that strayed upon the 
mountains ? shall we not, then, where the proportion is reversed, and en* 
Urged, (without abandoning those that are with us,) seek the 99-yea, the 99 
hundred— the 99 thousand— the 99 million— and I might almost say, the 999 
million, who are wandering npon the mountains, or perishing in the vallies ** 

[Rev. Mr. G. urged the accompanying of faithful eSbrts for the Heathen by 
prayer, and the adaptedncss of Tracts to arrest their attention.] 

Let them, then, go forth among the benighted nations, to usher in the 
Bible's broad and bright effulgence. A Pagan world lies buried in the 
shades of a dismal night. As we cannot, at once, pour upon it the full 
splendor of a spiritual dayy let us streak its eastern horizon with rays of 
everlasting light. 

I close, Sir, by expressing a desire, that the growth of this Society may 
be in proportion to the freraom of our civil Institutions, the enterprismg 
spirit of our citizens, and the ample means which a bounteous God has 
given us. And Heaven grant that the strength and usefulness of this Na- 
tional Institution may well compare with the stateliness of our forests, the 
majesty of our rivers, the loftiness of our heaven-invading mountains, and 
the spaciousness of our ocean-lakes ! 

Perhaps^ Sir, as to my manner, T shall be chai^od with too much excite- 
ment.^ Be It so. But to be lukewarm on such an occasion, is crime. To he 
cold, is unpardonable ! Could T do such violence to my nature as to be un- 
moved on thi* jovoii.4 anniversary. Gabriel • who hovftra over tbia aa««mbljr 
with ineflable delight, would smite me with his chiding wings, and bid m^ 
wake for shame ! I submit the resolution. 

We have not yet been able to obtain a copy of the other Addresses delivered at 
fhe Society's anniversary. 



• ' 



Atoard of Premium for the best ten Handbill Tracts. 

The Publishing Committee of the American Tract Society announce that there 
were submitted to them thirty-five sets of manuscript handbill Tracts, comprising 
from two to twenty Tracts in each set, which were all carefully examined. The 
Committee having selected the ten which they considered best; on opening the 
envelopes which accompanied them, the authors were found to be as follows : viz. 

Six Tracts, entitled, "The Bible no cheat," "I hope to be Saved," <" A Strange 
Thing,'* *' Gk>d is Merciful," " To Groeers and Retailers of Ardent Spirits," and 
*' Reasons for Total Abstinence from Ardent Spirits," were written by Rev. Joseph 
S. Christmas, late of Montreal. One Tracts " An Appeal," by Rev. William S, 
Plumer, of North-Carolina. One do. " Thinn to think on," by John O. Wilson, 
Middletown, Newcastle County, Delaware. One do. " Set down that Glass," by A. 
Van Dyck, Coxsackie, New-York. One do. "The Worth of the Soul," by Rev. 
N. S. S. Beman, Troy, New- York. To these gentlemen the premium of fifty doUaru 
is awarded in the proportion of five dollars fbr eaeh Tract. - The Tracts will forth- 
with be stereotyped and published. The Committee deem it their dut^ also to 
express their opinion that a very ctmsiderable number ^ the Tracts received, ex- 
clusive of the ten whose titles are given above, merit publication. 

irctO'York, M«f, 1889. JAMES MILNOR, OHairmm. 



trtti—JbeStcttBtttrom April IE lo May I, m amitud In IhttUit, taigv: 
ntni>n1«t2ed in iiw Pannh Aqmiul Hflpon. 

FROM ADXILIAHV TRACT 

VGR^BqillDEIon, Am. Dcp., John WlckwiK, Bee 
a.ISl.— KeBdort, B.S.C(.lioDi«,Sm. . 
C0HM^Bn)aifield,ReT,Abnerl9niiiil*f!*,Tr. . 



nddteuwB.Oen. O.WbHIICKy.Ac. '■ 

Kn Haini, Fm. Hn. HenrMU fi WhiiiK;, Tr. 

Htw PreUon, LHcMlald Co. Buawl Ar(rUl,Tr. . 



RoTliniT. Bew. FoBdte Hmi 
8>U>lH[;r< I*' Norton, Tr, 
ShnMi, C. F. 8«lrii»cl, !: 
Sottib BriulD, Fcm. Mlti 1 
SootlibdiT, Rrr. TlHnosi I 
W.rTHi,R"H.T«kottP 



Ameniafsnutli, DutckeH Co. Bo. 
UilnhridH, Ftm. Mri. Ojnthia HuDET, Bec. 
Bedrord, Fem. Un-SuHi & NIcbob, Tr. 

OimruUrB, Frm. Hn. Ellu UoMieU. Sec 






WalloD. Del. Co. Fan. Hln Runih N. Bcjmonr, 
Wiletlon, (JeflbnoB Co. An.) Ell FuHelL Tr. 
N. jeiL— Lower FrreboM, l>r. imns Eneljib, Sec. 
Nmnrk, Fan. Mill Hula L De^ Sr. 
nwaiBrlnvn, Norlta Drucb, Uonin V/yckoB, See. 
VKKS^M-aoinitltbatg, ftet. H. Augwiu Irvttt. Btt 
raUdelpUa nisnch, George W. BUgfat. Sec . 
MD~wW«iterCo. Fern. )ll>i Marin E. Btedell, Sec 
VIS. cut.— WnUacBill Cllr, Jobn Kennedf, Tr. 
VIR^FlKHIIa, Bautoun Co. William Panon, Ti. 
\. CAB^IllHilxiTu>, Fen. Hn. H. a. Nub, A?. 
So]trtaDy,Mlel>»l8rawi>,1V. ' . 

& FLOltII'A^^I.AuniUiie,ElluB.GBnId,Sec. 
TENN.— Kiiinpo>I<BA«tOleiBi,BK . . 

KEN.-LnbuiOB, Fim. LUba Btepbeu, Jig. . 

Hldrnr, (LItlBCMai aod CaldwM Co. Am.] Benl. G. Rice. Sec 



KECEIFTS. 



Cincinnati. Henry B.Fonk,Tr. • ^«* , -^ • 
Warren, (Tnialraal<3o*Aux.)01>srlesC.llftddMk,Tr. . 

do. by their Auxiliaries, 

MO.— Franklin Auz. Dep. Rev. WilTiam P. Cochran, Ag. 
St. Louis, (Mo. & Ul. Branch>) W. S. Olnuted, Tr. 

SOCIKTIfiS NCrr AtJXltlART. 
N. YORK.— Now Utrecht, L. L Fem. Bib. Miss, k Tr. Soc. Mrs. 

Barrier, Tr. •«•„,; .j ** 

Tag bconids, Cotombia Co, Rev. H. Vedder, Aff. . 

Xraets boM at the Depository to individuals, . 4 



Far Tr. 
360 
^4 72 

21 
276 


14 78 


152 96 
153 98 





10 00 
2dO<H} 



Diretftorsfor Life. 

y. YORK.— Canaan, Rev. Axariali 

Clark, by hlsCh. and Con. (in port 

of$Sa) . . _ . . 
N. York City, Arthnr Tappan, 
Members for life, 
MASS.— Bidton, Mrs. S. V. S. WU. _ 

der ^ ' r^^ 

Middlefiekl, Mrs. Mary E. Mack, 

forTracts in valley of Mississippi, 20 Ou 
PhiUlpstown, Rev. Joseph Chicker- 

iafrrCinfuUoftaO,). . . .10 00 
West6eld, Mrs. Emma Clark. . 20 00 
CONN.— Oomwall, Miss Eunice 

Birdseyc, . . . 20 00 
Mrs. Martha C. Rouse, by Mr. 
Gttstavtts Rouse, . 20 00 

Bartrord, Mrs. Beulah E. Goodwin, 

for valley of Mississippi, . .20 00 
Jewett City,Dea. Bte. Johnson, (in 

part of $200 • • . 2 00 

Daniel Wight, . . . . 20 00 
Lisbon, Mr. Silas Read, (in part of 

$S0,> 4 00 

d0. Hr8.AlkreSafford, do. 10 00 
Miiford, Rev. Asa M. Train, by 



Ladies, 



Kew-Yoik CiQr, Capt. Adam Knot, 20 00 
John Mason, Esq. . . 30 00 

South Kortrlgbttftev, Robert For- 
rest, SO 00 

WiBdham, Greene Ck». Rev. C. H. 
Goodrich, by tadie& . . 2D 00 

tOU«— Baton Rottfe,Mn. Peaehype 
Dorrance, faiy Fem. A. t. 8. . 30 09 

TENN.— Jonesborough, Rev. L. (3. 
BeQ, by Ladies, . . . 20 OQ 

Jiimual T^kmbers and Subseribers% 

R.ISL.— Providence, Col. Alexan- 
der Jones, . « . . 2 OD 

CONN.-~GreeDvricb, Miss Laura 
How, 2 00 

Ncurwicli, Miss Nancy Fanning. 3 OB 

». YORX.«^New- York City, Tat- 
belJessiq), . . . 2 00 

PhiUlpibai^, Orange Co. Miss Jolia 
Ann Riley, • . . l «l!p 

Othxr DoToHon^, 

OONN.— Lisbon, Thomas Bishop, 
|t, Henry Maiden, ^1, A. Tracy, 
50 c. Marthi Warren, fl, 

Pktinfteld, Hiraxfi A. Tracy, 



Piainfield, Mrs- Amaryllis Fowler, 
(iapartof$2a) . . . .5 00 

Warren, Tertins Reynolds, by his 
father, Jonathan Reynolds, (in 
part of 920.) . . .5 00 

N. YORK.— Bakibridge,Mr. Jabez 
S. Fitcb, 20 00 

Bedford, Rev. Ezra Fountain, by 



Fem. A* T. S.and Indiv. 



20 OQ Warren, Bundiy Individuals, 



650 
500 

e ^ 
fiOd 



Waahiiigfo«»C<)l. Perry Avertll, 
WeSI Stafford, collected at Month- 

fer Concert, for Val. Miss. 55 

N. YORK^Brooklys, L. L a Lady, 

by A. YaDSiddereo, £s<|. . 20 00 

Greeudetd, aa a««<d Lady, . 1 00 

New-York City, Friend to Redeem- 

er'sCatise, byaev. A. Peters, 80 00 



Blooming Grove, Mrs. Frances 
Howell, (In pert of $20,) . 10 00 



. 20 00 do. Unknown Friend, by J. P. j^a 



BridgeSiampton, L. T. Rev. Amzi 
Francis, (in part of $90,) 

Chester, Orange Co. Rev. Daniel 
Crane, bybl" Ch. and Cong, (in 
part of $900 . . . . 

Durharo, Greene Co. Mrs. Booth, 



10 00 WtodlMB, Greene Co. Ladies, 



3 20 Sprbw field, collected in a School, 
PEN If .— CaiM-aster Co. Fem. Friaai 
(in mirt of $2(L) for Val. Miss. ' 10 00 Mooiresis Walter Fetter, for Tr. in 



do. Stephen Tibbals, Jun. (in full 
of $2(V) 10 00 

^JlranviUe, Washington Co. Mrs. Sa- 
rah II. Savage, by Fem. A. T. S. 

. (iiipartof$S),) . . .13 00 

Livonia, Livingston Co. Rev. Jere 
roiah Stow, by Fem. A. T. S. 20 00 

New-York City, George Kinnie, 
Esq. by Messrs. Lang, Turner, 
kCo SO 00 



ven, , • « . 

Salem, a Friend, « 
Sherburne, Mrs. R. OopelMd, 



. 10 00 

12 

1 00 

6 00 



N. JER.— HarBngeB, the Misfies 

Skltlmaas, . . 2 00 

Sprbw field, collected in a School, 45 
PENN .— CaiM-asterCo. Fem. Friaad, 4 59 



VaLMItfB. . . 1 00 
TUU-A Friend, for Tracts in VaL 
Miss. dOO 

The above list contains desaiiotts-^ 
For Tracts tot ValL of Mlssissipipi, $56 53 

Whole Bnah of Donat. #1 ,025 50 

Recsfftr Tk»etssold, gStfia^ 68 

Tottlj — — »f?jOT$2^ 



THE AMERICAN 
c»L.iv. ruvr, 1839. NO.' 



TRACTS TO EVERY FAMILY 

WHICH 13 WILLING TO BECEfTE THEM. 

Had not God, in hii proTidence, braogfal before the miadi of Chria- 
tiani Ibe duly of ■ lyitematic diitribution of Tract! to all nho are 
willing to receive then], it might have been eaiy to laliirj comcience, 
whil« the duly WHi neglected ; but with the light reipecting the dalj 
hu come ilio the obligation to perform it, and nehher the one dot 
tba other can noiT beeraded. The Committee of the Americui Trad 
Sociely, in their Annual Report, have urged thii thoroogh method of 
diittibutioD by the moit coniincing coniideratloni ; the Brunch Tract 
Ssaietiei in Boiton and Philadelphia haTe unBDimpmly tanclioned It 
ID ipirited reiolutioni, and, lo Ihr ■> thu method ii known, it mani- 
feiily cemineDdi itaclflB the cordial approbation ofall the people of 
God. 

Toi. IV. 8 [Whoii Ho. 43l 



86 



TRACTS TO EVE&T TAIUIT. [^U^^* 



The plan ii simply to dittde any given portion of the country into 
coBTenient districts, and, at a meeting of active friends of the cause, 
assign each district to some individual, male or female, who will per- 
sonally and statedly visit every dwelling, present a Tract to each fa- 
mily, explain the method and design of the distribution, and engage, 
as far as circumstances permit, in personal religious conversation. A 
sketch of the plan, as adopted, for four successive months, through- 
out the City of New-Ywrk, by the New-Yorit City Tract Society, is 
presented- mndi more in detail in a circular issued by. that Society, 
and also in the Appendix to the Annual Report of the Parent Institu- 
tion, and in the Tract Magaatne for June and July. 

It has been eonstdeved an essential item .of the plan, to s«l«ct the 
same Tract Ibr distribution each month, throughout the whole dty, 
ordering a sufficient quantity of each Tract beforehand from the Pa- 
rent pi0ltiititffr. The Institution and Observance of the Sabbath was 
sel^<^i0^'f^ March, Kittredge on Intemperance for April, the Dairy- 
map V^I^iiughter for May, the Importance of Consideration Yor June, 
QuelH:K not the Spirit for July, Temper is Every Thing for August, 
Sei^^chethe Scriptures for September, and Do you want a Friend? 
for ipetolk^. Thi* measure being adopted, the distribution may be 
long-'COiitliiujed, with assurance that the same Tract is not twice pre- 
senfiied^o iStai family. Some of the encouraging facts, which have oc- 
curfttd in these distributions, we shall here add, after adverting to a 
few Cf^Htdi^titlons dearly urging the duty; for on this subject we 
feel thai Jwe can never be silent, till the whole Christian comttunity 
are awake to its importance, and the work is carried into active and 
thorough execution throughout all our boundaries. 

Motives for adopting the Plan proposed. 

1. Theie is a single feature of the plan which must bind it for ever 
to the affections of the people of God: it opens before them a way of 
directly enlargingt by their oton personal ^orts, under the divine 
blessing, the boundaries qfthe Redeemer's kingdom, and extending it 
into the territory of the graftd adversary of souls. The Apostle 
spoke with Christian triumph of building ** not upon another man's 
foundation'' — of carrying the blessed tidings of salvation where, but 
for him the great enemy might have held undisturbed dominion— 
and in this simple and delightful plan of operation, each humble 
Christian may do essentially the same thing. For, 

^. It is an undeniable fkct, that, even in this land, so distinguished 
by Gospel privileges, large portions ofihepopttloHon enjoy no meana 
of gface whatever. We do not refdr merely to the Valley of the Mis- 
sissippi, and the amazing tide of population that is daily rolling to the 
West; nor to the sparse population of extensive portions of the South ; 
nor to the victims of vice and infidelity congregated in our large 



%BS,9.] TRACTS TO ETE&T FAUILT* S7 

«iii«»; iM»f to plftees sp^ciallj dwtingwNfhed for wkludnwf and ft d^* 
litifttltto of the Gospel; we refer to theeo— 4>iit we refer aAto to the 
most ftivored portions of oar whole tend, whether in New-Eogland or 
ont of ity and we saf that even there (taking any portion of coaBidera* 
ble sise) tot// be found manyflmiiies, who absent themselves whoUy 
from the hooie of God; who are destitute of the Bible, or neglect to 
read it; on whom no minister of tbe Gospel calls to converse with 
them on eternal things ; whom no private Christian visits with taHy 
degree of frequency on the same errand of love ; and ^ho are living 
wHIiout God, and without hope, and without the means of grace, and 
dying, In this Christian land, under a condemnation more aggrsivated 
than that of the poor benighted heathen. Would to God that these 
representations were unfounded I But if any one is disposed to ques^ 
tion their correctness, let him first be assured that they apply not to 
his own immediate vicinity, and we shall rejoice to hear his testimony; 

3. R isaelear and solemn dtUy to ^jfer the tneuages of the Gosjptty 
in tome form', cotUiimeUly to all. ** Go ye<— and preach the Gospel to 
every creature,*^ There are long arrears to be brought up for* the 
dying heathen; but4faall we live, caddie, and go to the judgment^ 
while families within one mile, or two, or five of us, have scarcdy re* 
ceived the meMage of the Gospel in any form whatever, and will 
meet us in the judgment, to ask why, when we knew the grace of oar 
glorious Redeemer, and wore away our whole life almost at their very 
doors, we did not carry them, in any form, the Gospel message, -and 
entreat them to receive it, even with earnestness and tears? 

4. ne stated distribtUion of a Tract to every fam^ h a nwst happy 
method of conveying to all some portion of Gospel truth. The Tractar 
sue attractive in their appearance, and short, and interesting. Th^ 
successive Tracts come in a constant variety ; they come as a- free 
gift, a token of friendship and afieetion; if the heads of the family 
do not value them, they are very often acceptable to the young; by 
presenting the same Tract to all, no invidious distinctions whatever 
are made— the complaint of each family will rather be that they are 
passed by/ than that they receive the gift in connexion with others-^ 
and, in addition to all the encouragements to hope the Tract itself 
will be useful, an almost unparalleled opportunity for personal reli- 
gious conversation is presented, for persuading to an attendance on. 
public worship, recommending the perusal of the Bible, and the 
placing of the young in Sabbath Schools, supplying tbe temporal 
wanU of .the needy, and imparting blessings, temporal, and spicitual, 
to all our fellow4ieings,>to whom the providence of God thus gives 
us an access. 

Let no one suppose that we magnify the importance of this means 
of giraoe as eonirasUd with otlier means. We bless and praise God 
for tbe hope we ha^e,- that, eve long, a Bible will be placed in every 



m 

4 

i 



88 TBACTS TO EVEBT FAKILT. i^oiy, 

Ikmi^ in our countiy ; and soon may the time oome, when every 
child shall enjoy the blessings of the Sabbath School, and when the 
commissioned minister of Christ shall enter every dwelling to pro- 
claim the way of salvation through the Redeemer. '* This ought ye 
to have done, and not to leave the other undone." When we shall 
use all the means of grace with all our fellow-beings, and in humble 
reliance on God for a blessing, then may we hope that the kingdom 
of God will come with power. 

&. Nor must we pass in silence the rich bUuing which their labor 
of love bringt itUo the hearts of the dietribiUors themselves. It is a 
blessmg such as God loves to impart, and is with more difficulty de- 
scribed than prised by the devoted Christian, who knows the joys of 
laboring for Christ. It involves all the rich fulfilment of that promise, 
*^ It is more blessed to give than to receive"^t warms the heart, it 
draws forth the tear of sorrow for the ravages which sin has made, 
and the tear of gratitude, that there is salvation in the Savior's cross, 
and that he condescends to use such feeUe instruments to advance 
his cause on earth ; it lifts the soul in prayer, it swells the bosom witb 
christian love — it is a labor from which a child of God might joy fully 
go to give up his account— «nd hear the meltings of overflowing grace : 
** I was hungry, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me 
drink ; I was naked, and ye dothed me ; I was sick, and ye visited me ; 
I was in prison, and ye came onto me — inasmuch as ye have done it^ 
wUo one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto 
me." We have ourselves engaged in these distributions with a con- 
sciousness, strong as we have ever felt, that we were in the pAth of 
duty, that we had the aids of the Holy Spirit, giving us joy and peace 
in our own hearts, and opening before us the way of access to the 
hearts of others. 

Encouraging Facts, 

Other cheering enoouraoemeats for the stated distribution of 
Tracts to every family which is willing to receive them, are found in 
the fnicts which, in these distributions^ have already been developed. 
The following are selected from the reports of distributions in the 
City of New-York for the months of April and May.. 

The distributors, says the Committee for Ward No. 1, almost uni- 
versally report that the Tract was well received ; and many instances 
nre named in which much gratitude was expressed,, and a hope that 
the Tracts would be continued. A distributor in 110 families says, 
*' When this district was first assigned to me, I considered it largi, 
and thought of having some person associated with me ; but I have 
been agreeably disappointed, «nd should now be willing to have one 
of double the size.'' The distributor Of 139 Tracts reports, that a 
grocer and a Roman Catholic, who last month declined receiving 
Tracts, both consented this month ; and that a distinguished Univer- 
saltst, who sneered at them, consented, after a long conversation, to 
receive them every month. A distributor in ibree blocks betveea' 



I 



r » 

I. ! 

f 



1829.] TRACTS TO £T£&r. FJIttI2<T. <I9- 



^T I South-Street and Front, says, ** I have distributed 118 Tra€tfl,.aiid am 

the - happy to say that nothing like opposition, has been manifested." if no 

»ro- other results were to follow this i^reat enterprise, than the discipline 

-^ ' it will give the distributors themselres, inspiriog devotional habits and 

^.. ' feelings, government of temper, humility, patience, perseverance and 

^^' christian boldness, the work would.be worthy of perpetuity. 

ble The distributors, says the Committee for the 2d Ward, are generally 

om - eeaious in the good cause, and encouraged to persevere. If the. Com-' 

mittees do. not grow weary in well doing, no doubt great .good will be 

. I done, by their carrying into every family the word of life, in thefoms 

of TracU, aceompahied by a word from the distributor, which, in many 

' * instances, will prove to be as a nail fastened in a sure place. 

le- The Committee for the 3d Ward says, I had occasion to call on a 

of lady of affluence in S ■ street, who remarked to me, that this month 

^ I and the lest a Tract had been presented to her, and she was much 

' { pleased with the plan of distribution adopted, and thought she must 

f make a donation to aid the cause. On the following day, she sent me 

^f '■ ten dollars. 

IS, ' In the 5th Ward, one distributor says, ** I should judge, that not 

2e more tbanone family in four in my district statedly attend any place 

\ of worship." "The Tracts distributed by me this month," says an- 

I . other, " were received with much pleasure, and some expressed great 
^y I approbation of the Tract distribated last month. I saw a gentleman 

e : ' in Broadway, who last month, through his servant, refosed the Tract ; 

le but on my explaining the object, he now received one wdth pleasure." 

Another says, I have foimd much encouragement in fulfilling the duty 
assigned me. I did expect some difficulty in distributing Kittredge's 
Address on Intemperance ; but, except in one or two instances, ex- 
o ' - treme pleasure was shown and great interest manifested in the cause 

1- ' of Temperance. I should be very unwilling to relinquish the privi- 

,f lege of being a Tract distributor." 

,^ I The Committee for Ward No. 10 sajrs, *^ On the whole, there is rea- 

son for much encouragement. The Tracts are more gratefully reeeiyed 
^ than it was apprehended they would be, and tl>e labor of the distribu- 

tors is less difficult than was at first supposed. Many occurrences 
have been reported, showing the great need of Tracts, and of all 
,f other means of instruction. 

hi Ward No. 11, one lady said, that the Dairyman's Daughter was 
the means of her first religious impressions, which, she trusted, had 
terminated in her eonveriion» Another said she prized the Tract I pre- 
sented to her very highly, for it was the means of leading her to re- 
nounce all hope of salvation without an interest in Christ; and that 
she now hoped her tins had heen forgiven. 

The Committee for Ward No. 13 reports : The distributors have, 
in general, presented the Tracts in person, and, where practicable, 
I have entered into free religious conversation. Foiar persons wtre 

found earnestly seeking the salvation of their jnrecious immortal souls. 
One Female distributer says, ** The gratification I experienced is a suf- 
ficient incitement to persevere in this intercFsting labor of love— 4ay 
^ eyes have seen enough to encourage all the friends of the Tract cause." 

Another says, *' A young man, who had attended infidel meetings in this 
city, has been seen reading a Tract, with his eyes suffused in tears." 
Another says, ** A young man took up the Tract on Intemperance, 
fliod wag so aflfected in reading it* that ha has not drank a drop of ar- 

•8 



child .hJl .™.J •» "-"!■ °', tin rTr Wl "■»'•« ^ "'' ' 

rdUiKC m 0<"1 tot . bl.»"8, *■'' ""' " °°^ 

,f(M"ll »»•"■"' I"""- ri.h Nuti"!! ■■»'* ""^ "'' 

bl»dng .uch « God lo.« W ""Pf;. "f .^",ta kn^- *e joy *' 
.cribed th^ pri«d b, the '^""^.^'^TjfiTn.e.t of tb»t promi- 
taboring for Chriit. U iBvoIwi JI lb* "di fu'^" ^^^^ ^^ t^.^, ' 
•• it li more blei»ed to givt then to "**"* "^hich ■"> •»» ooad* 
dr.w. forth the U»r of «om.w tot the n|»«S" ^^^^ g,,loT'» crow 
^d the .e« of gWilude, th« there U "^"^'^^^o,. to -dranc 
and th«t he condeicendi to use «uch «<*" .^ ^^^, ,be bo^m wit: 
b'u tnat on «BHh ; it UfU the loul '° P^f'^'iJiy ^f God nughl joyful); 
cbriitiBQ loTB— it it ■ I«l»r from "l"'^ ^^j,^ ofoTetflowioEg™c« 
go to Bi»e up hii account— and hear Iti ^^^ ^^j y, g„e d» 

•■ 1 »aa faungrj, and ye g-"" "•= ■«•*' ' .i^. uid ye vUlted mt : 

drink; I waa naked, and ye "^""""^^^.^uEh a» ?< 






9Q TBACTS TO ETERT FAJtlLT. [Jtllft 

dent gptrits since." A Roman Catholic lady was seriously in pressed 
in Tj^adiog^a Tract, and desires religioiis conversation, and takes much 
delight in prayer-meetings. A Roman Catholic gentleman, who dis- 
regarded every thing serious, seems much cluinged since reading the 
Tracts. When bis wife expressed a fear that reading the Tracts would 
turn them from the Catholic faith, he replied, ** he did not care what 
he was turned from, if he could get true religion.'* " A lady/* says 
a distributor, '* who was not found last month, entreated me, with 
tears, to bring her a copy of the Dairyman's Daughter, when I came 
again. 

The Committee for Ward No. 14, reports the following instances ; 
One distrihsitor, a young lady, who recently requested the privilege 
of occupying a district, said to me at the close of the last meeting of 
distributors, " I have taken great pleasure in distributing Tracts, and 
have often bought them at the Tract House for this purpose. I sup- 
pose I feel more interest in distributing them, because a Tract first led 
me to attend to reHgion, It was * Q^eneh not the Spirits 1 read it 3 
times;i and determined thsft I would * seek religion now.* She is a 
member of a church in New-Jersey, and gives very decided evidence 
of piety. — One woman very thankfully received a Tract, seeing it was 
on the subject of Intemperance. She had been seventeen years in 
this country, and had lived, she said, very happily with her husband 
till he betook himself to the use of strong drink. ' Now,' she added, 
' you cannot conceive how much I suffer. Pray come again with 
Tracts.' " 

An esteemed clergyman of the city recently met an aged female 
member of his church with the usual salutation, ** How do you do?" 
" I am' getting better," she replied. '' Getting better ?^I did not 
know that you bad been sick." ** Oh yes— I have not been well these 
five-and-twenty years. But I begin to feel better. God bless the 
' Tract Society ! These Tracts that they are distributing to every fa- 
mily, have come close home upon my husband. They told him he 
must not break the Sabbath, and so plainly, that he knew they meant 
him- They told him his Lord's will, and he has be^n to do it. He 
prays In his family now. Tes, and he has knocked off his glass too ! — 
I begin to feel a good deal better, Sur." 

The wife of an intemperate man said, that Kittredge's Address was 
the best Tract ever distributed. Her husband left off drinking en- 
tirely, from the time of reading it ; but she was obliged to add that, 
within two or three days, he had commenced again. " The history 
of distribution in this Ward," says the report, " clearly shows that the 
work in which we have engaged is altogether practicable, and pro- 
mises very great good : nothing but criminal remissness, it appears to 
your Committee, can prevent its being permanently prosecuted. The 
grand foint it for the dittribtUor to become acquainted with every fami- 
lyfanato show, by his conversation and deportment, that the sole desire 
of his heart is to promote their best interests for this world and the 
world to come — ^then the work is easy, and often very delightful. It is 
almost the only means yet devised of carrying the Gospel to a vast por> 
*tion of our j>opulation. It is the belief of your Committee, that the 
work is more in^portant than has yet been felt by any." 

The Plan commended to Branehes and Auxiliaries, 
The duty manifestly devohes on Mranehes and Auxiliaries te fllke 



1IU9.1 TBACTa TO Eyjsar rAMif.T. 91 

up this work, and cany it on, throughout their own appropriate fieldii 
of lahor. We wish the officer of every Auxiliary who reads these 
lines, immediately to have a meeting of the Board or Committee of 
the Society with which he is connected called, the documents on the 
snbject which have come to hand read; the obligations to enter on 
the work solemnly and prayerfully considered ; and such measures 
immediately adopted as the best interesto of the cause of Tracts and 
of religion demand. 

If any feel, that the plan of operations propose will l)e attended 
with iruuperabU obttacleB, we urge on their attention the animating 
facU above mentioned, and others which have been published and ex- 
tensively circulated. 

If any feel, that it will be impouible to raite funds for procuring the 
Tracts which shall be requisite for the monthly distribution of a Tract 
to every family, we recommend to them the adoption of this simple prin- 
ciple : that whenever God points out to us the performance of any duty, 
if we enter upon it discreetly and faithfully, and in dependence on 
him, using proper endeavors to obtain the requisite means, he will 
never suffer the object to fail or falter for want of pecuniary aid. 

To Gk>d and to the hearts of Christians we commend this important 
design, praying that the day may soon come, when there shall not be 
a family in these United States, who is not visited from time to time 
by Evangelical Tracts, presented by the hand, and accompanied by 
the cheering smile and cordial best wishes and prajers of some faith- 
ful, devoted follower of the Lord Jesus Christ. 

A NEW ERA. 

Christians, what means it, that the Church is awaking to the duty 
of conveying the Bible to dU, and of carrying Tracts to all; and, by 
every means which can be devised, offering the message of the Gos- 
pel to att f What means this new sense in the hearts of thousands, 
that the Gospel is a mxssaox, that must be carried and delivered to ail 
vithout delay-'-that is not merely to be proclaimed in pulpits, and 
locked up in Bible and Tract Depositories) but to be carried and ten- 
dered to men who will not come after it, in their own places of abode? 
Are these not fruits of the motions of the Spirit 7 And is not God 
waiting to be gracious f Let us beware how we resist these motions, 
and grieve away the Heavenly Messenger. Let lis follow with the 
tenderest concern and the most filial obedience, wherever he would 
lead. His call is " now.'' Let us not offend the blessed friend of 
our hearts by saying, *' Go thy way for this time !'* Let us come up 
steadfastly and with unshaken confidence to the discharge of duty, 
that God may bless us, and when he calla for us, we may be feund la>- 
li^ring for hira. 



92 FKNNSTX.VAKIA BRANCH. (Jul|^ 

PENNSYLVANIA BKAICCH TRACT SOCIETY. 

The second AQniTersary of this Society was held, June 2,. in the 
Reformed Dutch Church, |in Crown-street. After prayer, the An- 
nual Report was read by the Corresponding Secretary, Mr. George 
W. Blight, when the following resohitions were adopted ; viz. 

Re$olvedf That the Report now read 'be accepted and printed under . 
the direction of the Board of Managers. 

On motion of the Rev. Mr. Beman, of Troy, seconded by the Rev. 
Benjamin B. Smith, of Philadelphia. 

Resolvedf That this meeting have heard with great pleasure of the 
systematic efibrts which have been made in various parts of the conn- 
try statedly to convey some poortion of the gospel, in the form of 
Tracts, to every family, which is willing to receive them, and that it be 
recommended to this Branch and its Auxiliaries, immediately to adopt 
a similar plan of operations. 

Very interesting addresses were delivered by these gentlemen, and 
by T. Bradford, jun. £sq. ; and all the services of the evening were 
calculated to advance the interests of this enterprising Society. 

BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE REPORT. 

German Tracts. 

A series of 37 numbers of Tracts, in the German language, have 
been prepared for the use of this large portion of the population of 
Pennsylvania, have been of incalculable importance to the Branch, 
and already exercise a perceptible influence among the people for 
whom they were designed. An edition of 10,000 German Almanacs 
has also been issued by the Society, and 30,000 copies of the Address i 

of the General Sabbath Union. More than 70,000 pages of Tracts \ 

have been gratuitously distributed during the past year. One thou- 
sand copies of their MagaEine are published monthly. 

State of the Funds. 

Received for Tracts sold, including Donations from Societies Ainiliary 

to tlie Branch, 95,549 42 

Donations from Life Directors and Life Members, . 1,823 62-^7,$73 04 

Paid to Amerieoi Tract Society for Tracts, $4,380 OQ 

For printing Tracts, Almanac, and Magazine, &c 1,015 14 

General Agent and Assistant, including all expenses of Depository, . 1,336 69 

Services and travelUng expenses of Agents, ....'. 68152 

$7,380 35 

Awnliaries. 

The number of their Auxiliaries is now 378, having increased, du- ; 
ring the past year, 213. Seventeen entire counties have been complete- , I « 
ly organized, so that an Auxiliary exists, or its influence is felt, in ] 

every township. The labor of forming Auxiliaries in nine counties j i 

of the state has been undertaken by the Society of Pittsburgh, which \ 

will probably be completed before the close of the present year. | 

Three other counties, the whole stat6 of Delaware, and parts of New* 
Jersey, have been extensively explored, though the Agents were not \ 

successful in forming Societies in every township. Resident Agents ( 

in four other counties have volunteered their services to establish 
Auxiliaries within their bounds. Seventeen counties stiU remain to 



islb.] 



BeSTOV BK1.NCH. 9S 



lie explored by the Agents of the Branch, during the remainder of 
this year; so that the pledge of the Managers to establish an AuxUia- 
ry in erery town or congregation in the state will, probably, with ease 
be redeemed. 

la addition to the Depositories before established at Harrisburg, 
Gettysburg, and Wilkesbarre, others have been established at WU- 
mington, Del., Milton, Carlisle, and Meadville, Pa. 

Tracts circulated. 

Since the organization of the Society, there have been received 
ihto the Depository . . 13,895,910 pages 

Total number of pages issued, . 11,905,910 „ 

AMERICAN TKACT SOCIETY, BOSTON. 

The fifteenth Jbnwoenary of this Society was held ui the Hanover 
Church, May 27. Among other resolutions adopted, it was 

Raolvtdt That this meeting cordially approve of the systematic efi- 
forts adopted in New-York and elsewhere, statedly to convey some 
portion of the Gospel in the form of Tracts to every family which is 
willing to receive them, and that it is desirable that a similar plan be 
immediately adopted throughout the United States. 

ABSTRACT OF THE REPORT. 

It is now three years since the union between this and the Ameri- 
can Tract Society at New- York was effected, since which time, they 
both have steadily pursued the same great objects, one in effort, one 
in feeling. 

AmmufU of T^aett arcukUtd. 

Sold to Anntt, AuxiUarlet, and Individuate, .... 0,497,796 pages. 

Delivered to Life llemben and Donoff, am»670 n 

Given to Dooatloa for gratoltoos distriUutioBS, . • VHSSfiH » 

Total, 8,»9S;640 pages. 

Besides the above donations in Tracts, the Committee have made 
grants in money to the amount of $2,422 45 ; via. $60 for a De- 
posltoiy; 9900 to curculate Tracts in Greece; $1,792 63 to aid 
the American Tract Society, New- York, in extending its operations 
in the Valley of the Mississippi; and $100 to perpetuate the Tract 
*< To a Guardian," 

State tf the Fundi. 

Received dttring the year in donations, including 50 per cent, of tlie 
Codman Fund and tiie Woodman L^acy, each llOOO, - 96,e06 S7 

Received for Tracts sold, 7,S89 91— 13,8M 18 

Total Expenditures, 10,lKM0a 

Balance in the Treasury, including Woodman Legacy, ... 2,3^ 18 

Sixty-three new Auxiliaries have been recogniied, making the num- 
ber now connected with this Society, eix kvmdred and ten. Of these 
123 are in Maine, 164 in New-Hampshire, 88 in Vermont, 212 in 
Massachusetts, and 13 in Connecticut. Four new Depositories have 
been established, making a list of 27 Depositories, owned and ma* 
naged by the people where they are established. 

The report urges powerful motives for increased exertkm. *' No 
town, even in New-England,'* say the Committee, *' can yet be 
pointed out, in which every family is supplied with Tracts ; Uit there 
are many districts and couQtiei, where the Sodety ii icarcfly known, 



94 



RECEIPTS. 



[JiUy 



and where feeble chitrcbes are strngi^iiig for eusteaee. Moat yeav 
after jrear nA away, wiule PrpYidenoe has deviied lhi$ ayntein^ 
wh9e it is organized, and the way perfectly open, beftre the desti* 
tute families even of New-England shall be supplied V* 

We regret that want of room compels as to omit a notice of the 
reports of other Ausdliaries which have come to hand, particularly 
those at Cincinnati and Utica. An abstract of their proceedings 
will be firaod in our next number. 



RECEIPTS 



INTO THE TREASUBY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 



Jhermg fAe mmUk ending June 15, 1829. 
FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES 

VER.->C]ai«iMtoii, Fem. ttra. Eveline Hodges, Sec 
MiddlelNiry, Dei». E. Brewster, Ag. 
Middletown, Rutland Co. Jesse Caswell, Tr. 
Sbeklon, Franklin Co. Samnel Wead, Pres. 
SadDtHiy, • . . • 

Tlaaioatb, Yonag Men's, Cbarlet WiUard, Tr. . 
MASS.— Boflon Amer. Tract Soc John Tappan, Tr. 

do. for VaU. Mlsa. $156,78— for Tnnet ** To a Guardian, 

from Old Judge of Probate, $100 
do. Baptist Evan. Tract Soc Natbaniel R. Cobb, Tr, 
Springfield, Chiekopee par. Ifiss Betsey Cbapfn, Tr. 
Stod£rldge, IL FaMiM, Tr. .... 
R. ISlN^Providenee, Charles F. Hanrl«,SBc 
CONN.— Bethel, Female, Mrs. Hannah Starr, Sec 
Hartford, ConnecUeut Branch, Charles Hosmer, Sec 
Northfield, in Weston, Fem. .... 

Sharon, Charles P.Sedgwick, See. 
Sooth Sbuufieldy Fem. Miss Sophia EnSworth, Tr. 
N. YORJEL— Auburn, Ciark B. Hotchklss, Ag. 

do. by their Auxiliaries, 
Berkshfare and Newark, Iloga Oo. Wm. B. Bement, Sec. 
BrocHdjnj L. I. Fem. Mrs. Sarah H. Richards, INpectress, 
Coie8Ttlle,BHKMDeCo. UriSmith.Tr. . . . 

FishkiU Landing, Fem. aiissM.W. Teller. Sec. . 
Flatbusb, in Saugerties, Ulster Co. John P. L. Oslerhoudr, Tr. 
Florida, Orange Co. Dr. H. K. (Siapman, Sec 
FtaMrtCovingtonvF.Blaisdenn,Tr. .... 
Greenbttsh villaee, Rensselaer Oo. Fem. Mrs. A. O. Spencer, Tr 
Harlaem, Fem. Mrs. Ann Ball, Tr. ... 

Harpersville, Broome Co. Autr Smith, Sec. 
Hempstead, Rockland Go. Fem. Miss Elizabeth Coct Tr. 
Homer, Rev. John Keep, Tr. .... 

Hopeville, Otsego Co. William Clark, Tr. 
Hunt*s Hollow, Samuel Swain, Tr. ... 

Ithaca, (T<Hnpkin8' Co. Aux.) Augustus SberrlllrSec 
Jamaica, L- 1. Marvin W. Fox, Sec. 
Keeseville, CUntottCo. Mrs. Maxj S. F. Keese, Tr. 
Lesfaigton Heights, Hennr Gosley, Sec 
Moriah, Essex Co. Fem. Miss Lucy Bdgerton, Sec 
New Rocbetle, Fem. Hannah Brewster, Sec 
New-York City Aux. Alfirad Edwards, Tr. 

do. . Ghcystie-st. Methodist ChttPch, John Oakley* Tr. 

do. do. do. Fem. Mrs. Sarah B.8tilweU,Ti 

Oweeo, (Tioga Co. Aux.) E. Jurv Dist. Col. O. B. Pixley, Tr. 
Portland, Ghilaaone Co. EUJah Fay, Tr. 
Poundridge, F^m. Mrs. Hannah Keeler, Sec 
ut|ca,B. Vernon, Sec 



J^*?'^. Dr. Henry Wldle, Sec . . . . , 

jv. Jii.R.--Chatham VlUage, Morris Co. Fem. Mrs. Amelia Spen 
cer,Sec. ...... 



FarTr, 
SOO 
13 38 

945 

1 35 
1000 00 



100 00 
460 
600 

2 44 

200 00 

4 13 

8 54 

10 97 

98 89 

6 IS 
13 to 

38 
700 
600 

13 87 
8 41 

1 00 
fi 00 
900 

S6 00 
SOO 

2 00 

14 00 
16 00 

663 

3 76 
790 
1 44 

166 00 

900 

600 

10 00 

1 SO 

10 88 

50 00 

4 60 

900 



100 

300 
9 10 
872 



256 78 

6 40 

100 OO 
81 

1 37 

2fiO 

10 8» 

10 43" 

6 68 

6 13 

4 57 

12 



84 
20 OO 

2 OO 
SOO 



067 

5 00 

16 S8 

I 25 

3 95 



8 00 



3(i2 



300 






N. JEB^Hirdwick, 

fcr, Tr. 

lBd(UMDWii,Frm. Bm.Biic. Ann B. Titlor, Sec 
fUcnODfMKcf'DutchCli. lUI^Dornmu, Tr. 
OaiO>~GunU*r, Pnw-BoDk, Tna uhI B. Behool, Boe. H. 

C.WInc,8«. 

Tnctt •old u Ika Deporiiorr la iDdlTMuli, 

Nuluuaa] Frtcni 



DirtdortfVT Life. 

_jl«iii«ii,bTBIr.L. _. 

CONN—Wittvi, pTMh. Sm. Rw, 
Syhuu HBigbt, by LuUo, C>n 

R. yCA£%nioklyn, L.L, X«t. 

DmulL-Cwn^lir F.A.T.S. 5C 

Do. KaT.PMcrP.HouH.brilO' BO 
ClBTeruk, CotumbiB count)-, Rer. 

Ridurd Sluyur, by Fcm. A. T. 

a <iiijMM of tsoo - - 1! 
VIR^niMa Edward ». R«t. 

Prof. H. P. Ooodrlch. by Udiu 



HIB — ^MAn R«. Geo. PotU, 

byF«i.XT.B^AiUor|9D,) IC 
OHlO>~Kiiaieo. TWiu Hucui, li 

Membtnfor Life. 
HABB.— BdcbertowB, Kri. Lynu 

CstaBUf by Kudry inditidoali, 3C 
CONN^Butfud, IDh Cubariiie 

E. Bwfber, ... ao DO 
IDo. El»z« Huntmcuii. (in ftiU 

«rt«o,> .... 

PliiiifitU. Kin DeUy Emco, On 

puioftao, - - - 

Rocky KiU, in WethtnAeld. IbuI 

WilUanu, - . as 00 

Wtnm, North Fufi«M Eo;. R*t. 



rpRK^-DiBchuopli 

t-His-EliBiWEly, 
— ■— OroTo, Onofa 



Ple«k«WiigdlHll, . SC 

Hiddltxnnh Oiun ». R>f. Ds- 

■uldHcIntnhTSyCbr. B-SiK. BC 
N. York Ciiy, Wilter Blckir, SC 

John Borlud, • - . ac 

Ret. ClurlH HiII, by Hr.Jehn 

ScT. JwUbu H. Noble, by do. ac 
Rome, Oneldico. Mui BelHy la- 

TU. by ber brothu J. B. Jervii, K 
N. jes^-Naw-BnuuwIck, Roi. 

Joaeph H. Awu, by >[n. Dr. 



.4nnuaJ Mtmbtri, 
t. TORK~New-Yi>rk Ciiy, Jdm 
StvphoUr Jud. ... a 



9.6 



RECEIPTS. 



(Hhar Donations, 

VER — ChtildhaU, E. C. - • 3 00 
MASS.~ABdorer, Anonymoua, finr 

Schools in 8. Am. - 5 00 

Belchortowii, mmdry indiTklMli^ 

forVal. Hioa. - - - 98 38 
CONN^Bfillbrd,SchoUunB, - 1 50 
Stratford, Indhriduab, for V. Mim. 5 00 
Weston, Individuals, - - 6 17 
N. YORK^Berkshire, Tiogn eo. 

A Friend, • - - - 5 00 
ChMZYt ClinUm co> Mrs. Ana Hvb- 

bell, 4 00 

Coisackie, Mr. bane A. HaBeiH 

beck, (decease«I) a bequest, 84 00 

Durham, Greene co. A Friend, 5 00 
Middkdield, Otsego oo. Mrs. Wm. 

A. Walker, • - . . 3 00 
NewbuTf h, Fem. Friend, aTails of 

jewelry, for Val. Miss. - 3 00 

Da Individuals, for Val. Miss. 44 80 
New-York City, A Friend, $5, a 



Ladyt Iff), Vettbers of Ref. 
Dutch €%. FrankUn-at. t<8 75, 73 75 
Domestic Senrants Society, lor 
Premium Tract, - 50 00 

Rochester, Monroe co. Messrs. E. 
Peck A. Co. praminm on Chris> 
tian Almanacks, - • - 17 59 

PENN.— North East, E. Royce, 1 OB 

DEL.— Middletoim, John G. Wil- 
son, 1 00 

8. CAR.— Charkaton, a Lady, by 
Mr. Jasper Comii^ > - 3 00 

TENN.— Tasewell, H. Graham, 1 30 

The abore list conttuns doaitkiB a 
For Thicts for Val. of Miss. |BS7 8D 
For Premium Tract 50 09 

For perpetuating Trast, "To a 

Guarduoi,'* 100 00 



Whole am't of Don. $1,407 73 

Rec for TracU sold, 3,790 64 

Total, 



15^188 3i5 



RBOam FITBLXOAVZOirS. 



THE CHRISTIAN READER, 

DESIONBO FOR THX USX Ot SCHOOLS IN THE UVITED STATSS.— pp. 408. 

" At the suggestion of seTeral Teachers of Fouth,'' say the Commit* 
tee of the American Tract Society in their Annual Report, ''and among 
(hem the late. Rev. Daniel H, BameSf principal of the High School 
in this city, who have long felt that a Reading Book, that should at 
once be interesting, and of a pure moral and religious tendency, has 
been a desideratum in the schools of our country, the Committee have 
prepared, stereotyped, and published, such a volume. It embraces 
32 of the Tracts, which, in point of style, interest, and moral and re- 
ligious character, were judged best adapted for general use, together 
with a Brief Selection of Divine Songs ; and is suitably divided into 
chapters, lessons, and paragraphs. The Committee indulge the san- 
guine hope, that it will be introduced into great numbers of schools, 
and thus be the means of producing the most salutary impressions on 
the minds of multitudes of the rising generation."— Price 60 cenfl), 
full bound in sheep, with a discount of 10 per cent, to all schools, 

HANDBlJLLS. 



No. S1.^The Bible no Cbmt. 
32.— <* I bone to be Snved." 
33.^" God is Merciful." 
84.— To Venders of Ardent 8^i- 

rits. 
35.—^' Is H not a l.ittle Thing ?» 
36w—** Repent ye." 



No. ^.— The worth of the Soul. 
2R.— -Things to Think on. 
27.— An Appeal. 
S8.— 8et down that Glass, 
2a— Reasons for Total Abstinence from 

Ardent Snirits. 
30.^A Strange Thing. 

To the first ten of the above handbills a premium of fdQ wcs 

awarded. 

New Tracts previoiuly adverHud. 

No.192.— Bible of Divhie Origin. By Rev. Professor De Witt, . 
323.— The Sanctuary. By Rev. Daniel A. Clark, 
224«— Letters on UnlTersallsm. By Rev. Joel Hawes, 
326.— On Female Influence. By Rev. Mr. Beman, • • 

227.->Oa Objections against the Bible. By Rev. 9r. Brewtflee, 



pages, 33 
12 

60 

\^ 
40 



THE AMERICAN 

OL. [VJ AJjaTTBT, ISM. [NO. 



I »iv (bt hsidi of lbs &mil7, ud tta TiMto wan tiueAiDf recelvtd. 

RESULTS 

OF THE MONTHLY DISTRIBUTION OF 

TBAOTS TO EVBKV TAHtaV 



Some of the reiulti of ihe >;stema(ic distribution of Tracts 
ill tlie city of New-Yorl(, wlitch, through liie CommJtleei or 
ihc respeciife Wards *nd the City Committee, hare been com- 
municated to Ihe Board of the Nzw-Yobk Citt Tbict Sv- 
ciBTT, are condensed in the folloiring pages : 

1. To faroish each Ward Committee and each Tract Dis- 
tributor in the cit;, with tlie suggestions of actual experience, 
to gnida and encourage them in tbeii future eSbris. 

£. To farnish tbe laoie information to all who are laboring 
10 advance the cause of Tracts in other poitions of the country, 
that tbe plan may l>e understood, and the molires for its adop- 
tion be seen and felt. 

Toe. IV. [Whwx No, «, 



^ TKACT8 TO £V£RT FAMILY. [Atlg. 

3. To spread before Evangelical Christians generally the 
magnitude and importance of the object, and commend it to 
their affections, their prayers, their personal efforts, and their 
pecuniary aid. 

4. To record, to the praise of God, a memorial of his good- 
ness in devising this means of usefulness, and so signally crown- 
ing it with his blessing. 

THE PLAN. 

The work is referred by the Board of the New- York City 
Tract Society to a *» City Committee," consisting of one in- 
dividual for each of the 14 Wards, each individual becoming 
solely responsible for the thorough occupancy of the Ward 
assigned him. By him the Ward is explored, and divided into 
convenient districts, averaging about 60 families each, which 
are numbered, and a small map of each is drawn for the use of 
the distributor to whom the district shall be assigned. A meet- 
ing of friends of the cause in the Ward is then called, and the 
object fully explained, when each individual selects a district 
whieh it is convenient and suitable for himself to occupy. 
The Tracts are, in due time, furnished by the Committee 
of the Ward to each distributor, who, within the first 15 days 
of every month, personally visits every dwelling in the dis- 
trict assigned him, explains to the heads of each family the 
method and design of the distributions, presents a Trict to 
each family which is willing to receive it, and, as far as cir- 
cumstances permit, engages in personal religious conversation ; 
recommending the reading of the Bible, attendance on public 
worship, the placing of children in Sabbath Schools, and pro- 
moting, by every practicable means, the best interests of the 
family for this world and the world to come. 

On or before the l5th day of each month, each distributor re- 
turns a report of his distributions to the Committee for the 
Ward,* by whom the substance of all the reports in the Ward is 
reduced to writing, and presented at a meeting of the City 
Committee, by which Committee a condensed view of the re- 
ports of the distributions for the whole city is presented, at the 
close of each month, to the Board of the New-lfork City Tract 
Society. 

'The population of New-York is not far from 200,000 ^ num- 
ber of families about 30,000 ; number of distributors' districts 
500 ; and Tracts have been refused, on an average, by about 
One family in a district. The distributors consist of about an 
equal number of males and females. It is the full conviction 
of the City Committee that this plan essentially may he sue- 

* It has been found very uspful for the Committee, at the close of the distribu- 
tions for the month, to call a nieeting of all the distributors in the Ward, when 
they present their reports and commuAicMe the various success which has at* 
ten^ecithcir miUual eoortifc 



H&d.] TRACTS TO EVERT FAMIXiY. -99 

cessfvUy adopted in every part of the United States. In smaller 
towns, it will be less complicated than in the large cities, but 
the general plan will be the same. 

It is deemed quite essential to the success of the plan, that 
some particular Tract be selected for each month, and a copy 
of the same Tract presented at the same time to every fami- 
ly, that the distribution may be long continued without unin- 
tentionally presenting the same Tract twice to any one family. 
Any number of copies of any specified Tracts may be obtained 
from the Parent Institution by Auxiliaries, large or small, in 
every portion of the country, provided the orders be given a 
sufficient time beforehand to admit of their preparation. By 
theNew-York City Auxiliary, the ** Institution and Observance 
of the Sabbath" (No. 177) was selected for March, Kittredge 
on Intemperance (No. 2£1) for April, the Dairyman*s Daugh- 
ter for May, the Importance of Consideration for June, Quench 
not the Spirit for July, Temper is Every Thing for August, 
and Search the Scriptures for September. 



RESULTS OF DISTRIBUTIONS. 

Extracts from the Reports for March, April and May, having been 
inserted in previous Numbers of the Magasine, we here give extracts 
only 

FROM THE REPORTS FOR THE M05TH OF JUNE. 

The distribution this month in Ward No. 1, has been more thorough 
than in any month preceding; written reports are received fVom all 
the distributors except two, and the beneficial results reported greatly 
exceed those of previous months. ** The family of a respectable gro- 
cer,"' says one distributor, " who at first refused the Tracts, have be* 
come decided friends. A young man and his wife whose prejudices 
against Tracts it seemed impossible to overcome, but who were per« 
suaded to read one Tract, now appear inclined to read all we can give 
them. The French and Spanish families now receive us very politely, 
and a French gentleman requested three copies to send to his friends 
in the West Indies." " Rarely," says one, " does opposition prevail. 
In a sail-loft, where about a dozen hands are employed, they always 
receive me kindly. I have found eight children for Sabbath schools, 
and six families destitute of the Bible." ** Most of this district," says 
another, " Is occupied with grocery and commission stores, the owners 
of which treated me with the greatest kindness and respect/' " Nine 
persons in my district last month refused the Tract, this month only 
three." ** One lady, whose husband before expressed bitter opposition 
to Tracts, now received it in silence, while a tear moistened her eye." 
** I have this month distributed sixty-six Tracts, which were all grate- 
fully received. In one establishment where many persons are em- 
ployed, the foreman told me that the last Tract was read by every in- 
dividuaJ in the establishment, and promised that the Tract for this 
month should be treated in the same way. I conversed affectionately 
and seriously with a journeyman printer, who had refused to receive 
Tracts, bat whose wife was pleased with them. He acknowledged that 



1^ TB4CTS TO ETCBT TAMtLT, [Mw^^ 

he had read some af them and thought well of tfa0in, and consented 
tO" leoeiTe them in fotnre." 

" We were erery where received with pleasave and even gratitude/' 
saya a yoongp female distoibutor, " and we have found two young 
ladies who wish to become distributors. In one instance, a lady was' 
irritated at our presenting^ her the Tract on fntempeiance, saying that 
she needed not to be reminded of her duty more than others. We ex- 
plained to her that th^ distribntion was general throughout the city^ 
and she received the Tract with pleasure. Another^ who refosed th& 
Tract before, on our calling this month, expressed sorrow, and thank- 
fulness that we had called again. An Englishman refused the Tract 
on Intemperance, saying it woold do him no good. He was not fk 
drunkard, though he had once oeen one. He renounced the habit 
twenty years ago, and had since drank nothing but water. He avowed 
himself an Inlidel, and boasted that he never read his Bible. He at 
length consented that we should leave the Tract, but said he should 
not read it. This month be told us he heul been much pleased vnlh the 
Dairyman* 8 Doubter t it had convinced him thai there is a God, in^ 
dueed him to reculhis Bibh, and he toas now thinking more seriously of 
the concerns of his soul than he had ever thought before. The mother 
of a poor family said ours were the first kindly words that had greeted 
her ears for many months. They were entirely without employment^ 
and we were enabled to obtain situations for the father and eldest 
daughter. On our last seeing the mother, she expressed great thaiik- 
fulness, and said iire had been kinder to her than we thought we had 
been ; * your Tracts,*^ said she, have done me good; but a few words 
you said, a few texts of Scriptare you repeated, God has blessed t» 
my soul ! I shall never cease to thank God for sending you here. Her* 
self and her husband now daily read then- Bible with prayer,, and he 
has become anxious for the salvation ' of his soiiA.'^ The poor look ta 
our monthly distributions with pleasure, and often part from us with 
tears of gratitude. Old and young, rich and poor, seem pleased to read 
the Tracts, and some old ladies already regard us with afiection, and 
say they have never seen any thing which is circulated to do so much 
good as the distribution of Tracts.^ 

Of the thirty-one distributors in Ward No. 2, says the Committee, all 
but one are professors of religion, and he is a Sabbath school teacher. 
They appear to have prosecuted their work with Christian fidelity and 
dependence on God for his blessing. ** An <Ad lady," says a distributor, 
" who was deeply engaged in the concerns of a fruit-store, told us that 
she formerly attended worship at the Methodist church, but now she 
was obliged to devote all her time to her store. We conversed seriously 
with her on the importanee of preparation for eternity. She was af- 
fected and promised to read the Tract with prayer, to close her store 
on the Sabbath, and to attend public worship." " Two Swiss families 
seemed as if they could not be sufficiently grateful for the Tracts."" 
"■ A Spanish gentleman thanked me for the Tract, and said he should 
always be glad to receive any thing of the kind.'^ 

In Ward No. 3, several gentlemen^ from press of bn^ness, have de» 
dined acting as distributors, and thehr places have been supplied by 
ladies, one of whom, though she was advised by some liot to enfist in 
such a cause, has ibund so much pleasure in the work, that she has 
cxfTered to supply another district besides the one assigned ber^if n«- 



!B^9.} TRACTS TO £V£ar fAlftlLT. 101 

cesBary. Another yonng lady who offered her services as a distributor, 
says, *' After making one or two calls the work became pleasant, and I 
wished to call at every place where there were any immortal beings 
who could be benefitted by Tracts." One distributor says, ** On enter- 
ing one of the most respectable grocery stores in my district, the pror 
prietor said, ' You see, Sir, you have slopped my telling at my Uquor 
iland, I was in the habit of making three or four dollars a day by the^ 
sale of liquors, but I am convinced of their evil tendency, and have' 
put my stand away. Every spoke in the wheel gives strength, and I 
am willing to make this sacrifice to help forward the good cause/ " 
' A distributor in Ward No. 4, says, " I met with an Infidel who said 
he did not believe in Tracts dr the Bible ; that he had once been a 
Christian, but had since read for himself, and found it all priest-crafl. 
He produced an Infidel volume as his Bible. His' wife agreed with him 
in sentiment. They were willing, however, to give the Society and the 
distributors credit for their good motives, acknowledged they had been 
the means of reforming some who had been immoral, and consented 
to receive Tracts.'' " I have met with many sailors," says another, 
" every one of whom has asked me for a Tract." 

At the meeting of the distributors, says the Committee for Ward No. 
6, inquiries were made with a special view of ascertaining the useful- 
ness of this method of distribution, and the general impression was, 
that much good has already been done, and much more may be ex- 
pected, if the work is faithfully contmued' One distributor found se- 
venteen families destitute of the Bible, who have been supplied. Each 
distributor, by continuing in the same district, acting with discretion^ 
and manifesting sincere kindness, gains access to the hearts of the fa- 
milies he visits, and by the blessing of God may be the means of in- 
calculable good, both in a temporal and spiritual point of view. 

** We were informed," says one distributor, " of a very wicked and 
profane man, who soofled at religion, was particularly hostile to all 
Missionarv operations, and had repeatedly refused to receive Tracts, 
or allow them to be read in his family. Being alone one day, he was 
induced to open a Tract which bad been left by some person unknown, 
and had not read far, before his feelings were powerfully arrested, and 
be felt convinced he was a lost, guilty sinner, and must for ever perish, 
unless the God he had^o often defied, had mercy on him. He continu- 
ed in great distress of mind for some months, but found peace to his 
soul in the atoning blood of Christ. His house is now open for the rc^ 
ception of the friends of the Redeemer, and his talents, property and 
life are devoted to his service. 

Our system of efforts, says the Committee for Ward No. 7, is ber 
coming more and more interesting both to the distributors and the re-- 
ceivers of the Tracts. The distributors are often surprised and much 
affected by being met at the door, and most cordially addressed by 
name, urged to walk in, told how anxiously their visits had been ex- 
pected, led into religious conversation, and apparently regarded as 
special friends and benefactors. The language of Providence m respect, 
to this work seems to be, ** Faint not, nor be discouraged,— onward, 
and under the Messing of the great Captain of our Salvation, victory, 
a great victory is yours." A distributor, whose district embraces a 
very irreligious population, and who at first met with more opposition 
than any other in the Ward, says, *^ With pleasure I inform you, that 
€iU the ninety fiimilies in my district received Tracts thankfully this 
month. For four families, Bibles wer^ wanted and procured." ''It is 



£02 TRACTS TO XVXRT TAMiLT* [Aog. 

agmtttpleasure/'sayiftBother, "xq have thoie receive Tracts wbo at 
first refused diem. This month dU receired them, and, except in one 
or two instanoes, with decided expressions of gratttnde. The friendly 
and cheerful coantenances of many spoke more expressively tbaa 
words, ''What have you got for us thii montht*' ** Besides my dis- 
trict in this Ward/' says another, ** I have taken one m the 10th, and 
I would sooner take more tluin give up either of them/' *^ One wo* 
man," says another, ** tdd me, that her husband, who had been an 
intemperate man, some time since received a Tract, which he read at- 
tentively, and resolved to abandoa his coarse ofdissipstioB. tYomthai 
time hehoi tdfstamed^ and he now appears to be a truly changed man.'* 
'< i have Ibimd one female,*' says anoAer, *' once very far from reli- 
gion, whose diaracter appears greatly altered^ aad who says she ia 
now happy in consequence of reading a Tract.'' 

The Committee of the 9tb Ward says, that, at a meeting of the dis* 
tributors at his own house, ibrty-four were present, when, after prayer, 
the reports of the various distributors were read, and great cordiality 
and cheerfulness exhibited in this work of faith and labor of love. To 
one distributor, a man said, " Tou are the very individual I have long 
wished to see — ^I should like to know the motive in these distributions-^ 
I always thougtit the Tract Society a money-making concern." The 
object was explained, and he'receivedthe Tract, engaging to read it. 
^ I obtained fourteen Sabbath Scholars," says another, *' and clothing 
ibr one boy for the Public School. In one instance I conversed with a 
sick man, who had been confined a month. He appeared sensible of 
his situation as a sinner againstGod, and said he found a sick-bed a 
poor place to prepare for heaven. I fed, that a great duty devolves on 
a Tract distributor. His district is his mission-field — ^the care of the 
souls embraced in it is in some measure committed to him, and he 
must give account, at the last day, for the manner in which he has dis- 
charged his duty. He has many duties to perform besides merely pre- 
senting the Tract to each family, and he needs great grace and aid 
IVom on high." " One person said she had reason to believe the Tracts 
bad been blessed to her eoul ; and another said that her husband, 
since reading them, had left off drinking ardent spirits. Twelve Sab^ 
bath Scholars obtained— seven families destitute of the Bible." '' Twq 
persons, who were formerly violent opposers, appeared to be very 
much pleased with the Tract. A Jew refused a Tract for himself, but 
received one for the servants in his family " " One woman said Kitt- 
redge's Address had been a benefit to her." " A man who had indulged 
himself in the too free use of ardent spirits, has been convinced of hi» 
error, abandoned the use of it, and excluded it tchoUyJrom his house.^' 

« I conversed," says another, " with a person who was quite ill, and 
who feared she was unprepared for eternity. I directed her to the 
Savior of sinners, but she feared that she had neglected hnn too long. 
She thanked me for my visit, and entreated me to come and see her as 
often as i could. One lady, who, through the prejudice of her hus- 
band, was prevented from enjoying the stated means of grace, took 
the Tract, sat down, and began to read aloud. While reatiSng, on the 
first page, of the sinner's appearing before God, she stopped, and, 
quite overcome with her feelings, 'said it was speaking to her. 
She wept very much, and when I left her, begged that I would come 
often and converse with her. What I have here mentioned is no 
more than what occtir9 to many. It speaks loudly to Tract distribji- 



1819.] TBACTS TO EYEET FAHILT. 10^ 

ton to persevere in the work, tOl adi shall know the lord/' « In the 
dwelUngs of the poor/' lajrs another, ** we have enjoyed some 
interesting seasons ; and oar hearts have been cheered in meetuig 
some, who, though snrronnded by oatward poverty, appeared to be 
rich in faith/' ** Distributed 70 Tracts ; almost all received with a 
cordial welcome. It was delightful to view the smiling countenan- 
ces of many who rejoiced to meet us again, and had much to say of 
the benefit of Tracts, and of the goodness of the Lord/' ** Visited 
160 families, and only one reibsed the Tracts. One woman exclaim- 
ed, ' J f people would but practise according to the last Tract, and let 
ardent spirits alone, how different it would be! Now, when husbands 
come home, they are so cross, and there is nothing but cursing and 
swearing/ — A shoemaker said, a countryman came in, jHoposed to 
buy a pair ofshoes, and said, if he took the shoes, the shoemaker must 
tffeat him. He replied, that he could not-^he had not treated any 
body for more than a year, and thought it wrong. His wife told the 
man she would treat him with a Tract, and brought him Kittredge*s 
Address* The man paid for bis shoes, took his Tract, sat immediate- 
ly down and read a part of it ; rose up and expressed his thanks for 
it, and went his way. 

** We met with some opposition/' says another, " but it confd not 
discourage us — for we felt that our work was the Lord's, and our 
trust must be in Him, and that we ought to be grateful to him for per- 
mitting us thus to engage in his service. We also met with much 
encouragement. In one house sat a poor aged man and his wife, happy 
in the fear of the Lord, for Tracts had been blessed to them ; and they 
could tell of one, who, by reading Tracts, was induced to shttt her 
shop on tfie Sabbathf which she had kept open for years, until she 
found that, by happy experience, she was a gainer in many ways by 
keeping the Sabbath holy to the Lord. — Another said she loved 
Tracts, and could tell a sweet experience of a young friend of hers, 
through the reading of Tracts. A lady informed us, that, the evening 
previous, she had seen a young man of her acquaintance who had 
been very intemperate. He had received Kittredge's Address, read 
it in silence, and read it again in tears — he has now become a reading 
man, both of Tracts and of his Bible, and appears to be truly chang- 
ed." — " There was an expression of tenderness of feeling manifest- 
ed," says another, " whenever I saw the head of a family, and I have 
never been so much encouraged in this duty as now.'^ 

I have personally visited every Distributor in the 11th Ward, says 
the Committee, and find that, with but one or two exceptk>ns, they 
have discharged their duty with great fidelity; they bear united tes- 
timony to the usefulness of Tracts, both to tlwmselves and others, and 
not one of them is willing to relinquish this service. In nearly one 
half of the Ward, it is ascertained that about one family in six is des- 
titute of the Bible; and the Tracts now distributed are almost the 
only message of the Gospel which many have received for years. 
Some have never heard a Gospel Sermon. In one district of 142 fa- 
milies, all but two received the Tract, and with many personal religi- 
ous conversation was held. Some families complained that they had 
been slighted in previous months, and begged that they might not be 
again passed by. In one part of the Ward several pious females have 
requested that a weekly prayer meeting should be hel<U >uid ^'^^ will 
probably be opened soon. 

Extracts of reports from other Wards are omitted for want of room. 



104 TRACTS TO EVERt FAMILT. [Aug. 

PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS 

DRAWN FROM THE FACTS ABOVE RELATED. 

1. The results of this system of effort afford great encouragement 
to persevere in its prosecution. 

2. The Tracts distributed are the means, under the Divine bless- 
ing, of the conversion of many souls. 

3. Personal conversation, accompanying the distribution, is often 
blessed. 

4. The distributor is welcomed as a messenger of good by many 
who felt that '< no man cared for their soul.'* 

5. Many, by these distributions, are induced to read the Bible. 

6. Many, to attend public worship. 

7. Children are brought into Sabbath and other schools. 

8. The temporal as well as spiritual good of families is promoted. 

9. Some of the immoral and dissolute are reformed. 

10. Some avowed infidels are led to serious reflection. 

11. Enemies of religion become acquainted with Christians, and 
learn the spirit of meekness and expansive benevolence which true 
religion inspires. 

12. The sygtem of distributing to every family is important, as it re- 
' moves the suspicion of invidious distinctions. 

13. It reaches all who can be benefitted by Tracts, and muttitades 
who would otherwise be overlooked. 

14. It carries the means of grace to multitudes, who otherwise 
might be given over by Tract distributors as hopeless. 

15. It commends itself to the approbation of the wealthier portions 
of the community, no less than others. 

16. The system being carried into effect throughout the whole ex- 
tent of any place, each distributor feels encouraged, as he could not, 
if laboring alone. 

17. The distributor should be in heart devoted to the cause of Christy 
and the welfare of the souls of men. 

18. He should feel his need of the aid of the Holy Spirit, and con* 
tinually pray for his guidance and blessing. 

19.. He should consider the district committed to him as his particu- 
lar charge, feel the sacred responsibility devolving on him, and make 
the distributions personally. 

20. He sh(^ld be familiar with the Tract he is distributing, that he 
may intelligently recommend its perusal. 

21. Hdtehould see the heads of the families, and become acquainted 
with them as far as practicable. 

22. He should fully explain the system of distribution, especially 
that it is made to all, and is gratuitous. 

23. He should pass by no family, however obscure or far removed 
from the public eye. 

24. He should not be discouraged by one refusal, when any hope 
remains of success in futare. 

25. He should regard the interests of every family with the most 
tender sensibility, both when present with them and absent from them. 

26. He should do his work |)unc/ua%, within the time specified. 

27. The reports of distributors should, as far as practicable, be made 
in writing. 



1829.] TKACTS TO EVEET FAMILT. 105 

28. Ladies may engage in these distribaticms quite as usefully and 
successfully as gentlemen. 

29. Meetings of distributors, at which they report the obstacles and 
encouragements with which they have met, are very interesting and 
beneficial. 

30. This work is a means of great spiritual good to the distributors 
themselves ; many have felt that they could cot be deprived of the 
privilege of thus laboring to promote the wel&re of the souls of men 
and the cause of their Redeemer. 



ADDITIONAIi MOTIVES. 

Beside the above evidences of good, from the systematic 
distribution of Tracts to all who are wiUiri^ to receive them, 
we beg every conscientious Christian seriously to consider : 

1. That there are multitudes, and probably many in his own 
vicinity, who are living and dying in the neglect of all the 
means of grace, and rarely, if ever, having the message of the 
Gospel presented to them in any form. 

S. That our Savior^a command is still binding on his follow* 
ers, to coiivey the message of his Gospel ** to every creature.^* 

S. That there is no insuperable obstacle to the discharge of 
this duty. The Tracts can be printed; and funds can be raised ; 
and there are Christians in almost every portion of the country, 
who are willing to engage in the distributions. 

4. That the duty of conveying the Gospel message in the 
form of Tracts, to all who are willing to receive them, is now 
distinctly known ; and in the day of judgment, we must answer 
for its performance oi its neglect, under the solemn responsi- 
bility of those who ** knew their Lord's will." 



BRANCHES AND AUXILIARIES. 

Ulica Branch, — Third Annual Meeting held May 6. Receipts dur- 
ing the year, $1,27067; amount of TracU circulated, 880,400 pages, 
besides 3,000 copies of the Christian Almanac. The Society has 82 
Auxiliaries, and 15 Life Members. The population of the coanties 
to which tJtica is a commercial centre, says the Report, may be safely 
estimated at between 600,000 and 700,000 ; and it is rapidly increas- 
ing. Hundreds and thousasds within these limits do not attend the 
public ministry of the word ; some towns are wholly destitute of 
stated preaching ; and many persons have been met by the Society's 
Agents, who had never seen a Tract, or heard of a Tract Society. 
Many striking instances of the useftdoess of Tracts are related in the 
Report. We only add an expression of our very deep conviction of 
the great responsibility devolving on the Branch at Utica to proceed 
with all their might in thoroughly occupyine the important portion 
of country which Providence has assigned to them as their appropriate 
ileld of effort. Edward Vernon, Cor» Sec, 4* Ag. 145 Genesecst. 



106 TRACTS TO £V£&t FAMILY. [Aug. 

Baltimore Bratich. — Thirteenth Annual Report presented May 18. 
Receipts during the year, $1,036 21 ; sold, 808,676 pages ; distributed 
gratuitously to Shipping, Steamboats, Sabbath Schools, kc. 216,235 ;' 
total circulated during the year, 1,024,911; exceeding the circulation 
of the preceding year nearly 200,000 pages. Also circulated, an edi- 
tion of about 5,000 of the Christian Almanac. The Society has a 
number of Auxiliaries in various parts of the State of Maryland, 
some of the most active of which are connected with churches of dif- 
ferent denominations in Baltimore. A number of striking instances 
are reported in which Tracts have been blessed in the evident con- 
version of souls to God. Rxv. J. P. K. Henshaw, Pres, Mr. Chas. 
R. Coleman-, Cor. See, Sf Ag. 

Cincinnali Branch. — Second Anniversary April 27. The meeting 
was addressed by Dr. James Warren, J. G. Burnet, Esq. Rev. Messrs. 
Patterson and Aydelott, Rev. Messrs. McAboy and Eastman, Agents 
of the American Tract Society, and Rev. Mr. Cornelius. The foUow- 
iug resolution, among others, was unanimously adopted : 

" Reaolvedt That, while the geographical situation of this city affords great facir 
lities Tor the circulation of Tracts la this IVestern Country, it lays a corresponding: 
obligation on her inhabitants lo lake a prominent part in this important work." 

Receipts during the year, $2,080 98; of which upwards of $800 
was contributed by friends in Cincinnati in donations, chiefly for es- 
tablishing a permanent Depository. The Society has 57 Auxiliaries, 
and 88 members for life. Circulated during the year, 1,052,065 pages 
of Tracts, and nearly 6,000 copies of the Christian Almanac. The 
Report contains a narrative of several instances of the usefulness of 
Tracts ; and the whole matters of fact it presents, show a determina- 
tion on the part of the Directors and friends of the Society and a spirit 
of Christian activity, liberality and zeal in their work, for which we 
feel specially bound to give thanks to God, and in which we see un- 
doubted evidence, that, with his continued blessing, very great and 
extensive good will be done. 



PREMIUiir TRACTS. 

On the Character and Protpects of the Heathen, 

[The following notice was puMlsbed in the religious newspapers ioimediately 
after putting tu press our Numoer fur May :] 

The FubTishiug Committee of the American Tract Society, through whom a 
premium of fifty dollars was offered hy a benevolent individual for the best .Tract 
** on the Character and Priupeets of Uu JSeotAen," have examined carefuHy the 
Tracts submitted to them j but, while they consider several of them as po86essiug 
condderable merit, they aie of opinion tliat no one of tiie number received com> 
bines all the proiterties to be expected by the public in a Premium Tract on this 
very Important subject. They have, therefore/ extended the time for prefentaiion 
to the first day of November next. JAMES MILNOR, Chairman. 

The Premium Tracts on sailing vesseh out of port on the Sabbath 
were under consideration at the time of putting this sheet to press. 

A premium of fifty dollars is offered for the best Tract, not ez^ 
ceedingl2pages, ''to influence the young Hr abstain entirely from 
the use of ardent spirits, and portraying to parents the guilt and dan- 
ger of tempting them to use it,*- to be presented on or before the Isi 
ioy of "November next. 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASDRY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT BOCIETr, 



111 Gmnwlch.fKcnl County AmUjarjr) 



N. J^K.— Uaikiiiridge. Howe gbcldao, 6fQ. . 

OrecBwlcb/WHTc'ii to. Fern. Mri. Hiry Bublm.T 
llBfkcuHct, Areliltnlil CauiutwlJ, Sec. 
IludHlek doni;. Bunei ca. Uri. Mart A. Luwr, Sec 
KmwHoo, Wut(b CO. FeiD. Uri. Hanrr Bbir, tjcc. 
Look Pond. Hnseit CD. 

HoTkilHiroHEb CoBI. Id Hardnlell. P«ni. UJii E. Hat: , - 

Ne«nniiii»lck, rtlcTliivUin.T'r. . 

Kn Hope ■ad UmtKDitrni', Fen;. Ellrn W. Sinddlford, Sec 

Pilenoa, in PmltChuriti, Henrj Viiii Hooltn.Tr. 

KeiSlnglowB, Wblli Hoiub F. o., Lukag VouiliHi, Tr 
Rocktvij.Ftm. .... 
SomenUle, Hn. Baphii TaUraidee, Tr. 
atlll»Bler, F*ai. Ulii Cmlh>rli» JohDnn, Sec. 
FBNN^raiMMpblii BniHsb, Geo. W. Bllchf, Cor. S 
'" crCo. Fern. Ml9M(rlHE.Erede]l,6t 



Ccnln BisihA, reler W*. Holil 
□luktbur;. aidMrd Impan), T 

UepbmlbK, DHTid Ujubert, Tr. ' 



u HanfoFd, Ar. 
.„.j„-.E_, .,.-.. — ..... ..^riltt Sicktl, Sec 

TIBn, S«a»Co.WUIlaiiiHunl<r,See. 
. UF. CAN.— BrcckrilJc.Lcci]) Co. Fen. Hrt, philnt Emut, Sn. 



108 



KCCEIFTS. 



[i8£9. 



SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 
N- JEE.««Haa)bttrgb, Feni. Mrs. D. Haines, Tr. 
N. GAR.— North Oarviina Book Co. Rev. James W. Douglass, Ag. 
Tiacu sold at the Depository to Individuals, 



I 



ForTr. 

600 

39 00 

182 24 



Diredarsfor Life, 

CONN«^Norvpleh, Wiiliam P. 

Oreene, E^. - - - 125 00 
V. York, Hudson, Colnm. Co. Rev. 

Wm. Chester, by individuals and 

A. T. 8. (In part of $dO) - 28 40 
N. JER*— New Bmnswiek, Rev. 

Jos. H. Jonr8,bv his Ohurch and 
Cong, (in full of $50) - - SO 00 
VI R.-rCutpeper CourtoHoose, R v. 
Geo. A. Sautb, l^ Ladies, (in fuU 
of f SO) • - - • 10 00 

Membenfor Life. 

3IASS^West Newbury, 3d Par. 

Mrs. Sarah Hills, by Fern. Ben. 

Tract Society, - - - 90 00 
CONN.— Norwich, Wm. O. Oilman^35 00 
Rideeiield, Dea. Elisba Ilawley, 30 00 
Stafford, Lucius Orrin Lyman 

Smith, by Ids lather. Rev. Har- 
vey Smith, ' • - - SO 00 
Winchester, Mrs. Elixabetfa Blake, SO 00 
N.YORK.— Bethlehem, Mrs. Arte- 

mas Dean, by Church & Cong. SO 87 
Blooming Grove, Mrs. Melisoent 

Smith, (in part of $20) - - 100 
Dridgehampton, L. I. Rev. Amzi 

Frauds, (in fuU of $30) - • 10 00 
Ooshen, Orange Cii. Thomas W. 

Bradner, - - > • 30 00 
Ooshen, Orange Co. Dr. S. Crane, SO 00 
Little Britain, Ass. Ref. Cong. Rv. 

R. H. Wallis, by his Society, 20 00 
Sackett*8 Harbor, Rev. Ebenezer 

H. Snowden, by Mrs. Susan 

Snowden, (in full of 30) . - 15 00 
Scotchtown, John McWtUiams, (in 

part of $20) - - - S 00 

N. JER.— Bloomsbury, Bliss Eliza 

Hyndshaw, • - - • 30 00 
Greenwich, Warren Co. Rev.Wm. 

B. Sloan, by his Church liCong. 31 00 
Newton, Rev. Jos. L. Shafer, by 

his Ohurch and Cong. - - 20 75 
RotAaway, Rev. Barnabas King, 

by hist;i>nreb and Cong. - ' 20 00 
Six Mile Run, Rev. Jas. RomQrn, 

by his Church and Cong. - tO 00 
Bomerville, Rev. Richard Van 

Kleek, by his Church and Cong. 20 00 
PENN.— Canonsburg, Jefferson 

Coll<tge, Rev. ProfT Wm. Smith, 

by Students, • • SO 00 

Annual Members, ifl2 each. 

N. YORK.^New Windsor, Daniel 
Moores, - - - - S 00 

N. York City, Mrs. Geo.Codwise, 
Jas. Davituon, Mrs. Jno. Peck, 6 00 

N. JER.— Rockaway, Hiss Electa 
Jackson King, - - - 2 00 

Olhtr Vonaiions. 
MASS.— Belcbertown, individqal^ 



(in full of contrlbotioB of $t0O 

from that place) - - - 1 78 
Blanford, from the Church, - 15 00 
Conwuy, Elijah Nash, for ValL 

Miss; - - - - - 5 00 
CONN.— A Friend. - - -8 00 
Cheshire, A Friend, - - 1 00 

Middletown, E.G. Southroayd, for 

ValL Miss. .... 5 00 
Stafford, sundry individuals, • 5 00 
Winchester Centre, individuals, 4 (i3 
N. YORK— Bloomingdale, Miss 

Ann Strieker, . * - 5 00 
Blooming Grove, Individuals, 16 S& 
Flnlbush, L. L, Mrs. Ellen C. 

Strong, ti 00 

Goshen, Daniel Case, - . 50 

GroiOD, Fem. Friend, 50 cts. for 

Burmah, and 50 cts. for Ceylou, 1 00 
Hopewell, iodividuals. > - 2 00 
KInderhook, Colum. co. Church & 

Cong, of Rev. JacobSlckles, for 

Valt. Miss. • - . . 87 3t 
Rinderhook, Colum. co. Students 

in Academy, for ValL Miss > 3 81 
Lebanon, Roswell Woodworth, S 00 
Marbletown, Ulster co. individuals, 31 91 
Middletown, Miss Caroline Han- 

ford, ... - . 1 0(1 
Montgomery, individuals, • 15 19 
New Windsor, individuals, 2 00 

New York City, Cash $3, by Dr. 

Wiltett, Children of Orphan 

Asylum, collected on 4th July, 

$2, a Friend, $3, do. 50 cts. - 6 50 
Scotchtown, Jason C<Mrwin, $3^ do. 

OUver Bailey, $1, • - - 8 00 
Utica, Ladies, for perpetuatTraef, 

** Incorrigible Sinner forwarned 

of his doom,** - - - 40 00 
Waldra, Individuals • • 13 81 
N. JER— HHIstone, MIsi T. Van 

Harlengen, . - • 10 OO 

Springfield, E. Clark, 50 cts. A. 

Duvnell, 50 cts. - - - 1 OO 
VIR.— Augusta CO. Major Samuel 

Bell, - . - - - 5 00 
Received by Rev. F. Y. Vail, on 

board steamboat Washiogton, 

for sup|4ying boats with Tracts 

on Miss. River, - . 100 00 

The above list contains donations— 
For Tracts for steamboats on Miss. 

River, 100 00 

For Tracts for Val. of Miss. . 50 02 
For Tracts for Burmah, . - 50 

For Tracts for Ceylon, . - 50 

For perpetual. Tract, Ko. SIS, • 40 00 

Whole am*t of Donations, $1 ,048 54 
Received for Tracts sold, 4,381 9i 

Total, $5,310 45 



THE AMEKICAN 



"Tho Field iilhoWorW," 



PR£8S]NT state: 



AMERZCAXr TRACT SOCIfiTV. 

The follaving iienu in reference (o this Society, deaerre, >i the 
present lime, tbe couideratiiiii of every friend of (be Tract cmiie. 

I, Operaimiu in Ihe Valley o/Ihe Miisiulppi. 
At Ihe clsM of the lut autumn, this Society commiiiiaiied lii: 
Agtntt ID labor among the 6,000,000 of that iatcrcHiDg Valley, and 
JiM arc Kill faithfully prosecutin|- their work; qoI only rormiag De- 
palileriec ia the large towm, and Auiiliariei in every direction arouad 
them, and cndeBToriDg, through the iDitrumentality of Iheie Inttitu- 
tiona Bqd by gratUiteui dittribulioni, to introduce Tracti into erpiy 
Vol- IV. 10 tWaoti K(.. 46. 



1.10 PaESENT STA.TE OF TH£ [Sept* 

familj ; but preacbiag the Gospel continually, on the Sabbath, and tlie 
other dvfi of the week, wherever they g^o. 

It is exceeding^Iy encouraging that the friends of the cause at the 
West have ecMiperated in these efforts with great promptness and 
liberalitjr* Their contributions b^ve been almost exclusively appro- 
priated to the purchasing of Tracts. These the Parent Society haa 
furnished at cost, and ha« also sent Tracts to a large additional amount 
on a short credit, besides making continual grants of Tracts for gra- 
tuitous distribution in the more destitute places. 

The whole sum remitted by AuxQiaries in the Valley of the Missis- 
sippi for Tracts, during the year ending May I, was ^,628; th^ 
value of Tracts sent into that country during the same period was 
about f9,000 ; of which Tracts, 800,000 pages were ditlrilnUtd gra- 
iuUoudy* On the 1st of August,. Tracts, exd^ive of grants, had been 
sent into that country, over and above the whole amount which had 
at that lime been received, to the value of upwards of $5,000. 

Every thing a0brds encouragement vigorously to prosecute these 
Western operations. 

II. MoTithly distribution of a T^cxtto every Family 
vfUling to receive it. 

This system of* effort, (for a definite description of which ,we refer 
ttf the American Tract Bfogaaine for August) is engaging the serious 
and heartfelt attention and prayers of Christians extensively in almost 
every portion of the country ; and in many of our principal towns, in 
the North, the South, the East, and the West, it is already adopt- 
ed with encouraging success. We have seen the most intelligent 
Christians of the land, clergymen, and instructiHv in our principifl 
theological and literary institutions, when their countenances glowed, 
and their hearts burned, in view of that providence of God by which 
Christians are induced to go personally, and, in christian kindness and 
love, tender tha message of the Gospel, in the form of Tracts, to all. 
It is regarded as (and truly it is) one additional step in the onward 
march of the means of Gospel grace, wfaicli, we trust, Giod will bless in 
the renovation of our land and world. 

It carries the message of the Gospel to those who will not come 
after it, and carries it to ali; not with cold and distant formality, but 
in the kindly intercourse of social lif^. 

It gives one short portion of truth this month and another the next, 
** line upon line — ^precept upon precept^-here a little and there a lit- 
tle.*' The Tract lies in sight of the eye, to be taken up while sitting 
down to rest, or waiting for a friend, or when, for any reason, the mo- 
ment of time hangs heavily. The successive Tracts come in a rich 
variety— something, new and attractive every month-*and tiiey are 



J 829.] AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETt. Ill 

tkofl Ikr more likely to be read and to be asefid, than if twelve TrtctK 
were proeented at one time to each fttmily . 

This system ofefibrt sapplies in some degree the want of pastoral 
visitation. Ministers usually confine their visits to the people of their 
own charge, and find it impossible to sustain the amount of labor re- 
qnired within those limits. How, then, are others, who do not attend 
poblie worship, and see no commissioned minister of Christ in their 
own bouseSf to receive the message of the Gospel f Let the pious 
layman, and the pious lady, go and carry it to all who are williilg to 
receive it, in the pages of Tracts, and on hearts warm with love to 
Christ and the souls of .men. 

These visits, when the object of them is understood, are almost 
universally well received ; indeed always, if the distributors have a 
proper spirit and proper qualifications for the work, except in cases 
of unusual prejudice and bitterness against evangelical truth and ef- 
forts. The Tracts are given to aU, with no distinctions on account of 
poverty, or vice, or error, which can bethought invidious; and still 
it is left to all voluntarily to accept or reject the proflered gift. In 
the prosecution of this work, prejudices, in a multitude of instances, 
are found to be giving way, and most gratifying evidences of good 
accomplished have cheered the hearts of those who have engaged 
in it. 

in adopting this system of effmrt, we recommend as strict an adhe- 
rence as possible to the plan described 'in the August Tract Maga* 
sine. The distribution is wwtUhly ; the tame Tract, in each place, is 
each month presented to all ; the duties assigned to each distributor 
are perfectly definite : he has a certain district to occupy personally, 
and for the manner in which the duty is ducharged in his district, he 
a/otte is responsible. 

We know of no amount of good which may not be anticipated to 
result from this system of effort, if ftuthfully and perseveringly carried 
into operation throughout the country. 

III. State of the Society's Funds. 

The ftinds of the American Tract Society, at the last meeting of 
the Committee, feU more than 91100 short of the turn requisite for 
meeting the InUs then due ; it has not had funds in its treasnrjff at any 
time since Mio^ 1, nffideni to meet the current expenses of one week ; 
it has no permanent funds whatever; and members of the Committee 
are now under personal obligationif for paper on which the Tracts are 
printed, to the amount of $6,043 24> which must be met within two 
months, and of upwards off$afiOdmore,which must be met within fae 
months, » 

And the field of operation in our country is immenselif toide ; there 



U2 LOSTDOIV BELI0I0U8 TBACT SOCIETT. [Sept? 

are 12|000,000 of « tbinking, investigating, reading people, to be lup- 
plied ; and these 12,000/X)Q will soon be 20,000,000, 25,000,000, 
30,000,000, and onward ; every day we delay, the field is becoming 
larger, and the habits of transgression more inveterate. The Soci- 
ety 's operations in the Valley of (he Mississippi require extensive re* 
sources : the sustaining of its agents, (and who, of all the laborers in 
the Master's vineyard, are occupying a more promising field ?) the 
granting to that country of not far from 1,000,000 pages of Tracts, 
annually, for gratuitous distribution ; and advancing, as the Commit- 
tee have now done, more than |^,000, for Tracts forwarded to that 
country, beyond the whole amount of moneys received ; all these ex- 
penditures will require liberal and continued contributions from the 
friends of the cause. 

The operations of the Society are eeonomieal ; it printed the last 
year, notwithstanding all incidental expenses, eleven pages of Tractt 
for every eeni received. 

The Tracts are blessed moie and more in the evident eonvenion of 
souls to God ; very numerous instances of this kind have recently been 
communicated in the correspondence of the Society, especially from 
the West. 

Is it not desirable that Auxiliaries should aid the Society in its 
great work, by donations 7 that ministers should be constituted Direc- 
tors for Life, by the contribution of $50, or Members for Life, by 
the contribution of $20 ? that those to whom God has given means, 
should contribute liberally of their abundance, and that all should 
contribute something ? 



I.ONDON RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY. 

THIRTIETH ANNIVSBSARY^ 

The Thirtieth Anniversary of this Society was held at the City of 
London Tavern, on Friday morning, at 6 o'clock. May 15, 1829^ 
Thomas Pellatt, El8<i. in the chair. 

For the accommodation of the friends of the Society in the western 
part of the Metropolis, the Anniversary was also celebrated at Willis's 
Rooms, King-street, St. James's, when the MARi^ins of Cholmon< 
DSLET presided. 

The speakers at the first-mentioned meeting were, Rev. R. Marks, 
Rev. Dr. Philip, from South Africa, Rev. Dr. Bennett, John James, 
Esq., Rev. J. Hughes, Rev. J. Dyer, Rev. S. Hillyard, Rev. W. 
Jowett, late from Malta, Rev. R. Asbton, Rev. John Hands, Samue^ 
Fletcher, Esq. Treasurer of the Manchester Tract Society, Rev. Ho<. 
ratio Montague, Rev. Dr. Cox« and Bev^ J. Campbell, 



tZih.] LOVDON BEI«IOIOUS TRACT SOCIETY. lid 

The Western Meeting was addressed by Rer. W. Marsh, Rev. J. 
Hatchard, Rer. W. Jowett, Rev. J. Hughes, Rev. Dr. Steinkopf, Rev. 
D. Wilson, Rev^ J. Burnett, Rev. Rowland Hill, Rev. W. Orme, Rev. 
Dr. Henderson, Hon. and Rev. Baptist Noel, and Rev. H. D. Leed8> 
Missionary from Malta. At this meeting Mr. Jones, the Assistant^ 
Secretary, presented the followins items in the 

ProgreMS of ike Society. 

The Society was formed in 1799. The publication of Tracts to be 
vended by hawkers commenced in 1806. In 1809, Rev. Legh Rich- 
mond's Tracts, the Dairyman's Daughter and African Servant, were 
published, of the former of which 80,000 copies were sold within 
twelve months. The year 1824 witnessed a mighty increase of 
the Society : in that year the Society first published its Monthly 
Tract Magazine, and Child's Companion ; a number of friends also 
then came forward, and enabled the Society to publish Bunyan's ** Holy 
War," and several other valuable works. 

In the 10th year of the Society, its receipts were $11,500; in the 
20th, $28,000; in the SOth, $101,000. ' 

At the close of the 10th year, its publiccUions amounted to 160 ; at 
the close of the 20th, 881; of the 30th, more than 1000. 

At the close of the 10th year, the Society had circulated 7,000,000 
of publications ; at the close of the 20tb, 40,000,000 ; at the close of 
the 30th, 180,000,000 had issued from the Depository, and from Fo< 
reign Societies aided by their funds, aud in 48 different languages. 

In 1806, the Society first printed Tracts in foreign languages^ issu- 
ing them that year in Spanish, Italian, and German. In 1815, the 
Society beean to aid Rev^ Dr. Morrison in publishing Tracts in China, 
and sirice the year 1818, it has aided extensively ui publishing Tracts 
in various native languages of India. 

Abstract of the Report. 

The report presents an interesting view of the Society's operations 
in China, Singapore, and Pinang ; showing that Tracts are apparently 
the only means by which the Gospel can now be conveyed to a great 
part of the Chinese population, and that cm tn^trin^ spirit is mani- 
festly rising among them. Statements of simUar import are made 
from Java, Siam, Calcutta, Serampore, Benares, Surat, Bombay, 
Jaflna, Columbo, Bellary, and Madras ; at the latter of which places, 
6 or 7 families have renounced Roman Catholicism and espoused 
the Protestant faith, and two intelligent young heathen give evidence 
of a savtngeonreriion to Crod^ through the reading of Tracts. 

The Society has aided in printing Tracts in the Armenian, Tartar, 
aud Persian languages; has extended its aid to Australasia and 
Southern and Western Africa ; and has printed, the past year, 5 new 
Spanish Tracts, and 16 Spanish children's Tracts, with reference to 
the supply of South America, to which 50,000 of these publications 
have, during the year, been sent. To the West Indies 13,000 have 
been sent, and large supplies to the Canadas. 

The Report expresses great joy in the success of the American 
Tract Society, especially in its operations in the Valley of the Mis- 
sissippi. 



114 LOUDON RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETT. [S^ptr 

In Poland, nearly lO^OOO German and Polish Tracts were circulated 
the la»t year. The Leipsig Tract Society are publishing soch vork» 
as " Erskine on Faith/' and *' Scott's Force of Truth/' to counteract 
the principles of rationalism. A Committee has been fbrmed at Chris- 
tiana, in Norway, which the London Society have authorized to trans* . 
late 8 new Tracts, and print editions of 5,000 each, to form the basis 
of a Tract Society. The Society at Copenhagen has, since 1830, 
printed 198,000 copies of 42 differ«nt Tracts. The Hambui^ Tract 
Society has, during the year, circulated 142,187 publications. 

At Malta, Rev. Mr. Jowett has carried through the press Baxter's 
Call and several important Tracts. 

The Tract Societies in ScoUanH purchase Tracts to a considerable 
extent from the London Society. Several new Societies have been 
formed in SotUh Wales ; and during the year, 148,000 Tracts and 
handbills have been granted for distribution in Ireland, 

During the year^ the following Tracts and handbills have been cir- 
culated, chiefly, if not wholly, in England: 21,000 Tracts and 72,000 
handbills by the Christian Instruction Society ; dO^OOO, Bristol City 
Mission ; 60,000 in the courts and alleys of London, in prisons, hos- 
pitals, and workhouses ; 243^000 at the pleasure fairs in London and 
its vicinity^; 26,000 among the crowds attending the execution of 
criminals, and the same number at different horse-races ; 4,500 by 
the Committee for the houseless poor ; 23,000 given to soldiers and 
sailors ; 150,000 on the Sabbath day ; 6,000 Portuguese Tracts to the 
emigrants at Plymouth. Supplies have also been sent to convict 
ships, and numerous other places. The new publieations during the 
year amount to 182. 

Income'. 

The total amount of the Society's receipts for the present year is 
£22,731 7«. Id. ($101,028,) being an increase of £4,314 4«. overth^ 
income of last year. Of the whole sum there were received from 
sales.£ 17,244. 

Circulated during the year, 10,113,463 publications, being an in- 
crease of 463,956, without including any of the Tracts published at 
the Society's expense in foreign countries. 

Addresses, 

The addresses at the Anniversary of this Society, as contained in 
the London " Record" and " World," would fill two or three entire 
numbers of the Tract Magazine, and we have scarcely room for even 
a few brief extracts. On the character of the Addresses, as a whole, 
we remark, that they were truly evangelical, showing great confi- 
dence in the importance and excellence of the Tract cause, and ar- 
dent zeal for its advancement, and manifesting a spirit of great cor- 
diality among Christians of different religious denominations, who 
have so long been harmoniously co-operating in this Society. 

The Rev. Dr. Philip related some most interesting facts respecting 
the infiuence exerted by Tracts among Roman Catholics in France. 
Among other circumstances, two ladies of rank visited a Catholic vil- 
lage in the neighborhood of Paris, and presented a Bible or a Tract 
to every family. The priest was exceedingly enraged, denounced 
their efforts from the pulpit, declaring that the Bibles and Tracts 
should be destroyed. The ladies, after haying spent two hours in 



18i9.] XiONDOlf EELiaiOUS TRACT SOCIETY, 115 

conversation with him, and finding him still stabborn, resolved to calf 
upon the people and endeavor to get the Bibles and Tracts returned, 
to preveni their being bamed. They employed three days in going 
f^om house to house, and, to their surprise, not a singU family were 
mlKngtopart with their Bibles and Tracts! 

The Rev. Dr. Bennett alluded to the industry with which infidel 
publications are circulated, as a motive for increased activity in cir- 
culating evangelical Tracts. " 

The nev. Mr. Jowett gave a most painful account of the deplorable 
ignorance and superstition prevailing in Greece, and other countries 
around the Mediterranean. ''When travelling inGbreece,'' he says, 
" I have seldom found any books in the houses of the priests, except, 
perhaps, a volume or two relating to the church service, to monastic 
rules, or to some abstruse branch of theology, and in these iatter it 
ttsUallv appeared to me that the writer was not only unintelligible, 
but wished to be so ; indeed such is generally the character of scho- 
lastic divinity. In addition to the works of that class, I frequently 
found saintly legends of the most improbable descriptions ; some of 
them fuU of invocations to '' Our Lady Queen of Heaven, and only 
gracious Mediatrix between God and fid^'*' In some places I found 
as many as fifty folio volumes filled wit)i accounts of miracles per- 
formed by the saints, and thirty with those of the Virgin Mary. I 
found, however, almost all the plays, novels, and romances, that, in 
the present day, constitute so large a portion both of French and Eng- 
lish literature.'' Mr. J. related many other facts, and suggested the 
importance of a separate fund for printing Tracts and Books for 
Greece. He wanted £3,000, and had been told that if £1,600 were 
given by individuals, an equal sum might be granted by the Society. 

Surprising Success of two Tract Distributors. 

S. Fletcher, Esq. Treasurer of the Manchester Tract Society, stated, 
that alXMit two years ago, two young men, belonging to the established 
church, were struck with the iniquity that prevailed in a village-with- 
in six miles of Manchester, and turned it in their minds what was 
best to be done. They were poor men, earning each from \2s. to 14s* 
per week. They at length hit upon their plan. They took the 
Tracts of the Society, and on each Sabbath morning walked over to 
the village, and proceeding from cottage to cottage, distributed them 
to the inmates. There were many families, none of whom could read ; 
to these the young men read and explained the Tracts. Their pro- 
gress at first was slow, but, by perseverance, they succeeded. One 
man, who was a most depraved character and a great fighter, was, 
by the blessing of God, rendered as mild and as gentle as a lamb. 
And now, said Mr. F., these young men have a regular congregation 
offromlOOto 150 persons. 

BUILDING FOR THE MEETINGS OF BENETOUBNT 

SOCIETIES IN LONDON, 

The Benevolent Societies being unable to obtain any room of 8ufB> 
cient size to accommodate those who wish to be present at the anni- 
versaries, a subscription was some time since commenced, and raised 
to £24,000, for the purpose of erecting a commodious building for 



116 fi&ANCflCBS AKD AQxiXiUaiss. [Sept, 

thi« explicit porpoie. A site has now been obtained, near the former 
site of Exeter 'Change, in the Strand, and the building will be com* 
menced and completed with all possiUe expedition. The proposed 
dimensions of the Great Hall are 130 feet by 76 ; the area being suffi- 
cient to contain 3,000 persons. There will be offices for at least 14 
Societies, and a large coffee-room, to be placed under the superinten- 
dence of a person of known integrity and respectability. The num-- 
bcr of tickets of admission to the meetings is now limited to 2,000, the 
application for them being often from 3,000 to 4,000. 

ROMAN CATHOLIC BOOK SOCIETY. 

A Society has recently been formed in Dublin, Ireland, under the 
patronage of 30 papal prelates, which have resolved to fiumish " every 
poor Roman Catholic family in Ireland with a select library of reli- 
gious and other useful books.'* 

<* This measure," says a London paper, ** affords the most gratify- 
ing proof of the blessed fruits which are being produced, and coming 
forward to maturity, under the influence of the intelleetual, moral, 
and religious culture which that unhappy country is now reeeiTing. 
The papal prelates are now convinced the people will reed. They 
perceive that the mental food prepared for them by the Protestant Si- 
Cieties is fatal to all their hopes of the prolongation of the pfpal faith ; 
and they, therefore, hazard a measure, which we are persuaded they 
would never have resorted to, but in a case which they conceived t» 
be of extreme necessity.'' 

BRANCHES AND AUXILIARIES. 

The Auxiliary of Richmond, Va. held its anniversary May 27. Cir- 
culated, during the year, 118,000 pages and 27 bound volumes 12mo. 
Tracts ; 38,d(K> pages and 47 bound vols, children's Tracts, and 44 
copies of Doddridge's Rise and Progress.' <* We have heard of seve- 
ral individuals," says the report, " of whom it is believed Tracts have, 
during the year, been blessed to their instruction, and it is hoped, sav- 
ingly to their souls." The report urges to fidelity, from the conside- 
ration that so excellent and extensive a series of Tracts is prepared 
by the Parent Institution ; and, " while the importance of pulpit in- 
struction is not at all diminished, the wonder-working press is pouring 
forth its myriads of intelligent vehicles, and, almost as by miracle, sup- 
plying every hand and every heart with the means of preaching the 
truth and making known the terms of salvation to every child of 
Adam." Rt. Rbv. R. C. Moore, Pret, Wm. F. Micou, SfVeof. Hila- 
ry Bakxr, See. 

Lexington, Ken. Fern. Union ^tixi/ftary.— Anniversary April 29. 
Sold, during the year, 87,448 pages and 23 bound vols, besides 1000 
Christian Almanacs; delivered to subscribers 17»000 pages; granted 
to'missiona^ry stations, Sabbath schools, and otherwise circulated gra- 
tuitously, 8,750 pages. The report, which is an interesting document, 
states, that Tracts distributed are often read till they are entirely worn 
oTit, and the practical effects they have produced show that they have 
not been read in vam. One Tract nsued by the Society has been 
made the evident means of salvation to a dying fellow-creature ; and 
through the influence of another, an individual, who had long neglect- 



1*8.28.] THE GOO0 WOES. GOES ON. U? 

ed «nd despised the public ordinances of God's house, has become si 
regular and attentive worshipper. 

** One Tract, sent by a member of the Society into a neighboring 
county, proved a word in season to a man who had long lived without 
God and without hope in the world. He felt himself a ruined, perish-^ 
ing and undone sinner. That truth which he had so long rejected and 
despised, now pressed with power upon his heart, and appeared in all 
its native loveliness and beauty — and, humbled ui the dust, he fled to 
Christ for l-efuge. It was not long before he was called to a sick and 
dying bed. During his illness he often referred to that little Tract, as 
the evident means by which he had been led away from sin to the love 
and service of his Lord and Redeemer. He died in the full assurance 
of faith; and m peace and holy joy resigned his spirit into the bands 
of God who gave it." 

An extra meeting of the Ltexington Auxiliary was held June 2d, 
when addresses were made by Rev. 0. Eastman, Ag. for the Valley of 
the Mississippi, Rev. Dr. Woods, and Rev. Messrs. Peers, Young and 
Hinckley; and a subscription was opened to increase the Depository, 
which was immediately afterward raised to $200 dollars. Miss Mar- 
garet A. Bltthk, Stc. Mr. L. Stephens, Ageni, 

Auxiliary af Dearierit Geo. — First anniversary Feb. 1829. Receipts 
^8 10. Circulated 65,000 pages, 24 bound vols, and nine copies of 
the Rise and Progress. Of the Tracts, a large part have been distri- 
buted gratuitously, and with great system and thoroughness, so that 
almost all the adjacent country has been to some extent supplied ; 
17,900 were sold to the Auxiliary at St. Mary's, from which an inte- 
resting report has been received. Bayard E. Hand, Es^. Dreas. and 
Ag., £• S. RsBS, See. 

Youne Men* 8 AuxUiarv, Petersburg, Va. — Curculated during the 
year, 62378 pages, of which 16,378 were gratuitously distributed. 
Total circulated in three years, 266,078 pages. An effort is making 
to raise funds for a permanent Depository. 

Niiuau HaU AuxUianf, Princeton, N. J.— Anniversary, August 1. 
Curculated during the year, 160,000 pages ; besides making a dona- 
tion of $75 to the American Tract Society. The Board resolved, in 
March last, ** to form an Auxiliary to the American Tract Society in 
every township in the state of New<Jersey where it was practicable ;" 
and in pursuance of the object, five Agents had, during the springs 
labored several weeks with much success in the northern part of the 
State.— The meeting was addressed by Rev. Dr. Alexander, Rev. 
Prof. Halsey, Rev. Mr. Breckenridge, of Baltimore, the Correspond- 
ing. Secretary of the Parent Institution, and others, in an interesting 
manner; and it was unanimously resolved, in connexion with the 
Female Tract Society in the village, to supply every family in Prince- 
ton with a IVael monthly; and also that the Board use every exertion 
tq extend the eyttem of monthly distribution throughout thfi State, 

THE GOOD WORK GOES ON. 

The system of monthly distribution (see p. 110.) is adopted in nu^ 
merous places, and nowhere, that we have learned, without success. 
In NeuHwk, K. J., 1506 families were visited, of whom only three 
declined receivmg tbe Tract The 40 male and female distributors 
bfive found the work delightful, and often refreshing to their own, 
hearts, Jt is mufih to b< dciirid, that the remits of this systematic 



118 



mscsiPVB. 



[Sept 

^vti m Mcft flau thouid he e&mnwmcaUif fir the tncwragement 
ofother$ engaged in the same work. 

Donations to the Lihrary* 

The Committee acknowledge the reception of an entire set of the 
jraUicationa of the Baptist General Tract Society » pretented through 
that Society's General Agent. Also, Bolton's Instructions for the 
Afflicted ; 1 toI. 4to. ; presented by Mr. T. H. Goddard, of New-Toric. 

RBCEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASUllT OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETV, 
DiiHV <^ *Mtniik endmg Atig^uit 15, 1889. 



FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 

V£R«— Ratfaad, Aoz. Dop^ A. L. Browa, Depositary, 
Mi^S«— Sprinffteld, Solomon Warriner, Jim. Tr. 
Waridngton, Mrinhire co. Rev. Caleb Knight, Ag. 
WoMfleld, F«Bi. Mrs. S. Post, Ag. . 
OONN.-C;aBterlrar7, Fern. BetBejr L. Coit, Ag. 
Hartford, CodB' Braiieb, Charlea Hosmer, Sec. 
New-Haven, A. Townaend, Jun. Tr. 

Do. Female, Mn. Henrietta F. Wlatney, Tr. 
Now-Praslon, Samuel ATerilt, Tr. . 
Norwich, Fem. Sarah Backus, Sec . • 

Pisrmottth, Edward Langdon, Tr. . 
Sharon, Charlea F. Sedgwick, Tr. . 
Torrington, Alphens Hodget, Sec. . 
N. YORK'«-Ancram, C<dumb. co. Rev. Heiman Vedder, 
Attbnm, Clark B. Hotchkiaa, Ag. . 
Do. by their Aux. at Aurora, • 
BedfiMrd, Fern. Mrs. Susan S. Nichob, Sec. . 
Carmel, Red Mills, Fem. Pbebe Smith, Sec. . 
OsiMmMa in Widton, DeL oo. Darius Soely, See. 
Deposit, Del. co. Ror. Elisha Wise, Tr. 
FishkiU Landing, Fem. Maria W. Teller, Sec. 
Fart Edward, zadock Wheeler, Eso. Pres. . 
Ranter, Greene co. E. J. Stinqpson, Sec. 
LanalngbuMh, E. R. Parmelee, Sec. 
MottieelhH Rev. William McJimsey, Ag. 
New-Rocbelle, Fem. Miss Sopliia Brewster, Sec. 
New-York City Aux. Alfred cdwards, Tr. . 

Do. 1^ Fem. Aux. Mrs. J. R. Hard, Tr. 

Chrystie^M. Methodist Ch. Fem. Mia. Sarth B. StihreU, Tr. 

St. Geone's Ch. Fem. Miss Ann Domhuck, Tr. 
Pleasant VaUey, J. Gabandan, Tr. . 
Pooriikeepaie, L. J. Van Klecdt, Tr. 

Do. Female, Mrs. S. L. Tnipen, Directress, 

Rochester, Monroe co. Levi A. Ward, Tr. . 
Sweden, M. H. Smith, Sec . . 

Troy, Abner Lovelaad, Tr. 
Utira, Edward Vernon, Sec. 
N. JER.<*-FleniUigton, B. R. JohnaoDf Tr. . 
Harmony in Graeawich, Warren ec Fem. Ann T. Fair, Sec. 
Liberty Corner in Bernards, William Annin, Tr. 
Mendham, Fem. BDss Ruth Dayton, Tr. 
Morristown, Fem. Mrs. Sarah A lUlls, Dhreetress, 
Newark, Ellison Conger j Sec. 
Newton, Whitfleki 8. Johnson, Tr. . 
Oxford, Warren ec Fem. J. M. Sherrerd, Esq. Ag, 
Perth Amboy, Fem. M^ Marnret Morris, Tr. 
Rockaway, Fem. Miss Emily Beach, Sec 
PENN.-^e, Fem. EmUy Wight, Sec 
}a>"Hagerstown, Ftam^ Rebecca L. Martin, Sec. 
Worcsster ec Fem. Maria E. Bredell, Sec , 



89 00 
S7 44 

675 
18 00 

7S3 
aODOO 

8 
11 

8 

9 



84 
85 

40 
00 



15 00 
380 
6 94 
356 
850 



8 01 
6 38 
SO 
50 
00 
85 
00 



88 90 

14 00 
1 60 

150 00 

86 00 
10 50 

600 
880 
800 
6 18 
100 00 

55 00 
90 00 

5 00 

87 00 
18 00 

1 88 

15 00 

56 40 
8 85 
900 
1 89 

15 00 

18 75 

3 94 

6 84 



Don. 



885 


867 


3 75 
30 


15 00 


406 
1 19 


150 


8 18 

50 

860 


1 75 


750 


550 
80 00 



4 00 



00 

4 oa 

68 
5 00 

75 
30O 

500 
485 

1 31 

888 



1829.] 



AECEIVTS. 



119 



VIR.— CharlotteTiIle» (Albemwle oo. Adx.) Rer. FraMis Bow 

man, Tr. .... 

NIoifiilk, Robert RobertMOfAg. . 
Rlcbmoad, William F. ]licou,Tr. . 
Winchester, Daniel Gold, Tr. 
N. CAR — ^Ifilloiii Fem. Misa Margaret Smith, See. 
ALA.— HualavUle, Saramel- Coltart, Ag. 
luiB8<-*-NaftehesE, Thomaa Hendenon, Tr. . 
TE14N.— NTashvaie, Samuel B. Snowden, Tr. 
KS^.— Lexington, Fem. L. Stephens, Ag. • 
OHIO.~-Cincinaati, Henrv B. t%nk, Tr. 
Jeiexsg% (Aahtabub eo. Aiix.) Rev. Peny ftm, Sdc. 
Nawark, Licking co. Rev. S. S. Miles, nea. 
Putnam, OHhskiligum eo. Aux.) Levi Whipple, Ag. 
lfO.~St. Louis, W. S. Olmsted, Tr. 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 

N. YORK.— New Utrecht, Fem. Bib. Mks. and Tract Soc. Mrs 

Berrier, Tr. .... 
QrvMe Co. 8. S. Unieii, Mm W^rta, Ag. 
Si JER.— Middletown, Fem. Ben. Soc. Mrs. Ann B. Ti^lor, Sec 
Faitrson, ad Ref. Dutch Church, Ralph Doremns, Tr. 
rJBNN.---Concord^ Veuango co. BL Cassland, Tr. 
Vnt.— Richmond Temperance Soc. 
Tlvete sold at the Depository to iadtviduals, (includiiig |3 for use 

ofRoom^ ...... 



FdrTV. 


10 00 


aooo 


90 00 


UlS 


90 00 


149 90 


917 00 


900 00 


303 9& 


197 00 


KM 00 


3156 


130 00 


100 00 


778 


2 67 


1 17 


50 


300 


10 00 


196 06 



Ihn» 



7 19 



JDireetart fitr Lifk* 

CONN^-East HaTen,Rer. Stephen 
Dodd, by Ladies, (In ftiU atfsOy) 30 00 

N. YORK.— New Paltz, Ulster co. 
Rev. William R. Bogardus, by 
Ladies, (in part or$SO,) 36 79 

OHIO.— Zanesville. Rev. James 
Culbertson, by Fem. A. T. S. of 
Zanesville and Putnam, 90 00 

Mtmbtra for Uft. 

CONN.— Farmittgton, Catharine L. 
Co«ides,ChaunoeyOMiingOowles» 
Mrs. Jennette C. Williams, Austin 
F. WOlianu, $90 each, by Timothy 
Cowles, Esq. 80 00 

Hartford, Mrs. Joseph Rogers, 90 00| 
do.. Miss Jerusha Watson (in ftdl 

of tao,) 10 00 

N. YORK.— Middletown, Orange 
CO. John H. Corwin, by a Fem. 
Friend of Tracts, 90 00 

New-York City, Miss Caroline Eli- 
za Taylor, and Miss Julia Ann 
Taylor, ffiXi each, by their father, 
Mr. Knowles Taylor, 40 00 

N. JER.— Connecticut Farm8,Rev. 
Stephen Thompson, by Fem. Bib. 
and Tract Soc. 90 00 

ALA. — ^Fldrence, Rev. Alexander 
A. Campbell, D. D., by Ladies, 
(inpart of fSO,) 10 00 

TENNv— Farroington, Bedford co. 
Mrs. Emma W. UaU, (in ML of 
$31,> 9 00 

OaUatin, Sumner oo. Rev. John W. 
Hall, by sundry individuals of 
Presb. Church, 90 00 



500 
500 



900 
900 
900 



OaiO^VemoA, Mrs. Laura L. 
Derraw, 20 00 

AnnwU Direetors, 

N. JER.— Newark, Hon. Theodore 

Frelinghuysen, 
PENN. Phfladdphia, Isaac S. 

Loyd, 

Anmud Members. 

N. YORK.— New-York City, Mra. 

AnnBootwick, 
do. Leander Mead, 

da Harriet Van Noetrand, 

VIR.—Eastville, William G. Smith, 9 60 

Other Dono^tonx. 

MASS.— A Friend, 9 00 
Dedham,MissLucy Talbot, forVaU. 

of Sfisaissippi, 10 00 

Salem, John B. Lawrence, Esq. 3 62 

N. YORK.— Fort Edward, Z. W. 1 00 
New-York City, a Friend, 95c.; 

Mrs. Jerrett, 19, 9 ^ 
do. Members of Ref. Dutch Cb* 

Franklin-st. » 95 

N. JER —Hanover, Wm. O. Ford, 9 00 

VIR.— Winchester, Geo. Bamhart, 5 00 
OHIO^-Sottthington, Trumbull co. 

Miss Bemis, 9 jSO 



The above list contains donation— 
For Tracts for Valley of Miss. $10 00 



Whole Amount of Donations, 
Received for Tracts sold, 



$531 36 
3,769 05 



Total, $3,393 41 



ISO REfiE^T FiraLICATlONS. 

RECENT PUBLICATIONS OF THE AMERICAN 

TRACT SOCIETY. 

No. 228. MOAAL DlGNITT or THB MlUXONART ErTEUFSIBE^— PR* 

no. This is, with a verjr alig^ht abridgment, the excellent Discouvse 
of Rev. Dr. Wayland, President of Brown University, published 
under the above title, in several successive editions, and most highly 
•esteemed by the friends of miBsions and of religion g^enerally. It 
may now be circulated by tens of thousands throughout the land, ,at 
mi expense of only two cents for each copy. 

SxBiBs TV. No. 14. A Catkchism on thb Tbit Comhabdmbrtb ; 
to which is added, ^e History of Margaret Andrews— pp. 36. 
This Catechism win be found simple, intelligible, and full for its 
length, as an exposition of the Decalogue ; and will prove, we trus|, 
an important help to the young to understand its spiritual import. 
The History of Margaret Andrews is a simple memoir of a child, who 
strikingly exemplified the effects of genuine unaffected piety in very 
^arly life. 

Sbribs V. No. 7. Lbtters to a Near Relative at School. By 
Rev. John NBWTOB<~pp. 49. These letters, 21 in number, address- 
ed to a child, while they introduce the excellent author to the young, 
are a beautiful •specimen of his happy talent- in epistolary writing, 
and are full of instruction. They are interesting to a child, and yet 
those of mature years, and especially parents, will find them amply 
deserving their attentive perusal. 

BAXTER'S SAINTS' REST. 

This work is stereotyped and perpetuated by the Society, through 
the donation of $100 each, by Mr. Henry Homes, Boston ; Rev.'jE. 
Burgess, Dedham, Mass.; Nicholas Brown, Esq., Providence; Rev. 
Dr. Milaor, of New-York; Hon. S. Van Rensselaer, Albany; and 
Rev. H. Dwight, of Geneva: and S50each, from Asa Tenny, Esq., 
of Newbury, Vt. ; Matthew Marvin, Esq., Wilton, Con.; and Col.. 
Henry Rutgers and S. C, New-York. It contains 270 pages ; price, 
full bound in sheep, 37 1-2 cents ; half bott«d in calf, 50 cents. 

We cannot but esteem this and Doddridge's Rise and Progress as a 
very valuable accession to the publications of the Society. We hope 
that soon, through the liberality of other friends, other evangelical 
works, of kindred character, will be issued by the Society, and circa>> 
rated throughout the country, especially in all our new settlements. / 



PREMIUM TRACTS. 

The Premium Tracts on sailing vessels out of port on the Sabbath 
were under consideration at the time of putting this sheet to press. 

A premium of fifty dollars is offered for the best Tract, not exceed- 
ing 12 pages, " to mfluence the young to abstain entirely from the use 
of ardent spirits, and portraying to parents the guilt and danger of 
tempting them to use it;*' to be presented on or before the^it day of 
November next. 

Also fifty dollar* for the best Tract, not exceeding 12 pages, on ** the 
Ckearacier and Prospect* of the Heathen;" to be presented on #r fieferb 
November 1, 1829. 



THE AMERICAN 

VOL. IT.] OOTOBBK, 1809. [NO. lO. 



TRACT CAUSE IN LOnsUNA AND SIISSI88IPPI, 

The following facti claim Ibeaeriom ciia>itl«r>rii>ii ofall the friends 
of the Redeemer, and dearl; ghow at once the obligation and the en- 
couragement to redouble our eObrli for the moral wellareof (he Weal 
and South. The; are communicated b; the Rev. Frarelu T. Vul, 
andconstituteapartof the report of hiiafrencj, in the itatei referred 
|0, in behalf of the American Tract Societ;. 

In commenciiig raj aeenc; in Louisiana and Miuiuippi, itatci leii 
bleued, perhapt, with the privilegei of the Qoipel than an; other 
part of the Uaion.but little expectation vai enlerltuned of collecting 
(iindifor the Tract cauie: our great work was to explore the field, to * 
awaken intereil on the subject of Tract! and of religion generall;, 
and to promote, as far as possible, the gratuitous distribution of these 
publications among the deilitute. 

Some idea of the increasine importance and wants of these alatet, 
as a field for MiSsioDar; and Tract operations, will be obtained, when 
jou coDtemtdate the Ibllowing fitos : They embrace an extent of 
tertitor; of 680 mUes long, k; 360 broad, a Mrsa portion of wbieb la 

Vol. IV. Jl iWaoLttfth-Uk 



l&i LOUISIANA AND MISSISSIPPI* [Ocf. 

allayial soil, of almost inezhaustible fertility. In 1810 the two states 
contained about 120,000 inhabitants; in 1820, 290,000; they now 
contain about 500,000, and the population is rapidly increasing^. 

It might seem invidious to state statiMHciiUyt the number, or rather 
the dearth of preachers of the Grospel, of every denomination, in these 
two states ; but I assure you their number is very small; scarcely bear- 
ine the resemblance of an actual supply of the wants of the people. 
It IS no uncommon thin;;^ to find families who have not heard the Gos- 
pel fbr five, and even for ten years ; while at the same time actual in- 
vestigation shows, that in large portions of these states, from one 
quarter to one third of the population are wholly destitute of the Bible. 
In the city of New-Orleans, already containing 50,000 inhabitants, 
and one of the most important points of moral influence in our coun- 
try, I am confident the whole number of membert of att Protestant 
churches, exiAuaive o{ the colored population, hvi.httle exceeds 100, 
The part of Louisiana which lies west of the Mississippi, a most fertile 
region, 200 miles long and 100 broad, embracing ten counties, is in 
a very great degree destitute of all the means of Grospel grace ; and 
ten or twelve counties in the interior of the state of Mississippi are 
but little better supplied. 

There are indeed, in various parts of these states, active Christians, 
who do honor to the cause of their Master, who mourn over the mo- 
ral desolations around them, and who are ready to co-operate in every 
well-dhrected eflfort for the promotion of the interests of true religion; 
but it canimt be concealed^ that Infidelity, Universalism, and other 
destructive errors, extensively prevail ; and that, as a consequence, 
duelling, gambling, horse-racing, profaneness, intemperance, andSab^ 
bath-breaking often cause the Christian's heart to bleed, and in many 
places seem almost to have incorporated themselves with the fiishion- 
able and approved customs of society. 

I allude to the prevalence of these errors and vices in the states re- 
ferred to, solely to show the great and imperious necessity of extend- 
ing to them, without any delay, and in every practicable form, the 
blessed influences of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. 

And I ask, do not these heart-afi'ecting fai^ impose sacred and irre- 
sistible claims upon our young men, who have entered, or are about 
to enter the ministry, for their immediate service and their holiest ef- 
forts 7 Many in these states are anxious to have the Gospel, its en« 
lightened muustry and appropriate influences introduced among 
them. Many would desire this, if for no other reason, because they 
are tired of the crime and suffering resulting from infidelity and irre- 
ligien. I have myself repeatedly received earnest solicitatioBs to labor 
with them, and also to send them other preachers of the Gospel. 
These interesting appeals I have presented to several Missionary So- 
« cleties, and the painful result is, that not a singU new laborer is yet 
found to say, ** Here am I, Lord, send me.'' 

In view of all these facts, who can fail to see the immense import* 
ance of furnishing this whole country with Tract preae?^cr8, as almost 
the only means of salvation with which they can now be supplied V 
And it is a matter of gratitude to God, that he has succeeded tlTis 
good work far beyond our expectations^ 



18£9.] LOUISIANA AND UISSI88IPPI. 129 

SUCCESSFUL KFFOHTS FOR THE TRACT CAUSE. 

It may not be improper to state, that before commenciDg m v efforts 
in Louisiana and Mississippi, I yisited MobiU, in the neighboring state 
of Alabama. That city contains from 8.000 to 10,000 inhabitants, 
with three small Protestant churches, and but a handful of members 
in each. There being but few church members able to do any thing 
in the way of contributing funds, and the great mass of the people 
not being accustomed to objects of this kind, we were agreeably dis- 
appointed in establishing a state Branch, and raising upwards of 400 
dollars for the Depository ; and by the assistance of some excellent 
female Missionaries, we succeeded in circulating Tracts generally 
throughout the city. A commodious room has been furnished gratu- 
itously by the Rev. Mr. Warren, in the lower part of the Government- 
street church, for a Depository for Bibles, Tracts, &«. which will great- 
ly conduce to the prosperity of this Branch, through which it is noped 
a large portion of the state may be supplied with Tracts. 

At NeW'Orleantf notwithstanding much ignorance and prejudice in 
reltton to the Tract cause, we succeeded in raising between 600 and 
&M dollars, chiefly for establishing a permanent Depository for the 
•upply of Auxiliaries in Louisiana and other adjacent parts.'" 

An Auxiliary was also formed in JVdteheZf and the liberal sum 
of 628 dollars was there subscribed, chiefly for a permaflent Depo- 
sitory. At Gibsonport, 260 dollars were subscribed ; at Alexandria, 
on the Red River, 270 dollars ; at Petit Chilpk, 180 dollars ; at Baton 
BougCf St. FrancisviUe^ NatebitnebiLa, and Coti, in Louisiana, and at 
Washington tLnd Clinionf in Mississippi, each 100 dollars, or upwards; 
at Bethel, 70 dollars, Vixburg, 60 dollars, Faye</e, 40 dollars ; making 
the whole sum subscribed at the organisation of 16 Auxiliaries, not 
far from 3,000 dollars. All these subscriptions are for Tracts, which 
are returned into that country at the cost prices. 

I could relate many interesting facts respecting this field of labor 
and the Societies now formed, did I not fear wearying your patience. 
Two or three must suflice as a specimen of the rest. 

AGEIIVr Oir THE RED RITER. 

Forty miles from Texas, I found about 1000 English, French and 
Spanish inhabitants, but not a single Protestant professor of religion. 
Receiving no encouragement from several English gentlemen, on 
whom I called, in reference to the promotion of the Tract cause among 
them, 1 repaired on board the steamboat to devise some plan of suc- 
cessful operation ; still hoping against hope, that God had something 
for me to do even in this, as it then seemed, spiritual desert; nor was 
my hope and faith disappointed. While waiting for Divine gaidance, 
God, in his kind providence, sent on board our boat a French Catho-,-. 
lie ; I introduced myself to him — gave him some French Tracts, and 
explained ray object. He became deeply interested, took me to his 
house, and made it my home ; appointed a public meeting ; attended 

* 1 eaonot deny myself the moarnful fJeanire of bere recording the name of a 
very decided friend and active coadjutor, which I found at New-Orleans, in Mr. 
BENJAMIN F. BABCOCK, a meniber of the Episcopal church, who disd some 
weeki since OD board shipi Ntuniag from that dQr to the north* 



124 LOUISIANA ANP MISSISSIPPI. [Oct. 

himself in connexion with a large audience ; a society was formed—- 
our Catholic friend, a man of great influence, formerly a member of 
the senate of Louisiana, was made president, and 100 dollars was 
raised and immediately sent to New-Orleans for Tracts. The door is 
thus opened for these evangelical preachers to publish salvation iB 
the English, French, and Spanish languages to thousands in this pait 
of the state, and also to send them to the still more destitute regions 
of Texas, lying contiguous to Louisiana. 

In passing down the Red River, I spent a Sabbath at Jllexandria, 
120 miles below Natchitoches. There being no Presbyterian, Epis- 
cOpaly or Baptist church here, and very few brethren of the Methodist 
church, but little encouragement was gained from any quarter, that 
much, if any thing, would be done for the Tract cause. We were, 
however, agreeably disappointed in liaving a large and very respect- 
able audience on the Sabbath. After the claims of our Institution 
had been presented in a sermon, a highly respectable judge was in- 
vited to the chair, with a view to form a society. In compliance with 
this invitation, he advocated the cause with warmth and ability, and 
invited his fellow-citizens to co-operate with him in this truly patriotic 
work. A society was immediately organized, embracing almost every 
iamily in our assembly, with our honorable judge at its head, and be- 
tween 200 and 300 dollars was subscribed on the spot. A plan was 
also adopted to send Tracts through the neighboring parts of the stat&, 
by the aid of our travelling Baptist and Methodist preachers. 

HOSPITALITY AND LIBEKALIIT Or THIS FJEOP^X. 

I should be ungrateful were I not to mention the peculiar hospitali- 
ty and kindness of the people in all this portion of country, through 
which I have travelled hundreds of miles, both by land and in steam- 
boats, without being allowed to incur any expense. 

I will mention one or two other facts, showing the liberality of the 
people and their willingness to support religious objects when inte- 
rested in them ; and also showing the importance of extending infor- 
mation of the character of the Tract and other kindred Societies. Oa 
one occasion, having passed the night with a rich planter, who made 
no pretensions to religion, I was gratified by being presented, the next 
morning, with a donation of 20 dollars for the Society. 

At another time, when consulting with a gentleman about forming 
a Tract Society in his vicinity, he seemed to feel but little interest in 
the subject ; said he knew but little about Tract Societies, and did not 
know that they had done much good. He attended a meeting the 
same day for the formation of a Society, and having heard the subject 
fully presented, he gave 100 dollars, saying he did not know that the 
Tract cause was so important, and that he must throw a hundred or 
two dollars into its treasury annually. 

COirXJUAUTION OF 100 DOLLARS OK BOARD A STEAMBOAT. 

In passing up the Mississippi, a voyage of ten or twelve days' length, 
we had between 300 and 400 passengers; Tracts were extensively dis- 
tributed and read, and much interest seemed to be excited. At length 
the Sabbath arrived, arid, as the Savior had, in ancient times, taught 
the people in a ship, it was not judged unlawful^ unauthorized, or iXb 



1829.] IiOrtSIAVA AND MISSISSIPPI. 125. 

«xpedkBC, tlKMigli leldom sanctioned by modern utase on that river^ 
to preach Christ to the multitudes oa our steamboat on that day ; and 
as two services were decided upon, it was hoped that the Tract canse 
might be profitably presented one part of the day. ProTidence smiled 
upon the effort: 100 dollars was cheerfully contributed to fijirnith the 
sttamboatt en the .^tfufim/]|n ioith the bound sets of Tracts. Twenty 
or thirty steamboats, carrymg from three te four hundred passengers 
each, and supplied with few if any reHgious books, will thus be fur- 
nished with one of the most valuable religious libraries, of a similar 
size, in the English language ; and may we not hope that God intends, 
in this way, to send sah'ation to some of these perishing immortals ? 
Why, my dear brother, should not every steamboat o«- our waters, 
with their thronging multitudes, be immediately furnished by their 
own collections, or otherwise, with this interesting means of salvation 1 

- GRATUITOUS DISTRIBUTION. 

In those parts of these states where Societies could not be formed, 
more than 100,000 pages of Tracts have been gratuitously distributed f 
and if our good friends in Boston, Connecticut, New-Tork, and else- 
where, who have contributed to send them, could have witnessed the 
eagerness with which J hey have been received and read ; the expres- 
sions of gratitude they have drawn forth from those who are Messed 
with no Bibles — ^no churches — no ministers of the Grospel; they would 
bless and praise Grod that he gave them the ability and the disposition 
thus to send their destitute brethren the bread of life. 

APPEAL TO THE FRIENDS OF RELIGION. 

I would now say, in conclusion, to all the friends of this cause, if I 
could address them in behalf of that suffering people, whose spiritual 
wants, and woes, and cries for help still cause my heart to bleed ; I 
would say to them in the language of Christian entreaty, do not give 
up the work which you have so usefully commenced, Leave not the 
souls you have now awakened to see their wants and their danger, to 
revert back to stupidity and perish in their sins. The interest now 
awakened will prepare the way for new efforts ; and for this work an 
Agent is pressingly demanded, by whom new Societies must be or- 
ganized, and those already formed, revived and cherished, without 
which they will speedily die, unsustained as many of them are by mi* 
nisterial influence. 

There is also a most urgent demand for a faithful Agent in New- 
Orleans, during eight months in the year, to attend to the general in- 
terests of the Bible, Tract, and Sunday School cause — ^to distribute 
Bibles and Tracts among the 60,000 inhabitants — among multitudes 
of seamen from distant parts, and boatmen from every part of this 
mat Valley ; and to gather the multitudes of children into Sabbath 
Schools. May Gad deliver bis churches and ministers from the niilt 
of abandoning this most important and needy section of our land! 

We beg the foUowen of the Lord Jems Chiigt in oar country, to 
r6ad the above communication, and weigh its import, and pray over 
it, tiU flie language of their inmost heart shall be, "Lord, what wjlt 
thou have me to do,'' <o supply these wastes of Zion ? 

11« 



tS4 ARKANSAS TERRITORY* [Oct^ 

III the Valley, of the Mississippi are now nearly 6,000,00(>of inha-« 
bitants, and as ministers cannot be raised up without a mirade,to sup- 
ply their immediate wants, can we do less than to supply all who can 
read with Tracts 7 

Only two obstacles now present themselres to this work : the want 
of Agents, and the want ofpeeuniary means. The former we believe 
Gk>d will provide ; and can it Ife in the hearts of Christians in these fa- 
vored states, abounding in all the necessaries and even luxuries of life, 
to tpithhold the fundi requisite for sending Tracts to our destitute bre- 
thren at the i^uth and West ? 

But at the last meeting of the Executive Committee of the American 
Society, one member had just become personally responsible for 1,247 
dollars for printing, because i^e Soeietjf* a treasury was empty; and 
an additional sum of 442 dollars was then due, which could be paid 
only by appealing again to the personal funds of individuals who are 
laboring continually for the Society, without the slightest pecuniary 
compensation. 

We feel, that, if the real necessity of additional funds for extending 
the cause of Tracts in our country were but known and felt, every 
Auxiliary would wish annually to contribute a donation to the Parent 
Society ; that many laymen and ladies would gladly contribute 20 dol- 
lars, and thus become life members, or 60 dollars, and become life di- 
rectors ; that many whose means do not allow them to contribute so 
much, would unite with others and constitute their pastors life di- 
rectors or members ; and that every friend of Christ, rich or poor, 
would wish to contribute at least his mite, so that this good work may 
go on. 

May God incline his children to weigh this subject, and do what 
He, in the great day of account, will approve and graciously accept. 



FROM A LAYIMLAX IN THE INTERIOR OF AR- 
KANSAS TERRITORY. 

The grant of 20,000 pages of Tracts, made by the Committee of 
the American Society, in July of 1828, arrived but about a month 
since. We had sent to New-Orieans for a fresh supply, but could ob- 
tain none ; so that 20,000 pages arc all we are to expect till the navi- 
gation opens again the ensuing winter. Of these we shall endeavor 
to make such a distribution, by means of lending and exchanging, as 
will circulate them as widely as possible. We have to express to the 
Committee our warmest thanks for this supply of the Society's pub- 
lications. In our remote situation, our poverty of information Is 
so great, and our hunger so extreme, that we grasp wUh eagerness the 
crumbs that fail frtm your tahtjs* 



18£9.] USEFULNESS OF T&ACT9. Ii27 

In my seelusion here in these Western WUdSf my heptrt, at times, is 
ready to sink within me, at the slowness of Evangelical TOovements to- 
wards poor, neglected, unknown Arkansas! 

It is matter of Terji serious reg^t, that New-Orleans, the g^eat em- 
porium of the West, should at auy time be destitute of Tracts. I hope 
this deficiency will be supplied through the attention of some of the 
travelling Agents, of whose arrival we are informed by the Tract Ma- 
gazine. How gladly would we hail the arrvoal of one of these good 
Missionaries among lu ! But our distance from the large towns, toge- 
ther with our thin-settled condition, precludes the hope at present; 

As to the religious and moral condition of this country ^^ it is deplora- 
ble indeed. On this subject, I could tell you a tale thaiwould cause 
your heart to bleed. We have much need of Missionaries and Tracts. 
We hear of a Missionary at Little Rock, our seat of territorial go- 
vernment, and that his labors have been greatly blessed. But that 
place is more than 100 miles distant from us, and we have but little 
communication with it. 

I have written at this time with a heavy heart ; and have hesitated 
whether I ought not to give over all application for relief, and to keep 
the knowledge of our real situation from afflicting the sensitive hearts 
of your Committee, urdU the means placed in their hands become more 
Qommenmraie vnth their views of benevolence. 



VSBFV&lfaSB OF TRACTS. 

CONVERSION OF A SAILOR BY A TRACT. 

CommuniccUed by the Chaplain at a United States* Naval Station. ; 

One case of conversion through the instrumentality of a Tract has 
lately occurred here. The subject was a young mariner who had been 
somewhat dissipated. He was lately received into the communion of 
the church. In relating his religious experience, he stated, that his 
mind was first awakened to the great concerns of religion and the 
things of another world, by reading the Tract entitled, '' fVithout ho- 
liness no man shall see the Lord.** The rationality of such a qualifica- 
tion for the presence and society of a holy Grod, and the necessary in- 
tercourse of pure and spiritual creatures, appeared at once to his mind 
so dear, so fit and becoming, that he felt no need of ** consulting with 
flesh and blood" to ascertain whether he was, in his then present con* 
dition, a proper subject for the kingdom of Grod ! His own under- 
standing convinced him to the contrary. He viewed himself, for the 
first time, as a creature all over covered with the most vile unclean- 
ness, his heart the residence of corruption, and the fruitful source of 
every abomination and evil work. He was conscious there was no 
trick, nor foolery, nor fanaticism in the solemn declaration, " With- 
out holiness no man shall see the Lord." And in the midst of his con- 
fiision, the first thought he recollected as forcibly occupying his mind 
was, Can the blood of Christ purify such a polluted wretch, and wash 
this filthy heart, this sink of corruption, and make it a fit habitation of 
GK>d through the Spirit ? This reflection was succeeded by the recoK 
lection of that text, ** The blood of Chrtst deai^es fhim aU tlin." Hut 



1S8 tJSEFULNEBS OP TRACTS. [Oct, 

be could not apply it to his unholy heart. He now recollected the cries 
and tears of a young seaman in the chapel a few Sabbaths before, 
and could now account for that agony and anguish of soul. He felt 
guilty, condemned, mined. I conrersed frequently and freely with 
him, furnished him such books as would be enlightening and conso- 
ling, and after a few weeks painful and pungent exercises, through 
the tender mercy of God, he was comforted, I trust, with ** that hope, 
which is an anchor to the soul both sure and steadfast, entering into 
that within the yail." 

TRACTS AMONG A COMPANY OF SOLDIERS. 

A gentleman travelling in the western part of New-Tork, says the 
Report of the Utica Tract Society, overtook a company of soldiers, 
who, though he gave them no provocation, rudely insulted him. He 
rode on silently a short distance, and when out of sight, took from his 
pocket a number of Tracts, and scattered them in the road. Soon af- 
terward he called at a tavern, and at length the soldiers came in, each 
with a Tract in his hand. They all sat down in the bar-room, and com- 
menced reading. One after the other, as he finished a Tract, ex- 
changed it with his companion, until the Tracts were generally read 
by them all. Before they had finished, many of the faces of these 
weather-beaten soldiers were bathed in tears. 



TRACTS BLESSED TO A UNITERSALIST, &c. 

From the Report of tike UHea Society. 

A clergyman one day gave Andrew Fuller's Tract on Universalism 
(No. 134) to a young man who had been brought up in the belief of 
that doctrine, with a request that he would give it a candid and atten- 
tive perusal. Not long after, in a time of awakening, this individual 
became a subject of renewing grace, and in relating the exercises of 
his mind, he mentioned this Tract, as " the means of Aaking hit Uni- 
versal faith to pieces.*^ He now gives satisfactoiy evidence of a radi- 
cal change. 

A professor of religion in F— , on reading the Tract ** Conver- 
sion of Sinners a Common Christian DtUy^'* observed : This is a most 
eicellent Tract. It has done me much good. It has taken away from 
me every excuse for sloth and indifference. 

During a recent revival at one of the missionary stations among 
the Indians, a gay and thoughtless young lady, who is now a hopeful 
convert, received her first serious impression while hearing the Tract 
read, entitled the " Death of Sir Francis Newport,** 



TRACTS BLESSED IN BALTIMORE. 

A Sunday School Teacher's Tract Distributing Society, says the 
report of the Baltimore Branch Tract Society, has accomplished great 
good by homing lYaets syttematicaify in various districts of the city. 
To a lady in feeble health, but indifferent about the salvation of the 
soul, they gave Tracts, accompanied by religious cqnversatipn and 



181^9.] nSKFULNESS OF TRACTS. l£d 

prayer. She was brought to see her miserable condition as a sinner 
against a holy God ; and in about six weeks afterward gav6 the clearest 
evidences of conversion. 

An intempertUe man, who said he had not been to a place of public 
worship for four years, received Tracts with great indifference, and 
when the Distributors afterward visited him, was so intoxicated that 
it was useless to converse with him. Soon after this, however, he 
was laid low on a bed of affliction. Sabbath after Sabbath they sought 
bis miserable dwelling, and proclaimed salvation through Jesus— ^lis 
proud and stubborn heart melted — he professed a hope in the Savior 
of sinners — ^the family altar has been erected in his hous# — his health 
is much improved, and he is now walking in the ways of holiness. 

Ji Deist f who despised Jesus of Nazareth, and trampled his sacred 
doctrines and precepts under his feet, has been lirought, by reading 
Tracts, to a saving knowledge of the truth as it is in Christ, has re- 
nounced his infidelity, and is now an active teacher in a Sabbath 
School. 

Another man was given up by his friends as lost, for he was a 
drunkard. But now how changed ! his house has become a scene of 
domestic affection and peace, his children attend a Sunday School, 
and he is hopefully a converted man, and all this through the instru^ 
mentality of Tracts. 

NINB TRACTS ON A VOYAGE AT SEA. 

A sailor, says the report of the Branch Tract Society in Baltimore, 
being about to embark on a voyage, called on ft gentleman to take 
leave of him, and was presented with nine Tracts. Several months 
afterward be returned, called immediately on his friend, and the first 
words he uttered were, " The books, the books, the best books in the 
world." When requested to give a statement of their effects on him- 
self and the crew, he said, " There was on board a sailor, who was a 
very profane man ; he used to read old newspapers and almanacs, and 
the men praised him for reading so well. One day I told him I had 
some books, and he promised to read them. I brought him the nine 
Tracts, and he swore that he would read them all, if they would be 
still. He took one and said, ' Here is the Swearer's Prayer, we will 
read that first.' He read, but he soon began to weep ; the sailors made 
sport of his tears, but he became so affected as to be compelled to lay 
down the Tract. He became so much, alarmed for himself, that he 
would not go aloft, for fear of falling, and having his many wicked 
prayers answered. He cried and prayed, until he found peace in 
Jesus Christ. Then he could go aloft as well as ever, and read the 
rest of the books for the sailors Every calm we go around him, to 
hear him ; and on thai voyage four others were converted to God. He 
came to be the best man on board; when the hands got sick, he would 
pray for them, and read my books for them ; so that you see they are 
the best books in the world." 



A TRACT REMEMBERED IN DEATH. 

Thomas Bradford, Juo. Esq. in a public address before the Tract 
Biociety of Fhiladelphia, related the following facts : 



IdO USEFULNESS OF TRACTS. [Oct. 

** A Lady, who is engaged as a Teacher in a colored Sabbath School 
in this city, some months since distributed -among the children her 
usual supply of Tracts. One of these — * Poor Sarahs was conveyed, 
by the providence of God, to a poor, aged Uack woman, and, as she 
could not read, it was read to her by the child. The moving centents 
of this precious Tract affected her heart, and such was her eagerness 
to treasure up its interesting incidents in her memory, and to appro- 
priate its divine consolations, that she was wont to crave oilen, of such 
as were instructed, the favor of reading it to her. It became her con- 
stant companion, and once, in particular, while journeying in one of 
our Delaware steam-boats, she was known to beg a similar favor of the 
captain, which was readily granted. On her return to the city, her little 
book, tiie herald of the mercy and grace which she then enjoyed, was 
still with her. A short time ago she was visited bv sickness, which soon 
proved to l>e a ' sickness unto death ;' but she had received the good 
seed in her heart, and it had sprung up, bearing its fruits, faith, hope, 
patience and charity, for her support in the hour when flesh and heart 
were failing her. For this seed and these good fruits she declared 
herself to te instrumentally indebted to the story of the poor Indian 
Sarah. She descended into the dark valley with songs of triumph, 
asking no other favor than that her much-loved Tract might be de- 
posited in the narrow house with her then dying body . Thi$ wa$ done ; 
she now rests from her labors and her sufferings, and her released, 
redeemed spirit is, doubtless, rejoicing in the realms of light, with the 
glorious assembly and church of the first borq^ whose names are writ- 
ten in heaven." 



PREJUIUm TRACTS. 

The Premium Tracts on sailing vessels out of port on the Sabbath, 
are under consideration. 

A premium of fifly dottartii offered for the best Tract, not exceed- 
ing 12 pages, " to influence the young to abstain entirely from the 
use of ardent spirits, and portraying to parents the guilt and danger 
of tempting them to use it '" to be presented on or before the^«/ day 
of Novemher next* 

AUo fifly dollars for the best Tract, not exceeding 12 pages, on " the 
Character and Prospects of the Heathen ;" to be presented on or be- 
fore Nov. 1, 1829. 



THE GOOD WORK GOES ON. 

We are continually receiving orders iVom various places for par- 
ticular Tracts, for the monthly dittrilmHon to every family whidi is 
vfUling to receive them. Among others, the Tract Society of Cincin- 
nati, Ohio, have ordered fice thousand copies each of three specified 
Tracts, for distribution in three successive months. 

From Natches, Mississippi, where the work has been commenced^ 
reports are of a most encoui'aging character. The first distribution 
of Tracts being nearly comfdetedi not a tingle instance of refusal has 
^et been met with. 



1829.] 



DONATIONS. 



131 



DONATION OF JEW£LI.ER¥. 

FROM A CLBROTMAH IS TH£ tTATB OF NEW-TORK. 

I send you herewith several articles of jewellery belonging to my 
wife, of which she asks your acceptance. I hare also a gold watch 
and seal, which I am trying to sell, and as soon as disposed of, will 
send the amount to you. We cannot feel willing to have these things 
about us, when means are so much wanted to advance the cause of our 
dear Redeemer. Besides, I cannot plead with a good conscience, either 
in my pulpit or in private, with such unnecessary trash about me. 



$10 FROM A LADY IN THE STATE OF N. YORK. 

It is with much satisfaction that 1 send you the enclosed. It has for 
a long time been my heart's desire and prayer to God, that I might do 
something for the dear cause in which you are engaged ; and I would 
now thank God that it is in my power, for I esteem it one of the 
greatest luxuries of my life to be able occasionally to cast my mite 
into the treasury of the Lord. I was a subscriber for the first Tracts 
ever printed in New-England, and I then as Utile thought of living to 
see a Society on the broad scale of the present , as I did of seeing the 
mUlennium ! When I reflect upon the wonderful change thirty years 
have effected, I am constrained to cry, " What hath God wrought !*' 
I hope to send you ten dollars more within a few months. 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 



Dwring Ike montik ending SepUmber 15, 1829 

FROM AUXU.IARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 
MASS.— Stockbridge, Moses FairchUd, Tr.' 
R. ISL. — ^East Greenwich, (Kent Co. Aux.) 
CONN.— Bethany, 
Black Rock, Capt. G. Stnrg es, Pres. 
Branford, .... 

Brooklyn, (Windham Co. Aux.) Edwin Newbury, Ag. 
Huntington, William Mills, Sec. 
Lebanon, Eleaaser Huntington, Ag. 
New-Haven, A. Townsend, Jun. Tr. 
New-London, Robert Coit, Tr. 
Norwich, Fem. Sarah Backus, Sec. 
Salisbury, Fem. Julia A. Dodge, Tr. 
Sharon, Charles F. Sedgwick, See« 
N. YORK.— Albany, Central Branch, O. GaUs, Sec. 
Anbarn, Clark B. Hotchkiss, Ag. . 

Do. by their Aux. at Owasco, . 
Buffalo, Orlando Alien, Tr. 
Uudaon, Fem. Mrs. Root, Tr. 
Jamaica, L. I., James Rider, Tr. 
Middletown, Orance Co. Dr. D. Hanford, Ag. 
Montgomery, do. John F. Scott, Sec. . 
Newburgh, R. B. Willi ams, Tr. 
New-Rochelle, Fem. Hammh Brewster, Sec. 
New-York City Tract Soc. by their Assoc S. Baptist Ch. 

Do. S. Baptist Cb. E. Caswell, Tr. 

Patterson, Fem. Miss Elizabeth liayt. Sec. . 
Plattsburrii, Rev. Moses Chase, Ag. 
Pleasant Yall^, J. Gabaudan, Tr. . 
Ponghkeepsie, Fem. Mrs. S. L. Tappea, Sec. 
Scotchtown, John McWfiUams, Tr. 
W«stfiel4, Chatauque Co. Fem. Mrs. C. C. Oakes, S^ 



[ForTy. 
5 00 

a 00 

800 

20 00 

18 50 
3 34 

60 50 

19 00 



3 
5 

7 



00 
00 
60 



69 91 
16 72 

*25 00 

1 00 

8 32 

225 

780 

12 40 

1 20 

908 

10 98 

12 94 

15 00 

272 

725 

500 

750 



10 00 
100 

3 60 

4 17 

1 60 



128 



2 71 

75 

600 



4 31 



100 
2iK) 



ld£ 



RECEIPTS. 



N. JER.— Aquackanonk, Essex Co. Mrs. Maria Zabriskic, S«c. 

Hackettstown, Fem. Miss Mary Campbell) S«c. 

Knowlton, Warren Co. Fem. Mrs. Nancy Blair, Sec. 

Lebanon, J. Crate, Tr. 

Mendham, Fem. Min Ruth Dayton, Tr. 

Orange, Allen Dodd, Tr. 

Oxford, Fem. John M. Sherrerd, Escl Ag. . 

Princeton, Fem. Miss F. W. Morford, Tr. 

Scott's Moimtaio, (Warren Co. Aux.) Jacob Cole, Tr. 

Springfield, Daniel S. Briant, Sec. 

Stillwater, Fem. 

Trenton, 1st Ch. Fem. Mrs. Rachel A. Fish, Tr. 

PENN.— Dundaff, Dr. William Terbell, Tr. 

Philadelphia Branch, Rev. Joel T. Benedict, Gen. Ag. 

Pittsburgh, Rey. Robert Patterson, Ag. 

Wattsburg, James Nelson, Esq. Bee. 

VIR.— Prince Ed. Co. Un. Theol. Sem. £. Ballantine, Sec. 

N. CAR. — Emanuel's Ch. Liucolnton, David Reinhardt, Sec. 

GEO.— Augusta, Joel Catlin, Tr. . 

Lawrenceville, Fem. Juliet Wilson, Sec. 

ALA. — Huntsvilln, Samuel Coltart, Ag. 

Do. by their Aux. at Tuscumbia, 
Tuscaloosa, J. B. Cook, Esq. Tr. 
MISS. — ^Natchez, Thomas Henderson, Tr. . 
TENN.— Nashville, Samuel B. Snowden, Tr. 

Do. by their Auxiliaries, 
KEN — ^Danville, M. G. Youce, Ag. 
Louisville, William Mix, Tr. 
OHIO^-Cincinnati, Henry B. Funk, Tr. 
Wakeman, Huron Co. Rev. X. Betts, Sec. . 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 
N. JER. — ^Augusta, Sussex Co. Eliza Gustin, Tr. 
Bloomfield, Temperance Soc.Dr. Ward, Sec. 
TENN — ^Fayette Co. Rev. Starke Dupey, Ag. 
Tracts sold at the Depository to individucds. 



|F«r7V. 

14 T2 
10 00 

3 75 
3 75 
63 
640 
338 

10 00 
300 
500 

18 
150 
2 37 
500 00 
150 00 

15 00 

aooo 

11 35 
154 57 

SO 00 
198 97 
100 00 
100 00 
340 00 
339 87 

100 00 
150 00 
455 00 
5 75 

500 
587 
800 
330 94 



thn> 
4 90 



35 
25 
63 



1 13 
3 00 



50 



3 % 



60 13 



Directors for Life, 

CONN^N. Haven, E. F. Backus, 
Esq. - - - - 50 00 

John Chester Backus, by his 
father, E. F. Backus, Esq. - 50 00 

N.YORK— New-Paltz, Ulster Co. 
Rev. Wm. R. Bogardus, by La- 
dies, (in full of $50,) - . 13 35 

New-York City, Arthur Tappan, 350 00 

Members for Life. 

OONN.-Bridgeport, Mrs. Emeline 

Sterling, (in fuU of |30,) - 10 00 

Monroe, Fairfield Co. Rev. Daniel 

Jones, by a Lady of his Church, 
Sharon, David Gould, 
Wallingford,Mary Henrietta Car- 

rington, by her grandmother, 

Mrs. Mary Beebe, 
N.YORK.— Leeds, Henry Whit 

telsey,(infUllof$30,) - 
.N JER.— Augusta, Sussex Co.Rev. 

Nath. ConcUing, by his Ch. and 

Congregation, ... 
Bellville, Essex Co. Rev. Oustavus 

Abeel, by Ladies, 
VIR*— Traveller's Rest, John B. 

Gray, $30, Robert Gray, $30, by 

their father, Mr. John Gray, - 40 00 



30 00 
30 00 



30 00 
-10 00 



30 00 



-80 00 



Annual Members. 

N. YORK.— New-York City, Da- 
niel Cooledge, - - - 3 00 
Wm. W. Jackson, - 3 QD 
Oth^r Donations, 

MASS — ^Dedham, Miss Lucy Tal- 
bot, for Val. Miss. $6, Mrs. Nan- 
cy D. Wheaton, fS, for do.. Dr. 
Jesse Wheaton, $3, for do. - 10 OO 

Enfield, a Friend to the cause of 
Holiness, - - - 50 00 

Northampton, Ladies, - - 3 "^ 

N. YORK.— Middletown, Orange 
Co. Dr. D. Hanibrd, - - 3 00 

Newburgh, a Friend of Tracts, - 10 00 

New-York City, a Friend, 13 cts 
M.atlO, - - -10 12 

ALA. — Whitesburg, Madison Co. 
Mrs. Elizabeth Genlinerf - 100 

TENN.— Farmington,Bedford Co. 
Mrs. Emma W. HaH, - - 3 00 

IND.— Bethlehem, T. S. - . 19 3D 

The above list contains donations— 
For Tr. for Valley of Missinippi, 10 00 

Whole amount of Donations, $749 85 
Received for Tractt lold, 3,137 % 

Tbtol? $3i877 30 



I THE AMERICAN 

1809. [NO. 11, 



'-.BelitidllieLiintiorQod,wIucbUl 



TRACT CAUSE IN INDIA. 

Th£ field for Tract opetationa in our mm country it wide beraod 
what we fear is fell b; the Chriilian community, as it cenainiy ia far 
bcfonil the limit! of (he pecuDtar; meaiu cominUted In the Americm 
Tract Society; yet we csDnot shut oor can lo (he claim) of mtUiant 
in Healhea landi. We have no doubt that the language of Ood, re- 
spectiog (IieEe two portions of duty, is, " TbU ought ye to hare doni^ 
and Dol (0 leave the oltaei undone." 

orriciAK APFEAi. 7K01I THE KisBionAKixs iH csrLOir. 

Deab Sir— Tour truly welcome letter and your Annoal Beport; 
hare beea received and read with deep intereil, and we Ad much 
encoiiTaged by fhe many isnracn of goad malting from Tract opc;- 

VoL. ir. 12 [WB(a«no,4R ' 



194 TBACT CAUSE IN 119 Dt A* [NoV. 

rations in America, to be more faithful in this department of our rais- 
aionaiy work. We have recently, in connexion with other missiona* 
ries and Christian friends, formed a Tract Society here, and have 
received some aid from the London Tract Society ; but our funds 
have been exceedingly limited, compared with the demand upon 
them. We now have ready for printing a number of Tracts, and others 
are greatly needed, to answer the inquiries of Roman Catholics and 
Heathens, to bring tiefore them in a concise and interesting manner 
the truths of the Gospel, and lead them directly to Jesus Chrbt, '* the 
Way, the Truth, and the Life." 

We rejoice in any intimation of aid in this work from the American 
Tract Society. We now send you English translations of two Tamul 
Tracts, ** The Heavenly Way'' and *' The Source 0/ B/iw,". which, if 
approved by your Committee, we shall gladly avail ourselves of your 
aid in printing.* Of the Tracts in your series, translations of the foI> 
lowing into Tamul will most probably be needed; viz. Nos. 4. 5. 32, 
37. 67. 71. 80. 92. 98. 107. 120. 123. 142. 148. 166. 166. 168. 178. 
179. 183. 186. 

The Tamul Language. 

It must be understood, however, that translations of English Tracts 
into Tamul can foe only translations of the seme. There is in the Ta- 
mul such a strict adherence to the order of time, that sometimes the 
last part of an English Tract may be the first in Tamul, and some- 
times a forcible paragraph in English may be exactly the reverse in 
Tamul. There is such a necessity also for connexion, that explana- 
tory or connecting clauses may be unavoidable. But from a strict 
adherence to the sense and doctrine of the original English Tract, you 
may be assured, that, in our translations, we shall not depart. We 
have already translated into Tamul the 9th Chapter of Baxter's Saints' 
Rest, which we think would be very useful to the members of our 
church. 

Usefulness of TYacts in Tamul. 

We have abundant encouragement in our Tract operations. Two 
or three instances have occurred of awakening and hopeful conversion, 
through the reading of Tracts. A young man belonging to Pandite- 
ripo has lately united with our church, whose attention was first ar- 
rested by reading a Tract. We not only have evidence that they are 
generally read by those to whom they are given, but we know that, 
in many instances, they have been reiid in little circles and lent from 
house to house. Our Tracts have awakened inquiry among the Tamul 
people, and some of them have pointed out to us many difficulties and 
inconsistencies, as they supposed, in the Christian system. Thus the 
way is preparing for issuing a series of Tracts for their benefit Jnst 
at present there appears among them *' no small stir about that way." 

The wide field to be occupied. 

Even in Ceylon ** there remaineth much land to be possessed," and 
on the neighboring continent the field is greater than can be occupied 

* Tbftse two Tracts havo b«en approved by the Pitbliahiaf Gom/taXUt, aa4 iaftr^ 
matien of tk9 samQ ctqmynisateft to Che SreChreii is Ceylon. 



1829.] TEACT CAUSE IN INDI4, 155 

for many years to come, should all the missionaries in India, with all 
the help they can get from friends and Societies in England and Ame- 
tlcAf unite as the heart of one man. We have under our care twelve 
individuals, most of whom are young men, and rU of hopeful piety, a 
part of whose daily business is to read and distribute Tracts among 
the people. These have been through our parishes, and some of them 
have made tours to unoccupied parts of the island. Had we Tracts 
they could go farther^could easily visit the Continent. This is in« 
deed the work in which we hope some of them will be constantly em- 
ployed, until every one who can read shall have in his hand a directory 
to Heaven, and every one who cannot read shall be able to call at his 
neighbor's to hear of the way of salvation. 

Appeal to American Christians, 

When we look at the extent of the Tamul population, at our young 
men through whose help we may easily distribute to them the words 
of eternal life; when we recollect that we have as yet done very little 
compared with what ought to have been done, and that since we have 
been on the ground almost half a generation have been swept away, 
we feel ourselves constrained to do all we can to redeem the time. 
Our eyes are directed to your Society for assistance, and through 
them to the Christian church in America; and without having recourse 
to more earnest appeals, we ask you to look at us, as a little band of 
your own brethren, to whom you have given, and ofleu renewed the 
gift, the right hand of fellowship. We ask you to look at the extent 
of the Tamul population about U8« and to number the souls who must 
be saved or lost ; we ask you to take into consideration the little that 
has been done ; and that we, your brethren and servants, have already 
spent more than half a missionary life, and must soon finish all, or 
leave it undone. And in view of sdl these circumstances " do all that 
is in your heart," for the upbuilding of the house of the Lord here, 
and for the salvation of this people. 

B. C. Meigs, ^ 

' UK \S^^* -. \ American Jlftsnona- 

M. WlWSLOW, > ... . /Vi,i^„ 

Jj. Spauldino, \ ^ 

J. SCUDDER, ^ 



<* pilgrim's progress,*' and the tract ''rewards of 
drunkenness," in 8inoalese. 

The Rev. B. Clough, missionary at Columbo, in Ceylon, wrote, some 
time since, that a native head-man, of respectable station, who had 
nearly ruined himself and his whole family by his confirmed habits 
of drunkenness, read the Tract " Retoards of Drunkenness" and 
came to the person who had given it to him, and with a strange mix- 
ture of astonishment, gratitude, and sorrow, fell on his knees before 
him, and cried out, ** O Sir, I never can sufiiciently thank you for 
giving me that little book ; it has made me feel so much, that I am re- 
tiolved, that as long as I live I win drink nothing stronger than water I 



136 TRACT CAUSE IN INDIA- [NOV. 

The effect of the Pilgrim*t Progrett, in one case, was equally 
striking. Tbe pundit who gat with me, engaged in translating it, a 
very intelligent and learned man, formerly a heathen priest, often was 
so affected with the book, that I found it difficult to get him to pro- 
ceed. The setting off of Christian, and his resolution in leaving the 
city of destruction, amused him vastly. When he found that Christian 
got into the slough of Despond, be really began to feel great sympa- 
thy for him, but on his arrival at Mount Sinai, with the interviews 
which took place between him and Mr. Legality, and'afterward with 
Evangelist, he looked very sad, and said to me^ " <Str, uhat man am 
be saved ?" I replied, *' Let us go on a litde farther;^' and when he 
read that Christian got in at the wicket gate and to the cross» the poor 
pundit was so transported with delight, that he clapped his hands, 
and actually shouted and danced for joy ; crying out incessantly, 
" Delightful, O Delightful /" 



TESTIMONY OF DR. MARSHMAN. 

** Of the value of Tractt in missionary labour," says Dr. Marsbman, 
a most zealous missionary in India, " it is endless to speak. Portions 
ofScriptureT or Tracts^ have had something to do in the conversion of 
almost every individfjicU who has joined the Christian church in india^* 



TESTlkONr OF THE AMERICAN BAPTIST BOARD OF MISSIONS 
RESPECTING TRACTS IN BURMAH. 

'' Perhaps there is do country,'* say this Board in their last Re* 
port, <* in which the prospect is better of accomplishing much by the 
circulation of Tracts, than in Burmah. Nearly all the males caa 
read ; and if such manuals of Christian instruction are necessary and 
desirable in this land, abounding in all the means of light and im- 
provement, how much more necessary in that, where the knowledge 
of the Gospel has but just dawned. Ifliere they are instrumental of 
reforming hundreds who come not within the influence of the minis- 
try, so there, they may be the means of calling the attention of multi-. 
tudes, and leading them to Christ, whom the missionaries never saw.'' 



We could add numerous additional testimonies to the necessity of 
Tract operations in India ; but the above are sufficient to bring the 
subject home to the heart of every Christian. 

It will be remembered that the Committee of the American^ Tract 
Society some time since appropriated $200 for Ceylon, and $300 for 
Burmah, to aid the American Missionaries there, in their Tract opera- 
tions. It is earnestly hoped, that the amount of donations to the So- 
ciety for the definite object of cireulating 2^ acts among the Heathen 
will be greatly increased. 



1929.] BRITISH C0RRESF05DENCE. 1$7 

8BZTI8B 0OB&B8POXn>BV0B. 

We joyfully reciprocate the cordial Christian sentiments expressed « 
by our Brethren in various parts of Great Britain in the Correspon- 
dence of which we here insert a few brief Extracts. 

From the Prayer Book and Homily Society, London, we haye re- 
ceived an ratire set of the Homilies in English ; and copies of some of 
them in French, Spanish, Italian, Portu|i;uese, German, Dutch, Swed- 
ish, Modern Greek, Arabic, Chinese, Hindostaoee, Armenian, and 
Indo-Portuguese ; together with articles of Religion in Latin, and co- 
pies of the Society's late Reports. From the letter of Mr. Thomas 
Seward, Assistant Secretary, accompanying the above, we extract 
the following : 

** How truly estimable is that love^ which, emanating from God, 
binds the heart of man to bis fellow of every nation and of every 
clime. Such I feel is the case of all true Christians ; the seas may 
separate them, and the climate change the complexion of their skin, 
but their hearts are united, and their souls breathe the same atmos- 
phere : the cause is manifest, for there is but " One Lord, one faith, ' 
one baptism, one God and Father of alt, who is above all, and through 
all, and in all." They are all born of the same spirit ; they are re- 
deemed by the same blood ; and are m<>rabers of that One Body, of 
which our blessed Saviour, Jesus Christ, is the Head. 

" Be assured, dear Sir, that Christians in this country greatly re- 
joice in the prosperity of the several American Christian Institutions; 
and our hearts* desire is, that Christians of all countries, and of all de- 
nominations, may be more circumspect, more fervenUy devout, and 
much more diligent in seeking daily, first, to give themselves to th« 
Lord, and then, with ardent zeal to |»roclaim, to all around them, by 
voice, by conduct and by conversation, the glorious and precious 
truths of the invaluable. Gospel of our adorable Lord. 

*'■ I should be glad, if possible, to exchan|;e a letter with you at least 
once a year, when the Report of our Societies is published, that wq 
may not forget that we are Brethren." 



From the Agent of the Tract Society of Manchester, England^ we 
have an interesting letter, expressing great joy in the evidences of 
the outpouring of the Spirit of God in the revivals of religion in Ame- 
rica, and ardent desires that God may appear for the revival of his 
work in the Eastern world. 



From the Glasgow and West of Scotland Tract Sodeiy we have re- 
ceived two sets of their published Tracts, including the Memoirs of 
Mrs. Peterson, A Brief Sketch of the Life of Mrs. Huntington, (late 
of Boston,) and Hints to Parents, by Mrs. Huntington. In their iett«t 



13S BRITISH co&&ESFo:ro£ircx. [Nor. 

accompanying the abore, Messrs. William Ferguson as'D William 
Wardlaw, the Secretaries, say : 

'* We are delighted to hear, from time to time, of your prosperity, 
and of the blessing which the Lord graciously vouchsafes to your ex- 
tended labours ; and trust that you mav be privileged to hear in time 
to come of multitudes more whose hearts the Lord shall have opened 
by means of your little gifts. We should gladly communicate details 
of this descripticw, that we might thereby strengthen your hands and 
gladden your hearts ; but whatever good our limited circulation has 
yet effected is only very partially known to ourselves. Our Tracts are, 
in most cases, welcomed with gratitude, but we have no particular de- 
tails at present to submit to you, of any thus brought out of spiritual 
darkness into marveUous light. The good seed of the word has been 
sown, and although perhaps the great proportion has been dropped 
on stony ground or amidst thorns and thistles, yet a few good ears 
may hereafter spring up, even where we looked for no increase. May 
the Lord grant that we may see not a handful only here and there, 
Imt an abundant harvest, to his own praise and glory. We apprehend 
that the want of such blessed results may, in many cases, be charge- 
able to our own want of faith and want of prayer. O, for more of the 
spirit of prayer, that we may follow our little messengers,, when we 
send them forth, with earnest and importunate entreaty that the Lord 
would accompany them wherever they may go, with the pouring out 
of his blessing upon the truths they convey, that thus they may find 
an entrance to the hearts of many, and be instfumental in bringmg 
them to Christ !" 



The Agent of the Religious Tract Society of Aberdeen, Scotland, in 
a^letter, accompanied by copies of new Tracts and their last Annual 
Report, says : 

" Your letter, accompanying a set of your publications as a dona- 
tion to the Aberdeen Religious Tract Society, was presented to our 
Board, and received as a genuine, though undeserved token of that 
pure friendship and regard which ought ever to breathe between 
kindred Institutions of a Religious character, placed at the distance 
of thousands of miles from each other. ! may the Holy Spirit ever 
breathe on all your Societies for promoting the cause of God. It has 
done so lately, far more than it has done upon us. We are doing, but 
we are not hearing of any revivals such as are frequently reported as 
having taken place in the Western World. We take shame to our*^ 
selves. We have sinned with our fathers and grieved the Holy Spirit. 
O! pray for us, that we may be healed; that he nuiy revive us again f 
lest the spirit should fail before him." 

TFSBFTIXIVBSS Ol* TRA0T8. 

<' i have lately been informed," says a Clergyman in Ohio, " on 
authority that I have no reason to doubt, that four Deists have beea 
converted to a belief of the truth by the means oi Leslie's Short Me- 
thod. News of the good effects of Tracts comes te my ears almost 
every day." 



iiiSd.J UONTHLT DIST&XBUTIOK. Id9 

At G—- — , says an Agent of the American Tract Society in the gtatia; 
of New-Tork, I found a Female Tract Society existing, the Secretary 

of which, Miss £ H F , ascribes her conversion to the 

Divine blessing on the reading of the Young Cottager and the Dairy* 
snan^s Daughter. 

The report of the Young Men's Auxiliary of Petersburg, Va. states 
that the Tract, Ruinous Consequences of GambUng^ was the means of 
reclaiming a brother and sister who were both addicted to that vice. 
At the anniversary of the same Society it was stated^ that a gentle- 
man from the country, who had gone to Richmond to purchase vai* 
rious articles, and among them ardent spirits, was presented with 
Kittredge's Address on Intemperance. He read it on the way home,, 
and on arriving home, sat down and countermanded the order for ar> 
dent spirits. 

mONTHLY TRACT BISTRIBUTION, 

Every week brings tidings of the adoption of the systematic month- 
ly distribution of a Tract to every family willing to receive it; of the 
success of the plan ; and the hold it is gaining upon the hearts of 
Christians. 

Who does not see in this effort an aggressive inroad upon the ranks 
of the enemies of Evangelical truth 7 

Who does not see in it that grand characteristic of the Gospel, that 
it is a MESSAGE^ to be carried and tendered to men ? 

Who does not see in it, obedience to the command to carry the 
Gospel message to " every creature ?'' 

Who does not see in it a resemblance of the fulfilment of that com- 
mission under which the " seventy" disciples went out by ** two and 
two" into evety house and city ; whether those to whom they were 
sent would ** receive them," or " receive them not?" 

Who does not see, that by this effort a host of faithful laborers will 
be raised up for the Lord's cause ? 

Who does not see, that presenting to every family one Evangelical 
Tract this month, another the next, another in the month following, 
and so onward, is a mean's specially adapted to arrest the attention to 
the truths of the Gospel 7 

Who does not see, that the presence and personal influence of warm* 
hearted Christians, on these errands of mercy, in every family willing 
to receive them, must be favorable to the interests of vital religion T 

Who does not see an influence, incidentally bat almost certainly 
exerted) in favor of an attendance on the Public Worship of God, the 
reading of the Bible, the Instruction of the Toung, and the temporal 
and eternal benefit of all 7 

And who does «ee, in the obstacles to be overcome in this work, the 
self-denial to be practised^ the sacrifice of money and of effort;^ «ii< 



140 HOHTHLT DIST&lBVTlOir. [NoV. 

the prayer and faith required, any thing that does not characterise 
every Christian effort to extend the Redeemer's cause ? • 

We know of no devoted, intelligent, active Christian, who has con- 
sidered the nature of this work, and viewed it in all its bearings, who 
is not deeply impressed with its magnitude, and the desirableness of 
its universal adoption. 

Let the work then go on. Let every Christian arouse himself to it 
just in the field where Crod has placed him. Let him see to it that the 
guilt of no soul, lost for eternity, be found upon himself. 

Look at the tsstimonies of bxperiekce from various places. 

In J>reuhYork City, the circumstances of encouragement and evi>- 
denoes of good accomplished, many of which have been published 
and extensively circulated, have accumulated till the whole would al- 
most make a volume ; and every month bears additional testimony to 
the excellency of the work It is impossible that those who have'there 
seen its effects should ever eonsent to relinquish it, while their sense 
of obligation and love to the Redeemer's cause continues. 

In Poughkeeprie, 'Af. F. embracing about 700 families, and divided 
into nine Distributor's Districts, from each of which reports have been 
received, an intelligent lady says: — *' We have thus far had reason to 
be thankful for the favorable manner in which we have been received, 
and to be encouraged to continue our efforts." 

In Riehmond, Va. late intelligence says, '* Thus for nothing but en- 
couragement has been experienced ;" and 4,000 copies of 6 specified 
Tracts are ordered for six successive months. 

In Avbum, N. Y, embracing 500 families, an intelligent gentleman' 
says : — "We have every encouiagement to persevere in this good and 
glorious work. We ^v« 22 Distributors, all professed Christians, 
from 4 different denominations, who, though they commenced the 
work with some fears, now represent il,«^ pleasant and delightful. 
One mooter of a family had never seen a Religious Tnxct; and an- 
other, who has lived two years within a few rods of a Christian church, 
has not within that time placed her foot within the sanctuary. She 
wept when she received the Tract, ao^ promised immediately to at- 
tend to her soul's salvation.'* 

In Natcktfs Miss, a gentleman of great respectability says : " Near- 
ly all the families in. this city have been supplied, the present month, 
with The Importance oj Consider aiion, 1 have heard of only 3 fami- 
lies in which the Tract has been refused. They have been generally 
politely, and in many cases thankfully received, and 1 trust will be ac- 
companied with His blessing without vvhich all our labors are in vain.*' 

The •" aty of Baltimore has' been divided into 78 Districts, averag- 
ing 130 families each ; and one hundred and forty individuals, all of 
tliem Sabbath Scliool Teachers, are pledged to become Distributors,^* 

In a town in Ashtabula County, Ohio, a clergyman says, •* We have 
commenced the labor, or rather pleasure, of putting a Tract into every 
family. The Distributors are highly pleased with their work, and we 
think that good effects are already seen." 
. In Montgomery County, N, Y, a County AoziUary is formed for 



Idid.] AUXILIARIES. 14i 

the purpose of placing a Tract monthly in every family in the County, 
and 2,000 copies of 3 Tracts are ordered for the first 3 months. 

In Lorain County, in the Western Reserve, Ohio, three devoted der* 
gymen have pledged themselves, in consideration of a grant from the 
Parent Society, to place a Tract monthly for a year in every family 
in the County, which is willing to receive it— the County embradng 
more than 20 towns. 

In WUmingtonf Del. this is the result of some months' experience : 
'' We feel that there is no time to be lost in this work, and no cause 
for weariness or discouragement. • It only requires resolution and per- 
severance." 

A clergyman in a town of 600 families, states that the placing of - 
the Tract entitled, " The Sanetuaryy" into every family, was followed 
hy an immediate increase in his audience on the Sabbath, of no^ far 
from 100 hearers, which has continued till the present time. 

Our limits forbid us to add more. God grant that such a voice of 
rejoicing and encouragement may soon be heard from every town, 
and village of our beloved country. 



AUXTLIARIES. 

Auxiliary of Lynchburg, Virginia, — Second anniversary held in 
St. Paul's Church, June 4. Receipts, during the year, $131. There- 
port acknowledges criminal remissness the past year, and appeals to 
the motives drawn from Christian obligation and the excellence of the 
cause, as imperiously demanding activity and fidelity in time to come. 

fEv. William S. Rew, Pres. Charles B. Williams, ^r. Geob«e 
KQBY, I^eas. 

Auxiliary of Tioga County, E. Jury Dist. N, Y. — ^Distributed, da-* 
ring the year, 44,000 pages, which appear to have been read with 
deep interest. The Swearer's Prayer was especially blessed to a very 
profane man, who, in consequence of reading it, has entirely aban- 
doned the habit of profane swearing. The Tract, A l^range Things 
under the Divine blessing, has shook down the hopes of a Univer- 
salist, who found no rest till, as we hope, he rested in Christ. He still 
gives evidence that the work is real. Rev. A. Putnam, Sec* 

AshtabtUa County Auxiliary, located atJefftrson, OAto.— The recent 
Annual meeting was rendered interesting by addresses and reports 
from all the minor Auxiliaries, except one, which show, that the Tracts 
have been almost uniformly well received and eagerly read. Paid ta 
the American Society, during the year ending May 1, $137. 

The Tract A Serious Inquiry, says the Report, was put into the 
hands of a young Lady, and by the blessing of Grod was the means of 
her awakening and hopefiU conversion. She has made a public pro- 
fession of her faith, and is now active in procuring subscriptions and 
circulating Tracts. Another Tract was blessed to the hopeful con- 
version of a youth 14 years of age; and another to a married Lady 
who has since made a profession of religion. 

The efficiency of this Auxiliary has been much promoted through- 
out the county by the gratuitous efforts of Its Corresponduig Secre- 
tary, Ret, Pcrrt Pratt, Harpersfield, P. O. 



us, 



p&BHItTtt. 



[Nov. 

AWARD OF PREBHUIII 

For Ihe best Tract on Sailing Vessels oiU of port on the ^hbalh. 

The Publishiog Committee of the American Tract Society an- 
kioance, that there were submitted to them by the Corresponding Se- 
cretary, as received by him previous to the first day of July last, eight 
manuscript Tracts for the above premium, which were all carefully 
examined. On opening the sealed envelope which accompanied the 
Tract on which the choice of the Committee fell, the author was found 
to be Mr. Edward £. Ford« of Morristown, N. J. to whom the pre- 
mium of fiflty dollars is awarded. The Tract will be immediately atere*- 
utyped and published. James Mxlmor, Chcdrman, 

New-York, October 8. 1829. 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

DuriMg the month ending October 15, 1829. 
FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 
MASS.— Boston, Am. Tract See. John Tappan, Esq. Tr. 
Monson, Young Men's, Jonathan R. Flint, Tr. 
Westfield, Fem. Mrs. Sally 6. Post, Tr. 
R. ISL. — ^Providence, Charles F. Harris, Sec. 
CONN.— Branford, Rev. Timothy Gillet, Tr. 
L;^me, Ist Soc. Oliver J. Lay, Tr. 
Suddletown, Luke C. Ljrman, Sec. 
New-Haven, A. Townsend, Jun. Tr. 
New-London, Robert Coit, Tr. . 
Norwidi« Fem. Sarah Backus, Sec. 
Ridffebury, Daniel Benedict, Ag. 

N. YORK.->Bath, (Steuben Co. Aux.) James Higgins, Tr. 
Brooklsm, L. I. 

Canaan Four Comers, Fem. Mrs. E. C. Warner, Prea. 
Centreville, Fem. Mrs. Rev. S. Hubbard, Tr. 
Corinth, Sarat<^a Co. Fem. Mrs. Susan Ann Safford, Sec. 
FishkiU Landing, Fem. Miss Maria W. Teller, Sec. . 
Flat Bush in Saugertiee, Ulster Co. John P. L. Osterhoudt, Tr. 
Harlaem, Fem. Mn. Ann Ball, Tr. 
Hurley, Ulster Co. John Besemer, Tr. 
Jamestown, Fem. Rebecca Haywood, Tr. . 
Keeseville, Fem. Mrs. Mary S. F. Reese, Tr. 
New-Rochelle, Fem. Hannah Brewster, Sec. 
New-York City Tract Soc. Alfred Edwards, Tr. 
Owego, (Tioga Co. Aux.) E. Jury Dist. Col. C. B. Fixley, Tr. 
Scotchtown, John McWUliams, Tr. 
Sotttii East Putnam Co. Fem. Mrs. Russel J. Miner, Tr. 
Troy, Abner Loveland, Tr. 
Vtica, Edward Vernon, Sec. 
Warwick, Henry Pelton, Tr. 

N. JER.— Bloomfield, Juv. John H. Morrison, Sec. . 
Caldwell, Jonathan Provost, Tr. . 
Puteh Neck, Rev. D. Derwell, Ag. 
Hackettstown, Fem* Miss Mary Campbell, Sec. 
Harlingen, Fem. Miss MmrySkillman, Tr. . 
Kingston, Fem. Sarah Van Der Veer, Sec. 
Littleton, Silas B. Condict, Tr. . 
New-Hope and Lambertsville, Ellen W. Studdilbrd, Bee. 
Orange, AUen Podd, Tr, ... 

Perth Amboy, Fem. Mrs. Margaret Morris, Tr* 
€kmierviUe, Fem. Mrs. Sophia Talmsge, Tr. , 

Stillwatar, Fem. Miss Catharine Johnson, Sec. 
Westfield, Fem. Miss M. F. Clark, Sec. 
Woodbridge, Fem Miss Jan^ Barron, Tr. . , 

PENN — ^Philadelphia Branch, Rev. Joel T. Benedict, Sec. 
fittsburgh, Rev. Robert Patterson, Aff. 





For TV. 


Don. 




2000 00 






12 OQ 






4 80 






60 00 


3 63 




11 74 


626 




94 07 






27 00 






34 00 






'Si 


100 




40 00 






50 00 






500 






229 


76 




7 00 






200 


250 




300 






239 


79 




4 92 


1 64 




600 


2 OO 




32 


3 00 




100 00 






600 






4 00 






700 


600 




50 00 






60 00 






2 44 


81 




25 20 


5 18 




27 75 


925 




560 


1 40 




4 00 






600 


200 




800 






100 


3d 




800 






400 






4 00 






400 






572 


190 




500 






19 00 






330 




t 


38 00 





1619.] 



RECEIPTS. 



143 



MD.— Baltimore Branch, C. A. Hall, Tr. 1 , 

DIS. COL. — Alexandria, Fem. Mrs. E. S. Ladd, Sec. 
IVaahington City, John Kennedy, Tr. for Tr. 
VIR.^tur8eonTille, Fem. Mrs. H. £. Clary, 
Winchester, Daniel Gold, Tr. 

Do. by their Aux. Opequan Cong. . 

Do. do. Oerrardstown, . 

Do. do. Falling Water Cong. 

N.CAR<— Milton, (Caswell Co. Aux.) Martin P. Hiintington, Sec. 
GEO. — ^Darien, Aux. Dep. Bayard £. Hand, Esq. Ag* 
ALA. — ^Huntsville, Samuel Coltart, Ag. 
LOU.— New-Orleans Board of Agency, WUliam. W. Cald 
well, Esq. Tr. ..... 

T£NN.—Knoxville, James Park, Esq. Tr. . 
OHIO^-^incinnati, Henry B. Fnnk, Tr. . 
Columbus, Aux. Dep. .... 

Elyria, (Lorain Co. Aux.) Rev. Daniel W. Lathrop, Sec. 
Frederick, Knox Co. Rev. John McKinney, Ag. 
Melmore, Seneca Co. David Clark, Sec. 
Mount Vernon, Knox Co. James McGibeny, Ag. 
Warren, (Trumbull Co. Aux.) Rev. Harvey Coe, Sec. 
Wooster, (Wajme Co. Aux.) Samuel Quinby, Esq. Ag. 
MICH. TER — ^Ann Arbour, Fem. Harriet G. Mills, Sec. 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 
N. YORK.— Orange Co. S. S. Union, John W. Wells, Ag. 
Sempronius, Cayuga Co. Fem. Mrs. Rogers, Tr. 
N. CAR. — ^Robeson Co. Fem. Ben. Soc. Eliza Jane McNaar, Sec 
VP. CAN.— BeUevIUe, BiUa Flint, Jun. Sec. 
Tracts sold at the Depository to individuals, (including $1 for 

use of room,) . . . . . 



300 00 
30 00 
33 96 
10 00 

103 25 



35 00 

40 

32 50 

150 00 

140 00 

38 63 

50 00 

3 87 
10 00 
14 77 
35 67 
16 00 
47 30 

5 00 

4 45 
450 
4 00 

30 00 

177 83 



Dmi: 



500 
4 50 
300 



4 92 



00 



Directors for Life. 

CONN.^BIilford, Rev. Bezaleel 
Finneo, by his Ch. and Cong, (in 
fuH of 150,) - - . 35 00 

N. YORK.— Blooming Grove, He- 
zekiah Howell, (in part of $50,) 35 00 

C/anaan, Rev. Azariah Clark, by 
his Ch. & Cong, (in part of $50 ) 6 37 

New-York City, Joseph Otis, - 50 00 

Members for Life. 

MASS.— Winchendon, Worcester 
Co. Col. Jacob B. Woodbury, by 
his children, ... 

CQNN.— New-Milford, Rev. John 
Treat Baldwin, by a few ftriends, 

N. YORK.— Blooming Grove, Mrs. 
Fanny Howell, (in part of $20,) 

New-York City, Mrs. Rhoda Ely, 

R. J. Hutchinson, 

Dr. Marinus WUlett, Jon. (in part 
of|20,) 

N. JER — ^Bloomfield, Rev. Gideon 
' N. Judd, by Juv. Aux. Tr. Soc. 

Hackettstown, Rev. Joseph Camp- 
bell, by his Ch. and Cong. 

PENN.-Butler, Rev John Coulter, 
by Mrs. Amelia Lowrie, Wash- 
ington City, - - - 

BTonntNebo, Butler Co. Rev. Reed 
PriJ^en, by WdlterLvnTie, Esq. 



30 00 


30 00 


15 00 
SO 00 
30 00 


10 00 


30 00 


81 00 


30 00 


39 00 



Annual Members. 

N. YORK.— New-York City, John 
Budd, - . . - 2 00 

N. CAR. — Greensboro', John M. 
Morehead, - - - 8 00 

Other Donations, 
MASS.— Pittsfield, a Friend, - 30 00 
Plainfield, Mrs. Mars't Hallock, - 1 00 
Do. George Vining, - 1 00 
CONN. — CornwaU, Lucius C. 

Rouse, - ... 38 

Lebanon, a Friend, for Val. Miss. 1 00 
N. YORK.— Collected on board 
the Constitution Packet-Boat, 
Erie Canal, Capt. De Forest, at 
Monthly Concert, Oct. 6, - 3 50 

Almond, Stephen Major, - - 1 06 

New- York City, cash, $1 50; Sa- 
muel Dyer, avails of music book, 
$1 ; a Friend, $3; do. $1 ; do> 
$1 ; do. 41 cts. ; Widow's mite, 
13cts. - - - - 7 03 

Rhinebeck, Ladies of Ref. Datah 
Ch. for VaL Miss. - - IQ ffb 

The above list contains dona- 
tions for VaUey of Mitslsaippi, lira 

Whole amount of Donatkna, |408 10 
Rectived for Tra«u sold, 4,027 43 

Tottlf $4*435 &^ 



144 R£C£NT PtTBLICATIOKS. {Nav. 

RECENT PVBUCATIONS 

OF THE AMEBICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 

No. 229. Ssur-CoMMVivioN. By Rev. Andrew Fullsr. — ^pp. 12. 
This Traet is Gharacteristic of the excellent Author; first famishing 
the reader with tests for self-examination^ and then closelj and se* 
riondy urging the importance of the doty. 

No. 290. The Domestic Altar. By Rev. Edward Bicserststh; 
—pp. 16. Showing, in the plain, clear, and affectionate manner of 
the Author, the obligation to Family Worship, its advantage and the- 
unreasonablenesB of the excuses usually urged for its neglect, together 
with instructions for its due performance 

No. 231 . Defbngs of the Use op the Bible in Schools. A Let- 
ter FROM Dr. Benjamin Rush. — pp. 12 This is believed to be one 
of the best treatises that have been written, showing the happy influ- 
ence of rendering children, in all the various stages of their educa- 
tion, thoroughly acquainted with the Sacred Volume. 

No. 5232. Do I qrow in Grace ? By Rev. Philip Doddridge, D. D. 
—pp. 8. Showing, with clearness, brevity, and precision, some of the 
false, and then some of the more prominent just marks of growth in 
grace. 

Occasional Tract. 

Occasional (6.) Instruction for Young Inquirers. Being a Se- 
ties of Addresies intended to explain and enforce the leading^ioetrines 
of the Word of God. By William Innes. — pp.i52. These Addresses 
exhibit the natural state of man, the character of the Divine Law, the 
way of Salvation by Jesus Christ, the work of the Holy Spirit, the 
obstacles to Christian fidelity, the sources of the Christianas happiness 
in the present life, and his future prospects ; all in a plain, simple, 
connected, and interesting manner; well calculated, as the title of th^ 
Tract imports, to afford Instruction to Young Inquirers. 



CHRISTLAN ALMANAC, FOR 1830. 

We earnestly invite the attention of the friends of the cause, to the 
desirableness of promoting the circulation of this excellent and use 
ful work. It is published in 22 editions, adapted to the meridian and 
latitude of diflerent places, so that some one of the editions is svffi- 
cienily aeeurate for use in any part of the United States. A list of the 
various editions, and of the persons to whom orders may be addressed^ 
^'ill be found on page 3 of the cover of this sheet. 



THE CHRISTIAN READER. 

We are persuaded of the usefalnoss of this volume, and the desira^ 
hleness of its extensive adoption as a School Book. The character of 
the work, as defined with much discrimination by the Principal of one 
i>f our first Female Seminaries^ is inseited on toe inside 9f the cover 
pf this number of che Magaxine. - 



THE AMERICAN 

DL. IT.] SBOEniBEIt, 1839. [NO. 



8m Kiltretfie'i Addrw, Ko. sai, piie 3. 

CIRCULAR. 

Taa Execulive Committee of (he American Tmct Society feel COtf- 
fiftained, in dutj to the inlereaiiiiK cau»e committed to (heir mankge- 
iiiea(, to^pieed before (he Chriitian community n view orihepreient 
£ta(e of the finaiicei of the Society, and to appeal to thein for the aid 
that i> neceiwry for proBecuting iti ardooua work. 

At Ibe lost stated meeting ofthe Committee, the Sodety't Tteumy 
wai eatirelj empty; members ofthe Committee had been oT tat* 
iVequeDtly compelled to raise contiderable sums, en their own per- 
sonftl relpoDilbllity, to laeet demaodi ft>r paper and printing'; and 
tbey were, at the lime of (he meeting, under penonal obligatioDB for 
$7,904 96, to be paid praTioul lo January 1 ; and for the ftirther *um 
of $7,488 S3, to be paid preriout to the fint of April rtriiowing; 
making a total of 416,393 78, whidimuit bepaid previaai to the l**t 
menliDDed day, ezclusire of the eipeniei neceuarily to fie incnrrA 
iH the Sociely'f opetatitnl in the intermediate time. 

Vol. it. 13 [Wkbl* K», 46.. 



i4d CtECULABv [DtC, 

For the VaUey ofihe Musmippir^ln sastaining the Society'g fattlr* 
fttl traTeUing Ai^ents ; in the g^rant of more than 1,300,000 pages of 
Tracts for gratuitous distribution ; and in sending into that ooimtry 
upwards of 20,000,000 pages of Tracts on sale at cost— the Committee 
bave» within one year, expended not far from Twenty Thauiond Dot' 
lart. Of this amount, it is pleasing to them to state, that there has 
been received from the West, during the year, chiefly fai payment for 
Tracts, the sum of $11,813 41 ; besides which there has been contrl^ 
bated to the Society, during the same time, in donations expr^sly fov 
the Valley of the Mississippi, f691 36. But the receipt of both these 
sums unitedj leaves a draft upon the Society^t Treasury for Tract cif^ 
ctUation at the JVest, during one year, (if upwards of Seven ThouamM 
Dollars. The Committee have been and will be called to make large 
expenditures for other destitute portions of our country, especially a$ 
the South ; for the circulation of Tracts in Greece, in Burmah, and 
other foreign parts ; for procuring stereotype plates and engravings > 
increasing the number of the Society's publications and the 8|ock of 
Tracts in the Greneral Depository ; giving credits to feeble Auxiliaries ; 
and in various ways extending the interests and usefulness of the 
Tract cause. 

It will be apparent to all, that, with no permanent funds whatever^ 
with an exhausted Treasury, and such heavy responsibilities already 
resting on members of the Committee, the Society's operations caA- 
not be continued on their present scale of extent without very liberal 
contributions to its funds ; and yet the Committee state, with pain, 
that the amount of donations within the last quarter has been less, by 
the sum of $2,563 08, than in .the corresponding quarter of the last 
y^ar ; and that the whole amount of donations expressly given for the 
West, during the last three months, is only $31. 

At the same time, in every other respect except that of pecuniary 
supplies, the motives to proceed vigorously in every department of 
the Society's operations were never more powerful than at present ; 
and it would therefore greatly afflict the Committee to be compelled to 
curtail them. They have given evidence of their reluctance to do so 
by commissioning within the lait four weeks thru additional travelling 
Agents, raised up by Providence to enter into the wide field already 
referred to in the Valley of the Mississippi. The dearth of qualified 
ministers of the Gospel in that portion of our country ; the alarming 
progress of vice, infidelity and soul-destroying error; the destitution 
of the young of the means of religious knowledge ; the facility with 
which some portion of Gospel truth may be conveyed by Tracts, withf 
out detar/, to all ; the readinesa mtthifestetl by Christians at the West 



1W»0 CIRCULAR. H'^ 

to cooperate in this work ; and the Divine blessing which has been 
shed down upon the Society's past labors in that region ; all urge the 
Committee, instead of desisting from their prosecution, to pursue them 
with undtminisbed seal, under a confident trust that He, ^ho first in- 
cited the hearts of his people to engage in this labor of love, will con- 
tinue to it his gracious support, and that the friends of the Redeemer 
Vill renew their exertions in its behalf. 

To incite them to promptitude of action in the extremity which has 
called £[yrth this address, the Committee add a few brief extracts from 
their recent correspondence. 

" I rejoice,'* says a faithful Agent at the West, ** in the prospect of 
your sending us another fellow-laborer in this wide field. Let him 
come and see the need of light, and the pletuure with which it is re» 
eeivedf and if he loves God, and feels for the souls of men, he wiU di> 
all he can do, to advance this cause." 

** I feel," says another, ** that the efforts I am here making to spread 
the Gospel will cause a new string in the harps of glory to be struck* 
even while eternity rolk on ; and that, should I be permitted, through 
iMHindleM grace, to sit down on the right hand of our Emmanuel's 
throne, a retrospect of these efforts will cause a new thrill of joy to 
vibrate for ever in my breast." 

Another says, ** I expected that the good seed we hare sown would 
show fruit in the Or eat Day: but God has already blessed our efforts. 
Numbers, in this and the adjoining County, are now asking the way 
to Zion, aad crying oat in earnest, What must we do to be saved t" 

A most successful Agent in the Southern part of the Valley, after 
stating its lamentable destitution of the means of grace, and especial- 
ly the great dearth of ministerial labor, says : ** In view of all these 
(acts, who can fail to 'see the immense importance of furnishing this 
whole country with Trad preaehen, as aimott the oniy means of s^ 
vation with which they can now be supplied ? — May God," he adds, 
** deliver his churches from the guilt qf abandoning this most import^ 
4Dt and needy section of our landt" 

'* In my secluai9a here in these Western Wildi,*' says a Gentleman 
residing far beyoai the Mississippi River, " my heart, at times, is 
ready to sink within me at the ilotwiMs of EvangeUeal movemenis tO' 
0ard poor, negkeied, unknown ArkanMot /" 

Such is the character of the appeids made to the Committee from 
the country West of the Alleghany, already emSraciog between 
4,000,000 and 5,000,000 of oar population, and soon to constitute th^ 
miijprity of the inhabitants of this great and growing community. 

Ttw Committee feel, that the Qgd of all raercj and grace hai U|ti 



Hi AGENTS FOB THE WEST. [DtC- 

iipon them a most solemn responsibility ; that the n^lorious Redeemer 
of sinners urges* by clear indications, the duty of spreading, in greater 
aomben, these messages of salvation through his atoning Uood; and 
that the Holy Spirit, whose gracious influences have given so much 
effect to their perasal, will, in answer to prayer, continue to bless 
them, to the endless felicity of multitudes of our fellow-men. No ob- 
stacle presents itself to the most enlarged and liberal efforts, but the 
want of pecuniary means. The extent of this want the Committee 
have faUfy and cMididly stated. It is great ; it is urgent ; it is imme- 
diate ; it presses on the hearts of the Committee ; and they now ap- 
peal to the friends of Zion for the aid that is essential to the prosperity 
of this Cause, trusting in Him who holds all hearts in his hands, that 
it will be promptly and cheerfully bestowed. 

The Committee would suggest to all the Society's Auxiliaries to 
make their donaiians as large, and to forward them as early, as prac^ 
tioable; and in case any thing is now due for Tracts, to make remits- 
tances without delay. 

They hope also, that many individuals, male and female, will be in« 
dnced to contribute their own personal dontUiont, according to their 
ability. 

Particularly would they invite Ladies of all Evangelical JGongtegOf 
tions friendly to the Society, to unite in canaiittUing their Patton Di- 
reetort or M»mber% for Lift. 

They would also bespeak the active co-operation of the Ariends of 
Tracts in diffusing these portions of truth, by the systematic monthly 
distribution, or otherwise, as Providence shall afford them the oppor- 
tunity ; and, above all, would they entreat the prayers of those who 
have an interest at the throne of God's grace, for wisdom to guide the 
Committee in every emergency, and for his blessing on the Society 
in all its extended interests and concerns. 

By order of the Executive Committee of the American Tract 
Society. JAMES MILNOR, Chairmm, 

Attest, William A. Hallock, Corresponditig Secretary, 

JVew-Yark, November, 182», 



AGENTS FOR THE WEST. 

It has been a source of unfeigned regret, that, during the last half 
year, three of the Society's faithful Agents at the West, have been 
removed from this department of Christian effort ; but we rejoice now 
to announce, that Providence has raised up four others to supply their 
places, all of whom have entered, with warm and devoted hearts^ 
upon their responsible and interesting work. They are Mr. Ciwljjs 



1829.] ^BEIPHEBD OF SALISBTTRT PLAI^. t^ 

W. CoNANT, Mr. William Eastman, and Mr. Ctrus W. Allxk, who 
are licensed preachers of the Gospel, and Mr. Lucius C. Bouse, aif 
intelligent Layman. One of these brethren commences his efforts iti 
West Pennsylvania, another in Central Ohio, another in Indiana, and 
the remaining one in Missouri and Illinois. 

While the Commi|tde are sending forth these additional laborers, 
the Christian community should be possessed of the fact, that, not- 
withstanding the friends of the cause at the West contribute liberally 
to supply themselves and those around th^m with Tracts ; and noU 
withstanding their hospitality is such that the travelling expenses of 
the Agents are very small indeed after they arrive on their respective 
fields of labor, yet the sustaining of their operations involves a large 
UTid continual draft upon the funds of the Society. A moderate com- 
pensation must be allowed them for their services ; Tracts must be 
furnished for gratuitous distribution to those who are unable to sup- 
ply themselves ; and very considerable quantities must be sent, on a 
short credit, to feeble Auxiliaries, especially those establishing Depo- 
sitories for the supply of adjacent portions of the country ; besides 
other incidental expenses. 

It ought also to be borne in mind, that the Committee send forth 
these Agents while their treasury is entirely exhausted, and heavy per 
sonal responsibilities are already resting upon them, and every revolv- 
ing day will britig them under deeper and deeper obligations, unless 
the wants of the Society are met by prompt pecuniary contributioq$ 
from those who love the cause. 

s 

It is also clear as day, that the Society's pecuniary means must be 
increased by donations, or the efforts it is making for our own desti-* 
tute population must be curtailed — and the young be left to spring up 
to maturity, the aged to become confirmed in vice, and many to plunge 
Hito eternity, without so much even as the warning of a Trtut, And 
why shall this be ? Is it because Christians, abounding in means-— 
enjoying daily the bounties of Providence; if not the luxuries of life-~ 
tannot afford pecuniary contributions sufficient to sustain this work? 



Mr. Andrew H. Reed has also been commissioned as an Agent of 
tills Society, and commences his efforts in Maryland. 



SHEPHERD OF SALISBURY PLAIN. 

The following particulars relative to the Shepherd whose character 
and piety are so beautifully described by Mrs. Hannah More,. in Tract 
No. 10, were communicated by a highly respectable gentleman, who 
recently visited ''the cottage where he lived, and the grave where his 

13» 



150 SHEPHEKD OP SAIftSBUAT VlAllf* (Occi 

remains lie deposited, in the church-yaRl of West LaTingteo, Eng^ 
^ land." He there found the yowt^est son of the i^epherd^ (the only 
sunrivor out of seventeen children,) with whom he had a very inte- 
resting interview ; and from whom be received not only a siifastai^ 
tiation of all the principal facts wbi<:h have bee» conwiuoicated to the 
world concerning the Shepherd, but also outlines of the cbaract^ of 
some of bis children and one of his grand-childx^n, together with se<^ 
vera! plain poetic effusions of the latter, which breathe the same spi- 
rit of deep-toned piety that characterised the aged Shepherd. 

The subjoined extract^om the Philadelphia Recorder, is the same 
in substance as was verbally communicated to an officer of the Ame- 
rican Tract Society, in the city of New-York, by the gentleman to 
whom we have referred. 

David.Saimdets, the originaKof the very just and admirable por- 
trait of an humble Christian, depicted in Mrs. More's Shepherd of Sa- 
lisbury Plain, was born ki 1717, and after struggling with the many 
difficulties and trials which the support of a large family of thirteen 
Irving children, upon an allowance of $1 37 a-week, may well be sup- 
posed to have occasioned, he died suddenly on the 9th of September, 
in the 80th year of his age. 

For thirty years he was employed as Shepherd upon one farm, and 
having much leisure, he employed himself, whilst taking care of his 
flock, in reading the Bible, in -meditating upon the wonderful works of 
God, and upon the still more wonderful plan of salvation. 

When be was about 43 years old, he married Lydia Bishop, a pious 
young woman, who was often subject to severe illness. When trou- 
ble and sorrow preyed upon her spirits, she always had recourse to 
her husband's large Bible, which he used to keep in the thatch of his 
cottage, and there by the grace of God, she always found something 
to comfort her. 

The gentleman mentioned under the name of Mr. Johnson, in Mrs. 
More's Tract, was Dr. afterwards Sir James Stonehouse, who took 
the greatest pleasure in assisting him in his various scenes of sorrow. 

Such is the attractive power of true religion, that wherever, in the 
decline of his life, the good old Shepherd went, he was admired and 
loved; and when, about a year before his decease, the failure of his 
sight nn^tted him for his employment, the neighboring farmers invi- 
ted him to visit them for a month together. It had been his constant 
prayer that the Lord would not leave him to struggle long with illness 
before his death ; and his request was granted. Being on a visit to a 
friend at Wyke, before retiring to rest one night, he was heard to 
pray with greater fervency than usual ; then falling into a quiet sleep, 
it was found in the morning that his ransomed spirit had entered upon 
that rest for which it had been so long humbly hoping and eagerly 
panting. 

He was interred in 4he church-yard of his own parish, with more 
than usual demonstratioBfl of respect, and sympathy. 

A tombstone is now erecting to his memory, at the expense of the 



ta29.] CONTCRSIONS BT %WLACt8> 151 

Bev. R. C. Caswall, Vicar of West LaTington,Wiltt, vUbthe follo^'^ 
i'n^ inscriptioD :— 

Erected in the year 1829| 

To the memory of 

DAVID SAUNDERS, 

Known through every quarter of the globe. 

Under the appellation of 

Thofious Shepherd of Salisbury Plain ; 

Whose little history has now been read with admiratiot> 

By multitudes of Christians in 

Europe, Asia, Africa, and America. 

He was buried by his sons, Sept 9th, 1796. 

Also, in memory of his wife, 

LYDIA SAUNDERS, 

Buried near this place. May 28tb, 1785. 



CONVEBSIONS BY TRACTI9 IN THE IHISSISSIPPI 

VAIiLEY. 

[Commonicatad by the Ciaeiiinati Auxiliary.} 

A man in — — county had been much addicted to the awful sin 
of profaning the name of God. By means of the minister he was pre* 
sented with the Swearer's Prayer. He was taken sick shortly after — 
the minister was sent for— ^he was in awfal distress, and found no 
peace till he heard the peace-speaking voice of Jesus. 

Another man in 7- county, when a request was made to him 

to become a member of a Bible Society, made light of it, and said, he 
could appropriate his money to better purposes. The clergyman lent 
him a volume of Tracts. One of them reproved him for his sin^he 
attempted in vain to shake off his serious impressions, the arrow had 
been too deeply fixed, and he fell, subdued, at the feet of Christ. This 
circumstance has since been instrumental of leading his toi/e to em* 
brace the Savior, in whom they have both professed their faith. 

A lady in Kentttcky had been deeply afflicted, and was inclined to 
murmur at the severe chastisement of the Lord. A member of a Fe- 
male Tract Society in Tennessee, being on a visit to that place, left 
with a friend a parcel of Tracts for distribution, among which was 
A Friendly Visit to the Howe of Mourning. This Tract was presented 
to the woman in affliction. It reproved her, and afterward, as she 
said, afforded her greater comfort than any book she had ever read. 

A young woman in Missouri had for some time been deeply im- 
pressed with the importance of religion ; she was anxious to attend 
meetings and converse with religious people. Her friends were un- 
willing to have her converse with any pious person. At length she 
obtained a religious Tract ; one day when alone she read it. It gave 
her the information she had long desired, and as she now hopes, was 
the instrument, in God's hand, of leading her to sincere repeAtance, 
and faith in Christ. 



4fsi tJSEFULZTESS OF V&4CT9. (pexr^ 

vssnjZiirasB or TKAom. 

« HEAVEN IiOST«» 

[Commwiicated to the Utica Tract Society.] 

An individual engaged in teacMng, at one of themiggionary statioiiji 
among the Indians, called one day upon a respectable merchant, wh(^ 
resided in a small village a little distance from.the station. He was a 
man of pleasure, possessed of many amiable qualities, yet lacked the 
one thing needful ; and about this, perhaps, he was unsoUcitous. Af- 
ter a short interview, the teacher presented Mr. M. with the Tract 
entitled '* Heaven Lclst," with a request that he would carefully ex- 
amine it. Mr. M. very readily manifested a willingness to comply 
with the request. The teacher passed on. Nothing was heard from 
the Tract for several months. But one evening Mr. and Mrs. M. called 
at the mission-house. They had frequently done so only as a matter 
of civility ; now they had a more important errand. They immediate- 
ly inquired what they must do to be saved ; and in a few days Mr. M. 
was rejoicing in hope, believing in Jesus, and his faith seemed to be 
of that kind which works by love. He immediately went from house 
to house, to all his neighbors, with language plain, but forcible enough 
to move a heart of stone. In relating the exercises of his mind, he 
jsaid, ** As soon as the teacher left his house, he cast his eye upon the 
title of the Tract, * Heaven Lost,' *' Feeling a strong aversion to read- 
ing it, he laid it aside; but could not banish from his mind * Heaven 
Xost.' Whenever he thought of readi^, that Tract was the' first 
thing that presented itself. If he attempted to take up any book, the 
Tract was the first that came to hand. At length he resolved to read 
it, and was convinced that heaven would be for ever lost to him. He 
found no rest until he ventured to cast his soul upon an almighty Sa- 
vior. His wif^ next found peace in believing. 

A very interesting work had now commenced ; six or seven others 
were hopefully the subjects of renewing grace. Several of the mo^ 
influential in the place were among the number. 



A TRACT VERSUS THE BOTTLE. 

A Gentleman from Connecticut carried a considerable supply qt 
Tracts into the state of Ohio ; where, distributing them, in connexion 
with his brother, they passed a family notoriously intemperate, and 
after some hesitation, called at the door and presented them a Tra<:^t 
on the sin which was causing their ruin. The same day they passed 
the house again^hen a boy. discovering them, came rudely out, and 
brandishing a bottle by the neck, ran after them, asking if they would 
not drink. But it appears, the Trojti had not then been read; for the 
/ather of the family, n few days ailer, called on one of the distributors, 
and seriously thanked htm for his kindness, and expressed his wish 
and hope, that the Tract might prove the means o^ their refraining- 
wholly thereafter from the nsc of ardent spirits, and of their spiritu^^ 
and eternal good. 



18^9.] TTSEFCXiNESS OF TBACTJB. . l6$ 

THACT BLESSEB TO A LADY IN A DECUNE. 

Mrs. f of our town, says the Report of the Anxiliary in Lou« 

i^villey Ken., a lady of amiable manners and affectionate deportments 
was afflicted with a protracted illness of a pulmonary character.— ^ 
I'hysicians tell us, that hope is constantly playing its illusions on the 
person laboring under a consumption of the lungs ; and friends and 
medical attendants too often most unkindly keep up, by incessant as* 
sidiiity, the veil of delusion. This fppears to have been verified ia 
the case of the Lady to whom we have referred. She remained care* 
less about the future state of her soul, stilt clinging to her poor ema- 
ciated body with the fond pertinacity of one who is in love with an 
unworthy object, tier heart yet revolted ftt the thought of seeking 
her father*8 God; and to her yet alienated mind, Jesus Christ was 
without moral loveliness. But Ged, for his g^eat love, wherewith he 
loved our fallen race, put it into the ihind of a Christian friend to send 
her a Tract, .which was read to her after some persuasion. Then the 
niist of her moral atmosphere began to rise for fiii^ dispersion, ahd 
the Sun of righteousness soon burst upon her with his healing and 
saving power. We trust her emancipated soul is now singing praises 
to. the Lamb for bis free salvation afforded her through the subordi* 
nate agency of scri{>tural truth contained in a Tract. 

A TRACT WON AT CARDSU 

A number of young men in the vicinity of Zanesville, says the 
Cincinnati Pandect, were in the habit of meeting on the Sabbath, for 
the purpose of playing cards, and gamUing on a small scale. This 
custom they had pursued for some time. At a meeting of this kind, 
not long since, one of the youths was unlucky, and lost all his money, 
but was still anxious to pi^y. He played off his handkerchief, and at 
last he thought of a Tract which some person had given him, and 
which he neither read nor cared about He staked the Tract against 
some trifle, and lost it : the winner carelessly threw it into his hat, and 
thought no more of it for some days. He, however, at a leisure mo- 
ment, concluded he would look at his Tract, and see what it contained. 
He began to read it — his curiosity was excited, and he read it through^ 
and was immediately struck under the most poignant convictions for 
sin — ^and after the lapse of three months, he came forward and con- 
fessed the Lord Jesus before men — ^and has since adorned his profes- 
sion by a regular life devoted to his Divine Master — and would lift his 
warning voice against the crimes of Sabbath-breaking and gambling. 

TRACT BLEST TO AN AGED MAN. 

[From an Agent in the Valley c^the Missiaaippl.] 
A man in B— — , in the county of F , Ohio, had been a pro- 

fessor of religion for 30 years ; his character was irreproachable, but 
he was almost always silent on the subject of religion. His minister 
doubted whether he was at heart a Christian, and lent him the ap- 
propriate Tract entitled. The Two Old Men. He read it, and it crea* 
ted in him a taste for reading Tracts, of which he procured many at 
the Depository near him, exchanging those he had read for others. 
About this time an cgisential change was discovered in his religious 



6haract6r. He loved to converse on reli^ous sabjects, bat to one 
knew the cause. One day he said to his minister, ** I have had some- 
thing to sav to you a long time; but mv fearful heart has prevented 
me. Sintelhave retUt TractSt I haoe had different views of religion. 
My days and nights had been formerly burdensome, but now every 
thing is pleasant. I knew not what to do with my wakeful liours of 
ni^ht, but now I love to rise from my bed and kneel down and pray 
before Grod." He is 74 years «|d, and is giving to his friends a de< 
lightful evidence, that his last days are his best days. 

In O — •— , in i^eighboriug county, Tke fVay to be Saved was lent 
to a young man under conviction of sin. He read it almost constantly^ 
and it was unquestionab]||Ma powerful means of directing him to th^ 
Savior of sinners. 



— *rr 

TRACTS BLESSBD AT THE WEST. 

Ton can scarcely believe, says a Clergyman of Ohio, the avidity 
With which TracO^are sought for l>y the people of this country, and their 
readiness to do what they can to supply themselves. I believe that a 
brighter day i% dawning upon the inhabitants of the Mississippi Val* 
ley ! The presint efforts to supply our destitute Vith religious J'racts 
wUl be productive of great and lasting good. In Ul our Tract opera- 
tions we should keep before us the new and interesting feature in your 
plan of supplying Tracts to every family who wHl '&ceive them. You 
will doubtless hear of many immediate and happy effects of this.syste* 
matic distribution, 

I was recently travelling, and becamb acquainted with the case of a- 
lady who has lately become hopefully pious, to wham ttfb Tract en- 
titled the DeaihrbeJi of a Free- Thinker hart been particularly useful ia 
the season of religious anxiety. ' 

I must also mention the case of a gentleiftan of high literary emi« 
nence, who is a professor in one of the colleges at the West, and who 
was a professed and confirmed Deist, who was stripped of his deistical 
scepticism and doubts by reading Leslie^s S^iort Method. This same 
gentleman has since become pious, and united himself with the people 
of God, and is now preaching that blessed Gospel which he once ridi- 
culed and despised. 

I know also the instance where The WelUcortducted Farm has been 
the means of reforming a farmer, who had been in the habit of fre- 
quent intoxication, and whose subsequent sobriety and entire abstix 
nence from the use of ardent spirits for many months, give reason to 
hope that the reformation will be permanent. 

MONTHLY DISTRIBUTION IN PHILADEI.PHIA. 

The number of the Tract Magazine published by the Branch So- 
ciety at Philadelphia, for November, contains an interesting article, 
jshowing the excellence of the System of Monthly Tract Distribution, 

At a late meeting of the Board of the Philadelphia City Tract So* 
ciety, it was 

** Bewlved, That this Board, depending, under Providence, upon 
the aid of the friends of the Tract cause, will commence the monthly 
distribution of Tracts in this city, and continue the same 9Q long 9^ 
Jbe requisite funds c«m be obtained.*' 



■•.!»'■ P' 



1229.] 



, 1Cfit£lP1!9'. 



tfsB 



RECEIPTS 

INTO TITE: THEASURY of the AMERICAN TRACm S^CftBXV, 
DfKnug tiU mmtth ending November 15, 1829. 

FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 

TER.— Fairfield, Beigamui Wooeter, Pres. ^ 
Middleburjr', Francis Willflon, Sec. . ' 

" - Aux. Dep. Eliaha Brewster, Ag^ 
Olrwell, Lyniis Wilcox,^ec. « 

St. Albans, Fern. Rer. Worthington Smith, Ag. 
Verjennes, •, . 

MASS.— Mon8on,Fem. Miss Olivia Flynt, Sec. . ' 
North Adams, Dea. EU Northam, Tr. ^ 

Tyringham, Fern. Candace Townaend^ S^ 
Williamstown, (South Par.) Caleb Broim,T'r. 
CONN.— Colchester, Col. Guy Bigelow, Ag. 
Danbury, Horace Bull, Tr. 
Grassy Hill, in Lyme, Benjamin F. Gillett, Tr. 
Greenwich, Stanwich Soc. William Smith, Tr. 
Hartford, Conn. Branch, Charles Hosmer, Sec. 
Harwinton, Dr. Joel G. Candee, Sec. . . . 

New-Haven, Fern. Mrs. Henrietta F. WliiUiey, Tr. . 
Jf ew-Milfbrd, Ezra Nobl^, Tr. . 
Northibrd, Rev. Matthew Noyes, Ag. . « 

Norwich City, F. A. Perkins, Esq. Tr. 
Norwich Falls, Fern. Blljss Eliza Allen, Tr. 
Salisbury, Fern. Julia A. Dodge, Tr. 
^laron, Charles F. Sedgwick, Sec. 
N. YORK^-Bainbridge, Fem. Mrs. C^thia Monger, Tr. 
Bedford, Fem. Mrs. Susan S. Nichols, Sec. 
Berea, in Montgomery, Orange Co. Fem. Miss Maria Houston, Tr. 
Bridgehampton, L. I. Rev. Amzi Itencis, Tr. 
Brooklyn, L. I. Richard M. White,%ec. . , . 
Coxsackie, A. Van Dyck, Ag. ^^ 

Elmira, (Tioga Co. Aux.) W. Jury^DiBt. Rev. John Barton, Sec 
Fishkill Landing, Fem. Miss M. W. Teller, See. 
Hunter, Greene Co. E. J. Stimpson, Sec. . 
Jamaica, L. I. Marvin W. Fox, Sec. 
La Fayette, Fem. Harriet Hoyt, Sec. 
Lexington, Timothy Edwards, Tr. 
Liverpool, Onondaga Co. Fem. Martha O. Dickson, Sec 
Lodi, Erie Co. Joseph Plumb, Tr. 
New-Rochelle, Fem. Parthenia B. Tioain, Tr. 
XSfew-York Ci^ Tract Soc. Alfred Edwards, Tr. 

" by Fem. Aux. Mrs. J. R. Hurd, Tr„ . 

" Mulberry-st. Ch. Fem. Mrs. Mary Winterton, Tr. 

** St. George's Ch. Fem. Miss Ann Dominick, Tr. 

Pleasant Valley, J. Gabaudan, Tr. 
Pottghkeepsie, Fem. Mrs. S. L. Tappen, Sec. 
Salem, Washington Co. James H. Seymour, Tr. 
Saady Hill, Washington Co. R. C. Gibson, Tr. 
Smyrna, BIrs. Asenath Avery, Ag. 
Union Village, Moses H. White, Tr. 
Utica, Edward Vernon, Sec. 

Walton, Del. Co. Fem. Miss Hannah Seymour, Tr. . 
Watertown, (Jefferson Co. Aux.) Eli Farwell, Tr. . 
N. JER.— Amwell, Fem. Mrs. H. Skilhnan, Tr. 
Baskenridge, Horace Sheldon, Sec. 

Hardwick Cong. Gratitude P. O. Fem. Mrs. Mary A. LowO) 8e<;. 
Kingston, Fem. Miss Jane K. Comfort, Tr. 
LawrenceviUe, Fem. Maria L. Phillips, Sec. 
AjTArKiBftoro' Cov^. ii» Hardwidk, Fem. Miss Euffh'aHatikiUffii^ SSt. 



ForTr. 


Dgri 


11 73 


3 91 




loot) 


45 8S 






400 


13 50 


4 50 




75 


21 03 


7 01 


4 50 


150 


3 16 


isd 


563 


1 87 


3 75 


125 


3 75 


1 25 


825 


2 75 


240 




400 00 




SI 21 
36 00 


12 00 


5 25 


1 75 


12 12 


6 06 


147 55 




9 00 


8<g> 


950 




9 48 




1 25 




450 


1 50 
«0O 


18 00 


6 87 


1 6^ 


40 




2 95 




22 60 




384 




54 




392 


1 30 


9 00 


40Q 


10 00 


3 33 


300 


1 00 


822 


25P 


96 




294 25 




119 7S 




500 


206 90 


1 15 


1 68 




21 50 




10 00 




8 00 




800 




6 08 


3 36 


42 00 




169 




22 00 




450 


1 50 


410 


150 


10 00 


500 


720 




900 


300 


> 


5 0j) 



150 



rCKXTElVtS. 



Hendham, Fem. Ifiss EnCh Daytoa, Tr. 
MillBtone, FHp. Bfrs. Peter Staats, Tr. 
Oxford, Fem. Bfrs. Mary Hiles, Tr. 
Pateraon, in Pres. Cb. Henry Van Houten, Tr. 
Princeton, Fem. Miss F. W. Morford, Tr. . 
Readingtown, North Branch, Martin Wyekoff, Jim. Sec. 
Somerv^e, Fem. Mrs. Sophia Talmage, Tr. 
Springfield, D.S.Briant, Sec. . _« • ^. • 
PENN—Philadeljphia Branch, Rev J. T. Benedict, Ag. 
PUtsburg h. Rev. Robert Patterson, Ag^ 
VIR.— FarmviBe, *>hn Rice, Tr. 
OEO.— Darien, Bayard £. Hand, Esq. Tr. 
Savannah, W. W. Baker, £^ Sec. 

KEN ^Danville, M.G.Youce,Ag. 

OHIO^— Granville, Licking Co. Rev. Jacob Little, Pres. 
Hudson, (Portage Co. AuxO Professor E. jliVright, Ag. 
Painesville, Geaoga Ol>. Silas Pepoon, Sec. . 
Salem. Aux. Dep. Rev. Luther Humphrey, Ag. 
Trumbull Co. Aux. Dr. C. C. Hadduck, Ag. 
MO.^St. Louis, m and Dl. Branch, W. S. Olmsted, Tr. 
MICH. TER.— Detroit, E. P. Hastings, Ag. 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 
1^. YORK.— Or»ge Co. S. S. Union, John W. Wells, Ag. 
N. JER.— Pateribn, Ref. Dutch Ch. R. Doremus, Tr. 
VIR.— Accomac, Co. St. Geo. Par. Fem. Mrs. Maria S. Jaques, Ag. 
IJ. CAR.— North Carolina Book Co. Rev. James W. Douglass, Ag. 
Tracts sold at the Depository to individuals, 



FfffTr. 

aea 

7 13 
9 07 

3 00 
10 00 
13 60 

5 00 
396 

4 60 
518 75 

50 90 
10 00 
15 00 
86 75 
111 36 
10 00 
36 00 
50 00 
13 00 
45 00 
95 00 

934 
4 00 

8 00 
50 00 

369 96 



JD0.fl4. 

9 6^ 
9 3T 



40 



16T)0 



00 
00 



Directortfor Life. 

CONN— Westchester, D. L. Par- 
melee, (in part of $50) - -10 00 

Scotland, Mr. WiUiam Rudd, 125 00 

If, YORK— New-York city, Col. 
RichardVarick, - 100 00 

Members for Life, 

CONN.— Bridgeport, Mrs. Catha- 
rine M. Basset, (in part of $20) 5 

Mrs Ellen Porter, do - 5 

JCf. YORK.— Manlius, Miss Lucin- 
da D. Lombard, by her father, 
Rev. H.J. Lombard, (infullof$20) 10 00 

PhUlipsburgh, Orange Co. Mrs. Sa- 
rah E. PlulUps, - - -20 00 

Smithtown, L. I. Rev. Ithamar 
Pillsbury, by Ladies, - - 20 00 

77. JER.— Allentown, Nottingham 
Square, Rev. Henry Perkins, by 
Ch.andCong. - - -20 00 

Elizabethtown, Rev. David Magie, 
by Ladies, - - - 90 00 

Hillsboro', Somerset Co. Rev. John 
L. Zabriskie, by his Ch. & Cong. 90 00 

Monmouth, 1st Presb. Ch. Rev. Ro- 
bert Roy, by his Ch. & Cong. - 93 00 

New-Brunswick, Rev. Jas. B.Har- 
denbergh, by Ladies, - - 90 00 

PENN.— Bethel Cong, near Pitts- 
burgh, Rev. Wm. Woods, - 20 00 

Harford, Susqh. Co. Rev. Ebene- 
zer Kingsbury, - - - 90 00 

Mrs. Hannah Kingsbury, by Rev. 
Ebenezer Kingsbury, - - 90 00 

OHIO.->Au8titiburgh, Ashtabula 
Go. Rev. Giles H. Cowles, D. D. 
byLadiesj - - -90 0Of 



AnnyMl Director. 
New-York city, George Hannabs, 5 00 

• Annual Member. 

New- York city, Wm. IK Murphy, 9 09 

Other Donations, 

VER — Hubbarton, a Fri«»d, - X 00 
CONN»-New*-Hayen, A. Town- 
send, Jun. - - •• 10 00 
N.YORK.— Monticello, Mrs. Phebe 

Stokes, - - - - 1 00 

New-York city, a Friend, - -100 

Fisher How, - - •^ 90 00 

M' S. $5; small earnings, 95 cts. - 5 95 
Perry Centre, Mrs. Howard, - ' 1 00 
South Salem, Mrs. Molly Northnip, 10 OU 
NWEIR — ^Readingtown, John Hall, 1 60 
S. CAR. — Charleston, for Premv 
for Tract on ** Sailing Vessels 
out of Port on the Sabbath," - 50 00 
OHIO. — ^Madison, Geauga Co. in- 
dividuals, for Val. Miss. - - 4 00 
ILL.^ — Galena, Rev. AratosKent, 
to aid Mission at Ceylon in Tract 
operations, - - • 33 ^. 

The above list contains donation»— 
For Frem. Tract, - $50 00 

For Tracts for Val. of Miss. 4 09 
To aid Mission at Ceylon in Tr. 
operations, .... 33 90 

Whole amount of Donations, $949 $4 
Receivea for Tract! sold, 9,895 77 

Tulli)^ |3i84? 01 



/ 



y 



^! 




