Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 






1 



w 



• t 



m • 



» 




• 



• • « 



y 



• • 






///r 



N. 




Mm 



^\\\ 







AMERICAN 
TRACT IHAOAZINE, 



FOR THE TEAB 



IfEW'TOBK. 

PUBUSHED BY THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETT. 
D. Fudwr, PiliMi. 



xifBaz 



Ab«rde0ii Tract Society, 
Ad^e§»t9 of 

Rev. Dr. De Witt, . . 63 
Rev. Mr. Babcoek, . . 68,87 
Rev. Dr. Codman, • . 63 

Rev. BIr. Eastman, . . .63 
Rev. Dr. Baxter, ... 63 
Rev. 8. Woodbridge, . 63 

Rev. Dr. Si»rp, ... 63 
Bishop McttvalBe, . • .63 
Rev. Dr. McAuley^ . . 64 
Rev. E. BlckerBtetb, . . 98 
Rev. Dr. tfbnrison, . • 98 
Rev. Bfr. Polk, . . . . 98» 
Affent, labors of , • 194 

AlezandriafD. C, Fem.Ailx . . 80 
AmericMi Tract SecUty-^ 

Special Meetinff in behalf of * 1 
Receipt^ 11,83, 34, 44, 57, 80, 



Page- 

. 89 Dayton Branch, Ohio 

JDmiaf tofw, interetting—' 



115 



Mode of Perpetuating, . . 
Hartford and New-Haven, . 89 
Greene County, N.Y. . . SO 
A Dying Widow, ... 80 
Female Auz, iklexandria, D. C. 80 
Cl0ifyman*s New Year's Present, 81 
Beantiful Example of Benevo- 
lence, . . .31° 
Noble Examples in the West- 
em District, N. Y. . 33 
Churches in Th)y, N. Y. . 39, 50 



New-Jersey, 
Foreign Jnaii^iivleB 

tors for Lifb, . 
The fhiitful Missionary Fund, 
$18 for destitute Townships, 



51 



Duty, Long Neglected 
9&, i05, 119, 130, 141, 150 I>ying Negro, 
Recent Publications, U>, 33, Edwards on the Affections, 

43, 56, Vi4, 118, 188 Evangelical Rambler, AuUienticity of 116 
Gftcular— Fields of Usefulness, 13 Foreign Operationt^ 



189 

145 

9 

188 



Prompt Payment for Tracts, 85 
Plan for Supplying our Country, 89 
7th Anuiversary and Report, 61, 64 
Executive Committee, . . 64 
New Publications, . . .65 
Amount Printed and Circulated, 65 
Gratuitous Distribution, . 65 
Receipts and Expenditures, . 65 
Branches and Auxiliaries, . 66 
Visiting and Financial Secretary, 66 
Claims of our Country, 66, 8S, 116 
Claims of Foreign and Pagan 

Lands, . . . 70, 86 
Circular— New Tracts, 133 

American Tract Society, Boston — 

18th AnniTorsary and Report, 91 

Argument for Supplying our Country, 116 Germany, 



Openings in Foreign Lands, 
Rapidity of Tract operations. 
The Burmans can read. 
Proximity of Burmah to China, 
Foreign Appropriations, 
Response to Foreign Appropri- 
ations, .... 
Claims of Foreign and Pagan 

Lands, . 70,86 

Demand for Foreign Opera- 
tions, 
Argument for 
Distribution to every Family 

in Tavoy, 
France, aid requested for 40,137,138 
Influence of a Tract in . 58 



8,16 
17 
19 
19 
37 

49 



93 
118 

188 



.70 
116 Glasgow, Scotland, Monthly Dis- 
67 tribution, . ' . . .115 

. 56 Greece, 73, 89 

78, 148 Hamburg, 70 

" ~ * 9,115 

43 

43,55 

183 

. 58 

54 

. 139 

5 

. 55 



Athens, Tenn. Auxiliary, 

BabcockjRev. Rufus' Address 

Baptist General Tract Society, 

Bombay, .... 

Burmah, Proximity to China, . 19 Harrisbnrg, Pa. Aux. 

Reading Population of . . 19 Hartford, Connecticut Branch, 
Tract Cause in . 73, 100, 118, 122 Huntsville, Ala. A^iliary, . 
Tract to every flumly in Tavoy, 188 India, value of Tracts in . 
« Catharine Yeates," authenticity of 114 Isle of Wight, visit to . 

Ceylon, 73 Itinerant Libraries, • 

Children's Tracts at the West, . 125 Jamestown, N. Y. Aux. . 
China, Tract cause in 76, 88, 99, 136 Judson, Rev. Dr. Letter from 
Cholera, Tracts on . . 118, 138 Knoxville, Ten. Aux. 
Christian Almanac, . 188 Letter* from— 

Cincinnati, Branch . 103 Rev. Dr. Judson, 

Circular— New Tracts, . . 133 Liverpool, Rel. Tract Soc. 

Cleaveland, Ohio, Fern. Auz. 139 Dr. A. W.Ives, New-York, 

Concert for Prayer, < . . 42 Rev. Mr. Bridgman, 



. 5 
. 51 

sa 

88,136 



INDEX. 



187 
148 
115 
lU 
51 

97 
98 
98 
99 
55 

1S3 
71 
50 

101 



to 

97 
51 
5S 



L«tUr« from 

Eer. Mr. KnlU, 
Sandwich Island WmIob, . 
Paris Tract Society, 
Bombay Mission, 

Liberality of a Younf^Clergyman, 

Little Henry and Us Bearer, 

Liverpool, Monthly Distribution, 

London Tract SocieQr, 33d Anni- 
' rersary, .... 
Abstract of Addreesas, • 
Annual Report, . 

Eitensive Foreign Operatioiis, 

Madison, Ind. Aux. 

Marshman. Eev. Dr. Testimony to 
the vaioe of Tracts in India, 

Mediterranean, 

MUne, Rev. Dr. TracU for China, 

Missouri and Illinois Branch, . 

MotUklf fHftribuHon^ • 

Synods of New-Tork and Al- 
* bany, .... 
Improvement in the System, 
In Liverpool, • . 

AnErj^m . . . , 

Evidence of the Divine Blessing, 79 
In Glasgow, Scotland, . 115 

Dayton, Ohio and Vicinity, . 110 
Providence, R. I. 139 

Argument for .... 145 
Fidelity of Distributers, . 147 

New Tracts wanted, 43, 114, 133, 149 

New-Tork City Tract Society, An- 
niversary, .... 

Occasional Volumes, sale of 

Pennsylvania Branch, Anniversary 
and Report, .... 

Petersburg, Va. Auz. . • 

Pilgrim's Progress, 

Plan for Supplying our own Coun- 
try 14,99 

Poetry— The Burmans and their 
Missionary, .... 

Prciimiiii TraeU^ 

On War, .... 
On Lotteries, .... 
** The blood of Jesus Christ,'' 

See. ... . 
On Prayer, . . . ' . 
On Duties of Christians, Ac. 
$500 for best ten Tracts, 

Prompt Payment for Tracts, . . 

Russia, ...*.. 71, 



Piye. 

Tract, Fieldfl selected at WesC, 
. 109 Imprecations against, . 
119 Tnusls, for Pagan Lands, 



Ptf«« 

. 40 

140 

9,118 

40 

. 8 

195 



For France, 

How valued at the West, 
instead of Wine, • 
New, Wanted . 43, 114, 133, 149 
Rapid Circulation, . 118 

Value in Clergyman's Library, 
7V«et«, Uuhibust 9f^ 
** The.Moontain Miller," 
The l<Hig neglected Tract, 
M This Tract has told me my 

whole Life," . » . • 
To Christians in Alexandria, 

D.C. . . 91,49 

" I am. not Sfttisfied," ice, . 49 
Two barrels of Spirits saved, 49 



119 

7 
8 

6 



F.or the Heath<yi, 
Tract in France, . 
BeantiAil Anecdote, 
Numerous Evidences, . 
** auench not the Spirit" 
To ** him who a Swrnon 
A Congregation Trebled, 
DicUnsw's Appeal on Tem- 
perance, 109 
Bbans of a Revival of ReligiflD, 109 



50 
. 59 
54 

79 
90,109 
99 
90 



ti 



fialem,N.C.Aux. 
Sandwich Islands, 
fit. Louis, Mo. Tract Society, 
Stokes, Thomas, death of , 
Tobacco Chewer, conscientious 
Tract, circulation, • 

Djatributen' Concert, . 



Alarm to Distillers, 
In numerous Instances, . 
Tracts in College, 
How to fill a Church, 
General Influence, . 
In Connecticut State Prison, 
Motive for writing Tracts, 
Ip a Clernrman's Library, . 
At 9auU De St. Marie, . 
In and near Dajrton, Ohio, . 
"Children of the Forest," 
At a Camp-Meeting in Ohio, 
To a S. S. Superintendent, 
Influence on three Clergymen, 
To a Judge in Connecticut, . 
"Swearer's Prayer," . 
In Providence, R. I. 
To a bitter Opposer, • 
Troy, N. Y. Aux. , , 

104 United States, Plan for Supplying, 

117 Volumes, Circulation of 

197 Waldo, S. S. Death of 

134 West, Agents for . 

95 Appeal fVom an Agent, 

101 Tract Fields selected at 



41 
140 

90 
55 
33 





91 
44 



Exam' 



55 Western Christian, 
79, 119 Western District, Noble 

. 101 pies in 

141 Winchester, Va. Aux. 
99 Windham Co., Conn. Aux. . . 
9 Woods, Rev. W. W. Agent in Tes. 



108 
103 
109 
111 

in 
111 

119 
119 
113 
116 
195 
135 
196 
196 
196 
197 
139 
140 
56 
85 
140 
141 
199 
99 
40 
134 

39 

89 

139 

U6 



THE AMERICAN 

DL. Til. JAinTAK-S-, IflSa. NO. 1 



WCOUI. MaiTINO >K BEHlLF OT THE 

AMBaZOAH TKA.OT BOOZBTV. 

& ariOiAi. meeting of the Exerutivo Committee, and a Ten- eth<!t 
rriendi of Hue Society, WM held at Ihe Souetya Houte, on Tuesday 
«Tening, Dec. 6 { tbe PreiidenI of (he Societj', 8. V. S. Wilder, Eiq. 
ia the chair, and Dr. JamGa C. Blias, Secrelaiy. 

Alter prajer by the Rev. Mr. Sommere, the Rev. Dr. Milnor, 
Cbainnan of the Executive Cooimittee, preaanted a fall atalemeat 
of the preient condition orths Society, the special divine Ueuing 
wliieh has alteaded ila labori, the preaMng eolicilatiant the Commillea 
bave received for aid to fereiga atatioos where AntGiican MiiaionaHcs 
•re laboring, and the very eiteniive wanta of the destitute of our 
own cDontry. He also stated, that while the Societj had expended 
naoeMayl, |31,3S344, the total receipts, daring the eame period, 
ttom *U aourcss, eiolasive of loans, had been only S33,S71 99; 

Vol. ni. 1 TThoie No. 70. 



fi TRACTS FOB FOREIOli LAZTDS. [1882. 

leaving the Treasury deficient in the sum of $9,011 45 ; and that 
there /weTs due on bills sanctioned, and on notes of members of th» 
Committee, $12,412 53, which must be paid within two months. 

The Rev. Dr. €ornelii(S followed by some interesting and appro- 
priate remarks, showing that the spirit' of the age, the demands 
vpon the charch, and the opportunities of doing good, call loudly 
upon christians to raise their standard of benevolence. 

The RcT. 0. Eastman, who, in view of the qeccssitics of the So- 
aiety, had consented again to engage for a time in their service, then 
presented the following resolution, which was seco&ded by the Rev. 
Air. Maclay, and unanimously adopted. 

" Resohfed^ That the field of usefulness now open before the Ame- 
rican Tract Soc^ty in thi^ co^ntry, and at the stations occupied by 
American Missionaries in foreign countries, demands the special and 
immediate attention and patroaage of the churches.*' 

On motion of P .Perit, Esq., a subscription was then opened, and 
the sum of $3,907, was subscri1]^ed by twcnty-seven individuals, of 
which $1,340 was designed for foreign countries. 

On motion of the Rev. Dr. Milnor, it was then ^^Resotved, that, in 
view of the interesting facts communicated this evening, it is ez- 
eeedingly desirable that the Christian community furnish a contribu- 
tion of at least $10,000 for the general operations of the Society in 
our own country, and $10,000 for the supply of the destitute in 
foreign, lands." 

It was also "Resolved^ that a committee of five be appointed to co- 
operate with Rev. Mr. Eastman, or other agents, in raising funds 
for the Society, and to take any other measures they may think ad- 
visable, in cooicarrence with the Executive Committee." Messrs. 
George Douglass, W. W. phestcr, B. L. Woolley, William M. Hal- 
9ted, and L. Tappan, were appointed the Committee. 

The meeting was closed witl^ prayer, by the Rev. Mr. Maclay. 

TRACTS FOR FOREIGN I<ANDS. 

. It will be perceived, from the above notice of the meeting of the 
friends of the American Tract Society, that their attention was direct- 
ed, in connection with the Society's present pecuniary wants, to two 
grand departments of usefulness opened before it : one of them in 
Foreign lands — the other in our own. country. We propose now to 
present some of the fiDicts which claim the attention of the christian 
community to the Foreign field. 

A correspondence was recently opened, by a special comimttee of 
the Society, with all the Missionaiy Institutions in our country, known 
^o bo engaged in promoting the spread of the Gospel abroad, and in- 



1832.] TRACTS FOR FOREIGN LARBS. S 

formation sought from other soarcos, from the results of which it &p* 
j>6ars, that, in enlightening and £vangelizing the Heathen, The Prcs4 . 
is a powerful and almost indispensable instrumentality ; that by it di- 
vine truth may be conveyed where the Missionary's voice cadnot 
reach; and that the short and impressive Tract arrests the attention, 
of thousands who would sufi^ra large volume to lie by them unheed- 
ed. In accordance with these facts, it appears there are now more 
than forty prinHng presses at Missionary stations in Pagan Lands. 

The Moraman Brethren gave the assurance that, as opportunity may 
ofifer, they will heartily embrace the co-operation of Ihis Society in 
their labors among the Heathen. 

The Domestic and Foreign Missionary Society of the Protestan 
Episcopal Church applied for Tracts for Liberia, and, through the Rev; 
Messrs. Robertson and Hill, for an appropriation in money to aid their 
TraQt operations in Greece. This application^ to the grief of the Com- 
mittee, they were cotnpetfed, for want of tneansj to dsny ! God grant 
that such a reproach upon the benevolence of American Christians 
may soon be wiped away. 

The late lamented Mr. Evarts presented, with -his own hand, an 
estimate of the pecuniary aid annually needed for Tract operations at 
the several Stations under the care of the American Board of Foreign 
Missions, as the result of an attentive and accurate examination o 
tacts. 

From their station at Bombay, he estimated that 1,500,000 pages 
of Tracts might be annually circulated, at an expense of about $1,500 

'' Tracts,'* says a joint communication from the Missioiiarics at tjus 
Station, <*are a useful auxiliary to all the Missions in this part of In- 
dia. They are permitted to wiii^ their viray over the Ghauts to those 
parts of India which are inaccessible to Missionaries, and are destined 
to bo heralds <>f mercy to thousands who will never hear the ae 
cents of Redeeming love from the voice of the living preacher. The ' 
•will be read and heard. We beg therefore to represent our case to the 
American Tract Society, and inquire if they could serve the interest^ 
'of Christ's Kingdom better than by making an appropriation to this 
specific ol]jeet." 

This application the Committee have had under tfbnaideration fijr 
eeveral meetings, but have been constrained to postpone acting upon 
it for UMttU efpeamiary memis. 

At Ceylon Mr. Evarts estimated that $J,000 annually might be^se- 
fnlly appropriated. A communication from this Mission says, **JCo 
method of doing good in Ceylon or India is so promising^ ioith the sane 9c- 
er^ice, as the disMbution of Tracts, They are better adapted for gene- 
ral circulation than even the Scriptures among such a population as 
we find here who read but little; and they feel not the sun, and sink 
not under the climate, as does the living Missionary.** 



4 [tracts foe FOREIGir LA9DS. [188f» 

In the Sandwich lahmdSf it was estimated that |9 1,500 should he ap- 
propriated annually. " No Tracts or Books remain in the Deposito- 
ry there — they are all distributed and read." 

On the Mediterranean, Mr. Evarts estimated that 1 1,500 might be 
advantageously appropriated annually; 60 Tracts having been alrea- 
dy printed at Malta, in Modem Greek, 40 in Italian; and 21 in Armeno- 
Turkish. 

The Secretary of the Paris Tract Society, France, in a late commn- 
nication, says: " We have distributed this year more than 430,000 
Tracts; and we ought to say with gratitude, that the facilities for 
their difiusion increase daily. We continually find d«w helpers, andf 
believe we shall soon have some in every department of France, in- 
habited by tkirty-ttoo miUions of souls, to whom, were not onr means a» 
Umited, we should easily have an access. If our brethren of New* 
York were to come to our assistance, we might be able to cultivate 
another spot of that immense field which we have under opr eyes.** 
On this application, the Committee have been compelled to defer aet^ 
ing hitherto, for want of means. 

The Rev. Richard Knill, of St. PHersburgh, Russia, has recently made 
an appeal for funds to assist in the publication of Tracts. Of near! J^ 
900,000 Tracts, consisting of translations of English Tracts, and se^ 
lections from Russian authors, which had been printed under the di» 
rection of the Princess Mestchersky, and by her presented to Ren 
Mr. Knill, he says the greater part are distributed, and some oC.then» 
are gone to places thousands of miles distant. The three Tracts of 
the Rev. Legh Richmond, aniong^o&ers, were translated by the Prin- 
cess into the Russian language, and of two of them not a copy is re- 
maining on hand. 

An appeal from the Lower Saxony Tract Sodsfy at Hamtwrg, strug^ 
gUng with civil and ecclesiastical oppression, the c<^mmittee have alse^ 
for want of means, been constrained thus far to disregard. 

Among the millions of China, Tract circulation has been comr 
menced ; and none but Grod knows how wide a field may be opene4 
there for ^e labors of this society. It is a fact of surpaasiitg interest 
in the providence of Grod, that though ^fierent dialects are spoken^ 
yet such is the structure of the Chinese language, (being a language 
ni signs,) that the same books are read by tM^ 

In Smidh JitneritOy in the West^hidia hlastds^ among the eAorigkOs 
of wet man csiadry, and in dmadOj are important openings. 

But BuRMAH, with a population equal to that of the United States, 
a large portion of whom can read, presents at this moment a field 
which in interest has perhaps no parallel on the face of the earth. Of 
thU the Rev. Dr. JirD8ov» who has endured the gloom and damps of 



1^32.3 TRACTS FOR FORKIOIT LANDSt I 

the dungeon, atid boned the partner of his bosom/ amid his perileyet^ 
ing labors, shall speak for himseIC 

In a letter dated Rangoon, March Ath, 1851) he says : " t can spar^ 
lime to write a few \in6B only, having a constant press of missionary 
work on hand : add to which, that the weather is dreadfully oppress 
0lve at this season. Poor Boardman has just died under it, ana Mrs. 
Wade is nearly dead. Brother Wade and I are now the only men .in 
the mission that can speak and write the language, and we. have a 
)>opulation of above ten millions of perishing^ souls before us, The 
^eat annual festival is just past. During this festival, I have given 
away nearly 10,000 tracts, giving to none mU those who ask. I presume 
there have been six thousand applicants at the house ! Some come 
' two or throe months' journey, from the borders of Siam and China— 
* Sir, we hear that there is an eternal hell. We are afrojd of it. Dr. 
cive us a writing, that will tell us how to escape iV Others coma 
from the frontiers of Cassay, a hundred miles hortli of Ava — '^ir^ 
we have scen'a writing that tells us about an eternal God. Are you 
the man that gives away such writings ? If so, pray give \is one, 
for we want lo know the truth before we die.' Others come Irom 
the interior of the country, where the name of Jesus Christ is a little 
known. — * Are you Jesus Christ's man? Give us a writing that tells 
about Jesus Christ.' Brother Bennett works day and night at tho 
press ; but he is unable to supply us ; for the call is great at Maul- 
mein and Tavoy, as well as here, and his types are very poor, and he 
has no efficient help. The fact is, that we are very weak, and have to 
complain, that hitherto we have not been well supported from home* 
It is most distressing to find, when w6 are almost worn out, and are 
fiinkins;, one aflcr afrother, into the grave, that many of our brethren 
in Christ at home, are just as hard and immovable as rocks; just ad 
Cold and repulsive as the mountains of ice ip the polar seas. But 
whatever they do,' we cknnot sit still dnd see the dear Biirmans, flesh 
and blood like ourselves, and like ourselves possessed of immortal 
souls, that will shine for ever in heaven, or bum for ever in hell — we 
cannot see them go down to perdition, without doing our very iltmost 
to save them. Aiid thanks be to dod, our labors are not in vain. 
We have three lovely churches, and about two hundred baptized con- 
verts, and soYne are in slory. A spirit of religious inquiry is exten- 
sively spreading tlirougnout the country, and the signs of the times 
indicate that the great renovation of Burmah is drawing near. O, if 
we had about twenty more, versed in the language, and means to 
spread schools, and Tracts,- and Bibles, to any extent, how happy I 
should be. But those rocks, and those icy mountains, have cnished 
H3 down for many years. However, I must not leave my work to 
write letters. It is seldom that I write a letter home, except my jour- 
nal, and that I am obliged to do.'* 

It is not too much to estimate, that from $1,500 to $3,000 may bo- 
usefully appropriated annually in Burmah. 

In view of all these fields, and in consideration of others which, in 
the march of Divine truth, will doubtless be continually opening, who 
can question that the sum of $ 10,000 will soon be needed by the Ameri- 

1* 



tf. ^ TR^CTI P0& roiXIOR 2.AK98/ [ISttr 

ean Tract Sodvty for its Foreign operationB 7 Tbe co ntrib u iion: of tfak 
ram, for this object, it should be obserred, will add nothing to the So* 
ciety's means for the supply of omr ownrcountiy, as every dollar thuo 
contributed will be sacredly appropriated to its destined end. Bat 
how can the Society, with a Treasury #8,00^ deficient,, proceed to 
occupy these inviting fields ? WIB not the friends of the Lord Jeso* 
send Jbrward their donations for this object as a volnQtary ofierii^t 

We do not labor for this Society without some consolation from tho 
hope that, on a dying bed, and in eternity, its conquests fer Ziony 
under the blessing of God, shall be a source of peace and joy. How 
will that joy be increased by the appropriation of even $10,000 for 
benighted Heathen in dififerent parts of this revolted world. What 
christian will deny himself the pleasure of participating in such joy, 
and of the consciousness of having contributed something of hi» 
eaithly substance for such an object ? We wish that not merely ih& 
rich, but that every ftOher and e9ery mother ^ and every son and every 
daughter^m our land, may partake of that joy ; and God forbid that 
the "poor wtdoio,'* who can give but her '*<too mttce," shall be ex^ 
eluded fiom the privilege. 



THE BURMANS AND THEIR MISSIOlf ART. 

*' Are yott Jesui Cbriat's man 7— Give a»a writinif thatteUa abooC J^sa»ChrifM 
XAtUr of ZIr. Judtom, 

There is a ctf in Bnrramh, and a ruali 
Of thousand fbotstepa, from the distant ftounci 
Of watery Siani, and the rich Cathay. 
From the fat northern fromler, pilfrims meei 
The eentiral dwellert of the forest riiades, 
And on diey press tovether. Eager hope 
Sits in their eye, and on their lips the warmth; 
Of strong request. Is it for ftreail they seek 9 
Like the dense multitude that ftinting hong 
' Upon the Savior's lips, till the third &y 

Past by, and left them hungering % 

Not for feed 
Or raiment ask they. 8im|4y girding on 
The scanty garment o'er the 4veapy limb, 
They pass unmark'd the IMty.dmnes of wealtbr 
Inquiring for a stranger. 

Thert he ttandt. 
The mark of foreign climes is on his brow; 
He hath no power, no costly gifts to deiA 
Ajuong the people, and his love perdntnce. 
The earthrbow'd worldling with hii scales of gold 
Acoonnteth folly. 

Yet to him is rais'd 
Each straining eye-ball "Tell us of the Chkist I" 
And like the far off murmueof the sea 
Lash'd on by tempests, swell their blended tone, 
" Sir I we would keor of Cheist ; would kave a ocroU 
** Bearing kit nowe.'* 



And there that Teeeher atoedt 
Ftf from hii native laiid,^midtiie gravea 
Of his fair infanta, near the " bopai-tree" 
ffiiadowing the asheB of the fbrm he lovM, 
Kore tiian kjM lift { yes, Oiere he stood atcnt^l 
And with a simplet saintlike ehMtwnee 
Spake bis Redeemer's words*^ Foryot waa wSl^ 
Hornet Ifbyhood, Christian feUowdiip, the tone 
Of Iris lost babesi his partner's dying- strife, 
Cfai^ias, perik) Burman dungeons, M forg9t. 
Save the deep danger of the heathen's sottl, 
And God's salvation. 

And methou^ht, that Earth- 
In all the vaunts of majesty, or tricks 
With silk and purple, and the baubled pride 
Of tlirone and sceptre, or the blood-red pomp 
Of the stem hero, had not aught to boast 
So truly great so touching, so sublime, 
As that lone Missionary, shakinif off 
All links, and films, and trappings of th» wotld> 
And, in his chaeten'd nakedness of soul. 
Rising to bear the embassy of Heaven. 
Bmrtfvrdt Conn, Nov. 1891. C R. S, 



In our n6xt» we shall proflentiDterefting fkcCs, lowing the uiftnl 
*nd sxtensiTe claims Upon tiie Society ^or ike deatHnte of tmr mm 

« »>• II I II 

} BLANCHES AND AUXULI ARIES ' *: 

Are moat respecCfully and earnestly solidted, in view of the above 
faf tSy to afibrd some aid to the Parent Society, if possible, bya doH' 
nation. In case any amount is now due the Parent Institution, they 
will also feel the importance of remitting as early as practicableL 

•THE MOUNTAIN MILLER.** 

Communicated by the Treasurer of the Auxiliary Tract Society in N-— , Cons. 
This Tract waa circulated in N-^, Conn, as the monthly Tract (or 
October. It was presented by the distributer to a family in rather 
humble circumstances. The wife read the Tract, and on coming to 
the last page became deeply afiected with her lost and ruined state as 
a sinncir. Her convictions were pungent and distressing ; and in two 
or three days she was rejoicing in nope. This so afiected her hus« 
band, that he too became alarmed, and soon foimd peace in Christ* 
They then sent for the minister of the place, and communicate to 
faim the grateful news of what God haa done for their souls. They 
had rarely attended public worship — and the husband had kept a tip* 
pUng 9hopf taJdeh is now closed and the business rdinqjitished enh'rely. 



THE LONG NEGLECTED TRACT* "^ 

Mr. aiid Mrs. S says Rev. Mr. N— - of L. Conn/hid lived a 

number of years in the married state, without God in the' world. At 

length, Mrs. S became concerned for the salvation of her soul, 

and was grieved to find that her husband continued for some time as 



8 USEFULNEBS OV TRACTS. [iSSft* 

careless as ever. The tract called The Coitager*8 Wife had been in 
their house from the time of their marriage, but neither of them had 
read it. On a Sabbath iiajr, Mrs. S.*-^ perceiving her husband to 
be uncommonly vain and triiSing, brought him the Tract, desiring him 
to read it to her. To please her, as he after^vard said, he consented 
to read it ; but he felt sure it would not move him. He l>egan ; and 
.to his own astonishment, and to her joy, he was soon bathed in tears. 
He made several attempts to read it* through audibly, but could not. 
The little messenger haa brought the word of truth tu his heart, and 
he found no more peace, till he was hopefully converted. 



«« THIS TRACT HAS TOIiD ME MY WHOI^E MFE !" 

Five years ago, says Rev. Mr. M — , of M. Chautauque county, N. f« 
the forests in this township, had scarcely begun to fall. Near two 
years ago, sent here by friends 500 miles distant, I was installed. 
Not many months after this, I was invited to preach &t the house of a 
man who had been loose in his habits, though he sometimes at- 
tended public worship. His attention appears also to have been some- 
what awakened to tne danger of his condition by a remarkable pre- 
icrvation of his life. ' I found him and his wife both apparently under 
4eep. conviction for sin. I noticed several of our Tracts lying on the 
table. In the course of our interview, he turned and selecteathe one 
entitled. Sin and danger of neglecting, the Savior. <* This Tract," said 
he, " has told me my whole life.'' In less than a week he and his 
wife both gave us reason to hope they had passed from death unto 
life, and both have now been for more than a year connected with 
this church. 



HOW TRACTS ARE VALUED BY THE DESTITUTE 

AT THE WEST, 

[From a Gentleman on the Illinois Rirer.} 
Nino "years ago, this tract of country was unsold, and no other 
dwelling but the wigwam of the savage was seen in this romantic 
settlement. The people here are all far from opulence, and enjoy 
few of the privileges so bountifully showered upon the people of the 
old states. Preaching is rare, perhaps it would not average two ser- 
mons in three months, and they, alas ! are not always oi the most 
valuable kind. What little I have been able to do, for the rdigious 
instruction of the children, has been performed. We have atSunday 
school of from 50 to 60 scholars, several of whom come from a dis- 
tance of four or live miles. I have distributed among them all the 
tracts that I could afi<)rd to purchase, and I thank my Redeemer that 
he has prospered the little seed that I have sown. 

I am under the necessity of obtaining the daily bread of myself and 
my littrc family, by daily labor; and can bestow few Tracts. Would 
that I could take you into the log cabins, and shew you the gratitude 
of their humble inmates for the present of one oi the smallest of your 
Tracts. H^re, almost every child old enough, can read, and a Tract, 
to them whom the narrow income of their parents renders books 
acarcCi looks diff;;rently from what it does to a child in your city. I 



1832.] .TH£ DTiira negro. 9 

have often seen the tears swimming in their ejes when I hare given 
them a TAct. 0, that I had the means of difihsing these messen- 
gers of God among this people. Could I lead you. along the loft j 
and rugged bluff that overhanss our settlement, and divides tho 
prairie from the woodlands — could I show you the numerous youne 
immortals who have no preached gospel regularly, and who would 
prize a Tract as if it were a treasure, I cannot but think they would ba 
supplied. I know that many Tracts have been distributed m the Val- 
ley of the Mississippi, btU they have not reached naj* '* What are they 
among so many?" 

TRACT C1RCUI.ATION.. 

The circulation of the Society's publications ha0 never been more 
rapid than during the last autumn. The numberof duodecimo Tracts* 
pnnfed from May 1 to November IS exceeded 2,506,000, embracing 
more than 36,816,000 pages ; besides, 335,000 Children's Tracts, and 
other publications of the Society. 



TRACT SOCIETY OF If AWRTOBlTHgy PA. 

Rcceipta, the last jear, f 46,68 ; circulated 84,183 pag^es. Thft 
monthly distribution is in successful operation, the town being divid- 
ed into 18 dietriots, each supplied l^ two ladies, and upward oC 
TOOTraets circulated monthly. One young lady believes the Tiact, 
Wortk of the Swdf has been the instrument of great good to her* 
Many families have been supplied with the Bible, a number of in- 
dividuals persuaded to attend public worship, and many children 
brought into Sabbath schools. The report contains a beautiful exhi- 
bition of the various benevolent bearings of this system of eflbrt, 
and the importance of its general and faithful adopUon. Our limits 
forbid our mserting extracts. 

MODE OF PERPETUATING A DONATION, 

FreimuleiUr aeeompmnpng a tUmation.qf $80. 
The enclosed sum has arisen from the savings of an humble Mis* 
sionaiT ;. by his laying aside portions of fees and presents, at the 
time f hey were received. In consrquence of this contribntion, I will 
thank you to enrol the name of the Rev; D. C. A. of Ohio amonf 
▼our life members. You will please for^vard to Mr. A. a notice of 
his life membership : and also beg him to lay aside portions of his 
fees, presents, &c. that he may in like manner constHnte some 
other person a life member, and recj^uest that third person to follow 
our example. In this way, passing the excitement around^ att 
amount of good will accumulate beyond opr calculation. 

THE DYING NEGRO. 

A monthly Tract Distributer in New York 'city says, " In April 
last I found a poor colored man in Laureps- street, sick, and apparent- 
ly very near his end. He was in a little apartment, just large enough 
to contain the narrow couch on which he lay, without a window, and 



10 NEW YOLUMEI. [1832. 

lighted only by a small lamp on a itool. I sat down as near him as 
I coaid, and on conversing with him he wept, and informed me that 
he was not prepared to die. I asked him ii he had a Bible 7 He said 
ves. I inquired if he loved to read it He made no reply, bat raising 
himself slowly in his bed, took from under his pillow an old Bible, 
evidently much worn with reading. I asked him why he was not 
willing to die 7 He said he was a sinner, and was afraid to meet God. 
I intreated him to throw himself a lost and ruined sinner, into the 
arms of sovereign mercy ; and in prayer commended him to Him 
who is the poor man^s.6od, and in whose sight the soul of the Ethio- 
pian is as precious as th« white man*s. 1 soon after called with a 
physician, who gratuitously prescribed for him. He was so weak as 
soarcety to be able to sit up. I ealled on him about a week after, and 
ibundlitDtin a very happy frame of mind, ready and willing, as he ex- 
pressed himself to go whenever his blessed Master called tor him; 
Frpi^this time I visited him frequently. He always appeared very 
happy. About six weeks since, hi^ spirit took its flight, as I trust, to 
the mansions of eternal rest. For .two or three weeks before his^ 
death, his daily longing and prayer was to be delivered from this 
body of sin. A few hours before he died, he sung the hymn, '* I seek 
acity yet to co m e . " The poor negro had but little time to slaiy afler 
flingmg this hymn. He died very happy. His last words were, " O 
I'm happy — ^I'm happy — I'm going home." Thus fell asleep In Je- 
sus this nnmble saint. In view of the scene, I could not but praise 
Qod for tho privilege of thos searching out this poor individual, and 
administering to him divine consolation as a Tract Distributer. 



MONTHLY DISTRIBUTION. 

The Synod <{f ,J{eu> York, in their recent narrative of the state of 
religion within their bounds, say, f* We see the little Tract insinuat- 
ing itself more and more into the friendly feelings of every Christian^ 
and philanthropic heart, and the System of Monthly Distribution ac- 
quinng,a wider patronage, and more indisputable efficiency/' 

The. Synod ofAlbanyt m their late narrative of the state of religion, 
say, ^ The Monthly Distribution . of Tracts has been adopt^ by 
nany of the churches, and in every case, it is believed, has been at- 
tended with gratifying success. A considerable number of instances 
have occurred in which this simple but blessed agency has been ho- 
nored with direct apparent conversions to God." 



NEW OCCASIONAIi YOLVBIES. 

Family Htmns. — 216 pages 18 mo. embracing 300 select, Evan- 
gelical and Devotional Hymns, particularly adapted for use in the 
family and the closet. Price 25 cents. 

Baxter's Call to the Unconverted, with an introductort 
ESSAY BY REV. Dr. Chalmers*-159 pRges 18 mo. very few works 
except the Bible, have been so extensivdy blessed as this. Thou- 
sands of Christians can refer to it as a principal instrument, under 
the agency of the Holy Spirit, in their own conversion. Price 20 cents. 

Who can calculate the results for eternity, wfere these two little 
works placed in every family in our land? We commend them to the 



183J2.J EECEIPTS. * 11 

special attention of the benevolent, and would ask how a donation 
coald be better applied than in furnishing them to families of their 
acquaintance, or supplying erery family in a neighborhood, or town, 
or county with them. 

A number of new Tracts are now stereotyping, or in the press. 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OF THE AMERICAN' TRACT SOCIETY. 
Durinff tA« month ending December 15, 1831. 

FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 

VERMONT.— Castleton Joseph Steele, Agent, 

Sudbury, Fem. Susan Rangef, Ag. 

WUIiston, George B. -Mansen, Secretary, .... 

MASSACHUSETTS.— Boston, Evangelical Tr. Soc. Nathaniel 
R. Cobb, Tr 

Tyringbam, Fem. Miss Theodosia Brewer, Sec. 

CONNECTICUT.— Brooklyn, (Windham Co. Aux.,) E. Newbury, 
Esq. Ag. 

Essex in Saybrook, Fem. Mrs. A. P. ChampUn, Ag. 

New-London, Robert Coit, Tr. ...... 

Norwalk, Alfred Mallory, Tr 

Norwich, Fem. Miss Sarah Backus, Sec. . . 

I>o. Do. Ist Soc. S. School Aux. Mary Ann Lester, Sec. 

N. YORK.— Alleghany co. Aux. A. S. Allen, Esq. Tr. . 

Bridgehampton, L. I. Rev. Amzi Francis, Pres. 

Cannonsvilie, John Randall, Tr 

Catskil), Fem. Miss Jane G. Sayre, Tr 

Clove in Rochester, Ulster co. Rev. B. B. Westfall, Pres. 

Delhi, Fem. Miss Sarah Leal, Tr 

Deposit, Delaware co. Rev. Elisha Wise, Tr. 

East Hampton, L. I. Rev. J. D. Condit, Ag 

Franklin, Delaware, co 

Gos)|en, Orange co.- Dr. John S. Crane, Tr. .~ . . . 

Harpersfield, Del. co. Lewis R. Lockwood, Sec. , 

Hector,' Tompkin's co. Ira Reynolds, Tr. .... 

Hoosick FaUs, Lyman Wilder, Tr. 

Hudson, Fem. Ophilia Olcott, S^c 

Hunter, Greene co. William W. Edwards, Pres. . 

Jay, Elisha Wells, Tr 

Keeseville, Fem. Mrs. Jane Aiken, Tr. 

Masonville, Del. co. Daniel Orcutt, Sec. •.'... 

New Windsor, Silas Corwin, Tr 

New York City Tract Soc. AUred Edwards, Tr. ... 

Do. Fem. Mrs. J. R. Hurd, Tr. 

Rochester, Ulster co. Elizabeth Bevier, Tr. .... 
Seienceville, Greene co. Fem. Miss Julia Ives, Pres. 

Tompkins, Del. co. James Barbour, Sec 

Troy, Charles Lyman, Tr 

Upper Bovina, Del. co. John Hume, Tr. 

Watertown,- (Jefferson CO. Aux*,) Levi Beebe, Ag. . 
N. JERSEY.— Belleville, William Stevens, See. 
Mansfield, Fem. Hetty Hi Kennedy, Tr. .... 

Newark, Fem. Mrs. Samh M. Graham, Tr. . . 

Plainfield, Fem. Miss Catharine Bond, Sec 

Readingtown, (North Branch,) Martin Wyckoff, Sec. . 

Somerville, Rev. Richard Van Kleek, Pres 

Westfield, Fem. Miss Mary Pierson, Sec. ... 
PENNSYLVANIA.— Easton, Fem. Eliza A. WUson, Sec. ' . 
DISTRICT COLUMBIA.— Alexandria, Fem. Mrs. E. S. Ladd, Sec.| 



ForTr.lDon. 


1)00 




S 00 




864 


636 


11 10 




330 


80 


10 00 




8 93 


• 


1 43 




1 74 




6S4 


3 76 


435 


4 3S 


31 48 


s 


8S9 




2 87 




4 87 




7 86 




8 00 




U 52 




16 00 




10 00 




17 32 




5 52 


9 00 


25 eo 




10 00 




6 00 




10 00 






5 75 


12 81 


10 60 


3 29 


2 81 


87 




117 09 




112 61 




10 00 




306 




14 00 




100 00 




3 33 


1 00 


75 15 




4 80 


520 


17 25 


5 75 


20 00 


33 00 


3 00 




8 23 




13 00 




5 12 




50 




22 19 





li 



rkojciptS. 



VmGINU^Frederiekabmrg. Deporitdfy, Wm. H. White, Af. 
Pateraburg, A.8.HoWerby, P»e«. ... • • 
St. Geo. Parish Accomac co. Mrs. Hana B. JoyneSi rret. 
OHIO.— Cincinnati, Henry B. Funk, Esq. Tr. . . . 
ZanesTille, (Muskingum co. Aux.,) Edwin Putnam, Esq. Ag. . 
INDIANA.— Madison, Moses H. Wilder, Cor. Sec. . 
Vincennes, (Knox CO. Aux.,) Dr. Kuyendaii, Pre* . . 
MICHIGAN TERRITORT^Detroit, E. P. Hastings, Ag. 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 
N. YORK.— Burlington, Bener. Aftoc. Henry Sills, Ag. . 
Dashville Falls, Fem. Mrs. Jane A. Bntler, Sec 
New-Utrecht, Fem. Bible, Miss. & Tracb.Soc. Mrs. C. Knapp, Tr. 
tracts sold at the Depodtory to individuab (teoiading $197 02 
received by traveling agents.) • . ^ . . . 



Far. Tr, 

31 25 

40 00 

12 00 

43 45 

100 00 

4 87 

9 75 

10 00 



9 12 
04 

1 28' 

464 90 



JDm. 
300 



DirBctorafar Lift,- 

N. YORK^— Brooklyn, L. I. 
S. V. S. Wilder, Esq. Pre- 

New York City, WilUam W. 
Chester, . . 

James Donaldson, 

Richard T« Haines, . 

James Lenox, (in Aill of $50.) 

VIRGINIA.— Petersborg, Rot. 
William N. Scoft, by gentle- 
men, (in fnU of $50,) 

Membert for L\fe, 

CONNECTICUT.— Plainfield. 

Col. Erastus Lester, (in full 

of 120,) .... 
N. YOIitK-.Albany, W. T. Hjid- 

dow, by W. A. Tvreed Dale, 
Bainbridge, Rer. E. Pratti by 

Ladies, . t * . 
CannonsviHe, Rer. Ellas Ch0d8,'> 

by individuals, of his cong. 

and of Ceok*s settlement, 
Franklin, Del. co. Rev. Dayid ^ 

Waterbury by Ladies, 
New York City, Thomas Araen, 
Dr. Ansel W. Ives, 
Robert Lenox Kennedy, by Mr. 

James Lenox, • 

A. Melntyre, 
•Dr. John R. B. Rodgera, 
Windsor, Broome co. R-ey. Eli- 
jah W. Stoddard, by his church 

and congregation, 

Jinmud Directress. 

N. YORK-— New York City, 
Mrs. John Peck, 

Other Donations. 

VERMONT.— Castleton, Con- 
- gregational flociety, 
N. YORK^ Albany, A Friend, 
Bainbridge, few individuals, 
New YoA City, Unknown 

Friend for Valley Miss. 
Last earnings of a poor widow 

apparently near deaUi, 
AUen-ftreet Church, members of 



f 100 -00 

lOOOO 
50 DO 

300 00 
30 00 



30 00 



10 00 
20 00 
90 00 



20 00 

20 00 
30 00 
20 00 

20 00 
30 00 
20 00 



20 00 



5 00 



15-00 

20 OO 

200 

1 00 

31 
67 09 



Free Chnrdi in Dey-st. Lewis 
Tappan, Tr. in part of sub- 
scription of #200, to Tract 
cause, 

Cash $3 do. |3 do. fl do. 50 c. 
do. 50 c do. 25 c. do. 6. 

Female Friend 68ct8. An aged 
LadySOcts. . . » 

Mrs. Calender $5, Mary Corne- 
lius f 1, R. G. So N. Day, #10, 
S. B..Halliday, $1, D. Hen- 
derson $5, A. Knight, $5, Mrs. 
Leavenworth, $3, Wm. Mc- 
Cutchen, $1, Mrs. Melntyre, 
$5, Caroline Melntyre, #2, 
James Melntyre, $1, Marga- 
ret Melntyre, #2, Ro^rt 
MaiUand, $10, H. Marvin, $10 
David Monroe, $1, J<AmMor« 
risen, $10, S. £. & R. C. 
Horse, $100 00, Amos Pal- 
mer, #1, J. H. Patten, $5, 
Mrs. Rodgera, 25cts. J. i^ 
Bheale, $10, Mrs. Shepard, 
#1, P. Skinner, $1, Wm. 
Sterling, $2, Milton St. John, 
$5, Sarah Stouteiibttrgh, $4, 
Bfrs. Thompson, $1 50, Mrs. 
Verplank, $5, Mrs. Wat- 
kins, $1, R. F. Winslow,$3. 

Troy, a tew friends. 

N. J£RSEY..BelleviUe, William 
Stephens, . . • ' . 

MISSISSIPPI.- Natchez, Ano- 
n3rmous, for foreign distribu- 
tion, .... 

OHIQ.— Lucius'' C. Rouse, Ag. 
oftheSoc 

FLORIDA.-^t. Augustine, Dr. 

* Andrew An4er8on, Don. ^r 
Tracts granted. 



50 90 
8 31 
1 13 



211 75 
2 DO 

200 



50 OD 
500 

)5 00 



The above list eontains donations— 
For the VaUeyef the Bfississippi, 1 00 
For Pofeign distributions, . SO 00 

Whole ampuat of donations, $1. 375. 81 
^.eceived for TracU sold, 1. 51 9. 22 



Total, 



$2. 896. 03 



THE AMERICAN 

OL. Til. FBBHUAB'S', ISSS. KO. ; 



FIELDS OF USEFULNESS 

now OPEN BEFORE THE 

A.KBRIOA.H TBAOT SOOIBTT. 

The Executive Committee of this Society feel that all 
IheiT elforts should be directed with immediate reference to 
the inquiry, Wiat offenct/ can this Siiciet]/ exert, under th« 
' bUseing of God, in the amvertion of the axrld ? 

It haa now great facilities for extensive uaefulness. Five 
Hundred and SStenty Evangetlca] publications, in six Ian~ 
guages, from the small child's Tract to the Rise and Progress, 
Pilgrim's Progress, the' Call to the Unconverted, and the 
Sainto' Best, are stereotyped ; of wbich more than 20,000,000 
have alretuly been otrculated, and blessed, in an eminent 
degree, in the coBrersion of sinners to God. In aJl our prin- 

Vot. VIL 9 WaoiB No. 71. 



14 



riBLDS OP irsKFirtNBSfc [t83J^ 



cipal towns Auxiliaries are formed, and Depositories com- 
menced i Missionaries are penetrating Heathen countries, and 
opening the way of access to them y and nothing is wanting^ 
by the blessing of God, but one united movement from the 
friends of Evangelical truth, to send these messages of grace, 
without dday^ to every family of our nation, and to millions 
Ml other land* who are perishing for lack of knowledge. 

These facilities ol usefulness the Committee cannot bulf 
regard as»a most sacred and responsible trust, received from 
the great Head of the Church ; especially when they consider^ 
that it is a first priBciple of his Gospel, that it is to be SENT 
to those who hav^ i* not, who never will seek to obtain it^ 
and will die unble»t with its saving influences unless their 
spiritual wants are " am^ht out,'" and it i« carried and ten- 
dered to them by the hand of Christian Benevolence. 

For THE SUPPLY OF OUR OWN COUNTRY, the Committee know ^ 
©f no method at once so economical and efficacious as that 
of dividing the whole hihabited territory into fields, each ap- 
propriate to the permanent labors of a faithful devoted Agenty 
whose direct object shall be to effect the supply of the entire 
population. If from 600,000 square miles, over which the 
census of 1820 extended, we deduct 60,000^ embracing por- 
tions of the country where the privileges of the Gospel are 
most richly enjoyed, we have remaining 540,000 square 
miles of inhabited territory, probably embracing 9,000,000 
of our population, more than half of whom, it is estimated 
by those best acquainted with the subject, areunsupplied with 
stated Evangelical preaching. If we divide this inhabited 
territory into fields, each containing 500 townships of 6 milea 
square, or 180 miles in length by 100 in breadth, we have 
thirty such fields ; each township embracing, on an average, 
600 inhabitai^ts, and each Agents*^ field, 300,000. Into such 
a field the Agent enters ; and having secifred the establish- 
ment of an adequate Depository of the Society^s publications 
at its commercial centre, proceeds from County to County, 
and neighborhood to neighborhood, forming Tract Societies, 
laising pecuniary means, awaking the energies of God's peo- 
ple to supply the entire population with Tracts^ and inducing 



1632,] TiCLDS or irsiTULiiBfts* IS 

them, if possible, to present them monthly, by gift, or loai^, 
to every family, accompanied by all such prayerful and chris- 
tian labors, in every way, for theispiritual welfare of the peo- 
ple, as God shall give them the opportunity and the ability 
to perform. Should the Agent advance at the rate of occu- 
pying one of the above mfmed town^ilbips in two days, he will 
scarcely compass the field in three year^ before which time 
a renewal of his efforts will be required where he commen- 
•ced, -and will be needed, as fast as he <caa again proceed^ 
throughout the whole field. 

The experience of the Society's devoted Agents, of whom 
it has ten now occupying fields similar to those above de- 
scribed, shows, that each of these fields will fully demand 
the undivided and persevering efforts of one laborious Agent ; 
that no more than means sufiicient to pay for the Tracts put 
into circulation, can be raised within the respectivo fields ^ 
and, consequently, the expense of supporting each Agent, 
end furnishing Tracts for gratuitous distribution to such as 
cannot be otherwise supplied, must be borne by the Society 
— an expense which can only be met as ability is given l^ 
the donations of the benevolent. 

Nothing is wanting for the complete -occupancy of our 
^hole country in this manner, without delay, but LABOIS- 
ERS for the respective fields, Clergymen if they can be o1>- 
tained, or in the deficiency of these, qualified La3rmen, aid 
sufficient MEANS to sustain them in their operations. A ad 
cannot twenty additional men, with a proper spirit of sdi' 
denial and self-conseeratioh, and the other requisite quati- 
Hcations, be found in our country ? And will the churches 
withhold the sum necessary to sustain thirty laborers thu 
dispersed among ail our destitute population ? Each of them, 
in regard merely to the proclamation of the truths of the 
Grospel, wherever men can be convened, will be scarcely less 
useful than a Missionary ; the Tracts circulated will prove 
arrows in the hearts of thousands far from God ; a healthful 
influence will be exerted in favor of every other Christian en- 
terprise; and the personal labors, which Christians within 
the respective fields will be induced to perform for the eier- 
nal welfare of their fellow men^ together with the happy le- 



16 niLDS OF VSIFULNBSfl. [1833. 

flex moral influence exerted upon themselves, would perhaps 
alone compensate for all the sacrifices made. 

The Committee beg the friends of Zion seriously to con- 
sider the bearing of this system of effort — the practicability 
of its speedy accomplishment — ^and to give the Society that 
pecuniary aid, without which not only new laborers cannot 
be employed, but those now in the field must be withdrawn. 

But wide and interesting as are the openings for usefulness 
in our own country, they can scarcely be deemed more at- 
tractive than those in foreign lands. The Committee have, 
from the pen of the late lamented Mr. Evarts, an estimate*^ 
made on a careful examination, and connected with a state- 
ment of the facts on which it is based, that $1,500 annually 
is needed for Tract operations at the Missionary station in 
Bombay, among not far from 12,000,000 who speak the Mah- 
ratta language; $1,000 at Ceylon, among 11,000,000 who 
speak the Tamtd; $1,500 at the Sandwich Islands; and 
$1,500 on the Mediterranean. The Missionary Society of 
the Protestant Episcopal Church, through Rev, Messrs. Ro- 
bertson and Hill, have applied for an appropriation to aid 
their Tract operations in Greece, The Moravian Brethren 
have expressed the satisfaction with which" they will em- 
brace the co-operation of this Society in their labors. The 
Secretary of the Paris Tract Society has earnestly applied 
for aid in their endeavors to difinse a knowledge of the Gos- 
pel among 32,000,000 of France. The Tract Society at Ham- 
burgh has made an earnest appeal. The Rev. Mr. Knill, of 
St. Petersburgh, has expressed the need of assistance in their 
Tract operations in Rtissia. The circulation of Tracts has 
been commenced among the uncounted millions of China, 
where a great veneration is entertained for every thing print- 
ed ; all, even those speaking different dialects, read one lan- 
guage ; and where it seems the Gospel must, for the present 
at least, be diffused almost soldy by m^ans of the press. And 
in BuRMAH, where the attention of the first Christian in- 
quirer was arrested by a Tract, and where tens of thousands 
seem now inquiring the way of salvation, we hear the re- 
spected and beloved, self-sacrificing Missionary, Dr. Judson 



saying, '' During the great annual festival which is just past 
I have given away nearly 10,000 Tracts, giving to none but 
those who ask, I presume that there have been 6,000 appli^ 
cants at the house ! Some come two or three months' jour^ 
ney, from the borders of Siam and China. * Sir, we hear 
there is an eternal helL We are afraid of it Doctor, giva 
«]s a writing that will tell us how to escape it^' Others come 
from the borders of Cassay, a hundred miles north of Ava. 
^ Sir, we have seen a writing that tells us about an eternal 
God. Are you the man that gives away such writings ? If 
tBO, pray give us one, for we want to know the truth before 
we die.^ Others come from the interior of the country^ 
where the name of Christ is a Vittte known, * Are you Jesus 
Christ's man ? Give us a writing that tells about Jesus 
Christ.' '' 

All these applications, demanding, as the Committee be^ 
lieve, the speedy appropriation of at least $10,000, they are 
pained to say yet remain unanswered ; for, inviting and ur^ 
gent as they are, what can the Oomtnittee do 7 They cannot 
deny these calls — and if they should make appropriations to 
meet them, it is only taking the same from the personal funds 
t)f members of the Committee, who are now more than $6,000 
in advance of an exhausted Treasury ! All these applications 
are therefore still held under consideration, and that, not- 
withstanding the solemn resolution of the Society at their 
last anniversary, ''that they will endeavor, by the Divine 
blessing, to supply Evangelical American Missionaries in fo*- 
reign countries with as many approved Tracts, or the means 
of procuring them, as shall, in the opinion of the Executive 
Committee, be needed in the prosecution of their labors." 
The Committee do earnestly intreat the friends of Zion into 
whose hands this document may come, to consider these 
facts in relation to the foreign field ; and as early as practica- 
ble to madce such contributions as they can afford. 

• 

There is one consideration of thrilling interest, connected 

both with the calls from our own country and abroad, to 
which the Committee cannot refrain from inviting the must 
serious attention: the itxwoiTY with which hundreds of 

THOnSANSS AND MILUONS MAY B£ REACHED BY THIS MEi N8 OP 

2* 



JS flELDS OW U8K«VUiB«f. [18S2« 

GRACE, WHO OTHERWISE, TO HUMAN VIEW, MUST PERISH WITH- 
OUT THE GOSPEL. Within two or three years, by suitable con- 
tributions and efforts, some portion of the Gospel may be con- 
Teyed, by means of this Society, to the entire 13,000,000 of 
our population, while all the other benevolent operations of 
our land shall be moving on without hindrance. — Or look at 
Dr. Judson, when penning the above extract, accompanied 
by one solitary laborer who could speak and write the lan- 
guage, and with 6,000 applicants for Tracts at his own house, 
during a single festival, some of them having come two or 
three months' journey. Is there a Christian in our land who 
would eons^nt to withhold from any Missionary sacrificing 
his short life among the Heathen, as many TYacts as he can 
circulate ? 1$ there a pleasure we can procure with money» 
which would not be imbittered, if it were the price of a Tract 
whi^ any Missionary might give to a dying Heathen ? Can 
the churches withhold $10,000, now wanted for distributing 
1,000,000 Tracts in Foreign and Pagan lands ? Or can they 
withhold the still larger sum necessary to plant and sustain 
30 laborious Agents in appropriate fields extending over all 
the more destitute portions of our own country ? 

The Committee do not make their appeal without much 
encouragement from the interest which has been manifest- 
ed by those to whom the Society's wants have recently been 
presented. At a meeting in the Society's house, 27 individuals 
subscribed for the above objects about $4,000; some of the 
churches of New- York, and two cities of a neighboring state, 
have made liberal contributions ; and one clergyman from 
the country has sent in his donation of fifty dollars. 

To the Society's Atunliaries, the Committee would earnestly 
commend the present claims upon the Parent Institution, that 
tbey may aid her by their dcmpUions, 

They invite the Mirdatera of Evan^dical Churches to bring 
the object before their people, and remember it in their 
prayers. 

They entreat the Female Priend^ of Ziow, whose hearts 
are ever ready to sympathize with her wants and welfare, to 



1SS2.] BVRMAB. 



19 



constitute themselves, or their pastors, or others, Members 
or Directors for Life. 

To aZZHhey appeal and say, if all Evangelical Christians 
avowedly /riendly to the Society, virill but contribute what, in 
the sight of God, they feel they consistently can, and prompt- 
ly send it forward, all the calls for Tracts for our country, 
and for the heathen world, may be answered, and the wants 
supplied. And they do affectionately request all who have an 
interest at the throne of grace, to unite their ardent supplica- 
tions with those of the Committee, that God will enlarge the 
hearts of his children to supply the pecuniary necessities of 
the Society, and no longer leave the Committee to struggle 
with calls which they cannot refuse, and with which for 
want of pecuniary means, they cannot contply. 

By order, and in behalf of the Executive Committee of 
the American Tract Society. 

JAMES MILNOR, Chairman. 
William A. Hallock, Corresponding Secretary. 
New- York^ January, 1832. 

J?9^?20, constitutes a life member— $50, (or theaddition of $30.) 
a Life Director. Members are entitled to 1500 pafres of Tracts an 
nua ly, and Directors to 3000 pages, M-hich may be obtained at New-' 
York, or at the Depositoriesofthe Society's Branches or Auxiliaries 
m almost all our pnncipal towns. $4 a page, including ihe cover, 
perpetuates a 12 mo. Tract ; $.) a page, a 12mo. bound volume. 

THE Bl/RAIANS CAN HEAD. 

The Rev. Dr. Judson says it is a rare thing to find a man in Bir- 
mah who cannot read. The female popjglation, except in the higher 
classes of society, generaUy cannot read. 



PROXIMITY- OF BURJUAH TO CHINA. 

The Northern and Eastern pari of Burmah, adjoining China is 
inhabited by a mixed population of Burmese and Chinese, amonir 
whom many speak both languages. Who can tell but this is the door 
by which the Gospel shall be sent to the millions of the « Celestial 
Empire?" Is there a Christian in our country who does not wisii to 
send forward his portion of the means to enable the Missionaries in 
Burmah to circulate Tracts, both in that empire and in China, to the 
full measure of all their opportunities ? 



t^ DONATIOHS. [IBSftk 

DOIf ATIONS FROM HARTFORD AND NEW-HAVEIf, 

The friends of the Tract cause iii these cities have met (he applica*^ 
lion presented them through the tSocietj's General Aj^nt, Rev. O^ 
Eastman^ hy donations and subscriptions in Hartford, to tAe amount 
of 91000, and in New-Havea about $500. 



RESOLUTIONS IN GREENE COUNTY, NEWvTORK. 

At a public meeting in the Reformed Dutch Church, CatskiUf Dec* 
9, the following resolutions were adopted : 

'* Retolvedt That the suitcitiide existia; in the minds of ao many m'llibnsof po* 
riihin^ heathen to learn the way of salvation, indicates an important crisis in th« 
kiatory of the church and of Che world, and demands redoubled eflCorU on the part 
«f Christians to extend the knowledge <of Christ." 

{jThe next resolution contensplaten the practicability of reaching millions of tk* 
pretent generation of the heathen by Tracu, who otherwise must perish without 
the 6ospel.| 

Resolved, That atihiv intereatinrcrisisyaDd In view of these facta, every facility 
should be afforded by tile churches (both by their prayers and their pecuniary aid) 
to the American Tract Society for increaning her operations ; that she may be able 
to grant immediate and efficient assiEtancet wherever calls may be made upon her, 
whether in heMheu or Christian lands ; and »1so, that she may seek out openings 
for spreading a knowledge of tlu^ Gospel, and supply them. 

" Reeolvedt That it is exceedingly desirable the county of Greene raise, as sooa 
as practicable, a sum not less than $1,000 in aid of the American TrM^ Society.*' 

Asa pledge of tho sincerity of the meeting, subscriptions were then 
made, amounting, with those previously obtained, to the sum of $500. 
A few days after $250 was subscribed at CoxsackU in the same 
County. 

31 CENTS FROM A DYING WIDOW. 

Rarely have we received a more acceptable donation to the Societyi 
than that of 31 cents, the last earnings of (i^or and unknown widow 
in New- York, evidently in a decline, being tlie avails of knitting done 
by her after she was unable to do other kinds of worii. 



DONATION OF $100, 

From the Femalt JiuxUiary of Mexandria, D. CoUtmbia, 
We are exceedingly gratified to be. able to acknowledge some re* 
cent liberal donations from JiutiUaries, without which we see not 
how the Parent Society can ever sustain its operations for the dcs* 
titute of otir own country and the Heathen. 

The above donation was accompanied by the third Report of the 
Auxiliary, which we should insert entire, did our limits permit4 
Tracts are distributed systematically by the Ladies among the fami- 
lies of the city : and by gentlemen on the wharves, and among 
•eamen and wagoners. The report contains the following 



^338.] MEW tsar's present. si 

Cheei-ing imtmcea of Conversion in Jjlexmdria, 

One Distributer was informed by a respectable woman, that her 
husband's attention had been arrested by a Tract which he received 
from her with great indifTerencQ, but by the influence of which he has 
*>^co™« apparently a regenerated man, and i» now a member of the 
church.—- Another reports, that a man who was extremely opposed to 
Tracts has become a subscriber, and professes to have given himself 
to God by this means. —Of the family reported last year as having 
given up Sunday marketinc, both the father and the mother have now 
become communicants in the church.— One man, who was awakened 
by the instrumentality of a Distributer, has since died, giving good 
evidence of faith in God. » s e s 



PREMIUm OF $100. 

A benevolent individual lias authorized the undersigned to offer a premium of 
$100 for the be«t Tract of not ioM than 18, nor more than S4 pages, which shall bo 
received previous to July 1, 1832, " On the duty of OkrUtituu to do what they earn 
to abolUhthe custom of War," provided the same shall be adopted by the Com- 
mittee of the American Tract Society, in which case the doner pledges himself to 
give an additional sum sufficient to perpetuate the Tract. Examining Committee, 
Rev. Gardiner Spring, D. D. Rev. EUhu W. Baldwin, Rev. Charles G. Sommera, 
and S. V.S. Wilder, Esq. of New- York, and Rev.' D. L. Carroll of Brooklyn. Each 
manuscript should be accompanied by a sealed envelope containing the name of 
the writer, which will not be opened except in case of the successful Tract, and 
may be addrewed to the care of Mr. A. Russbll No. 5 Cornhill, Boston, or to 

WILLIAM A.[HALLOCK, 144 Naswu-street, New-York. 



A CLERGYJHAN'S NEW YEAR'S PRESENT. 

" The recent appeal of the ^Smerican Tract Society, writes a cler- 
gyman from the coimtry, ** was to me irresistible ; and I cannot but 
• believe it has had, and will have, a similar infiucnce on the hearts 
of thousands. Go on. Dear Sir, you and your fellow-laborers, in this 
ipagnificent enterprise of Christian benevolence. Go on, in the 
name and strength of Jehovah- Jesus — ^that ever blessed, fruit-bear- 
ing tree of life, whose leaves it is the sole object of your noble Insti- 
tution to scatter abroad to the four winds of heaven, for the healing 
of the nations. I have full confidence in the glorious King of Zion 
that the arduous, responsible, and almost oyerwhelroing labors of 
your, and the other kindred Institutions of our country, will be se- 
conded by the contributions of his people. Accept, Sir, the inclosed 
fifly doUar bank note as my own individual J^ew Year's Gift, present- 
ed to the American Tract Society, and also as a pledge of my continu- 
ed devotion to its best interests, as long as it shall please God to pro« 
long my life on earth.'' 



tt 



EBCEI7T8. 



[I83t. 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY 



During the mimtk ending Jannumf 15, 1832. 

FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 

VERMONT.— Dorset, Fenala, S. Jackson, Secretary, 

Fawlet, N. Harman, Esq. Secretary, 

Rupert, David Sheldon, Treasurer, 

Salisbury, T. If. Kidder, Secretary, ..... 

XASSAGHUSETTS — Boston, American Tract Society, John 

Tappaii, Esq. Treasurer, 

West Sprini^field, (Feeding Hills) Female, 

CONNECTICUT.— Black Rock, Capt. Gershom Sturges, Prea. 
Darien, Charles Whitney, Treasurer, .... 

Greenwich, (Sandwich Society,) William Smith, Treasurer, 

Guilford, Henry G. Hodges, Agent, 

Hartford, Conn- Branch, Charles Hosmer, Secretary, 

NeW'Fairfield, Seelye Barnum, Treasurer 

New-Haven, C. J. Salter, Treasurer, .... 
Do. Female, Mrs. Henrietta F. Whitney, Treasurer, 
North-Greenwich, Rev. Mr. Wilcox. Treasurer, . . 

Reading, Rev. William C. Rniffin, President, 
Ridgefield, Philip B. Bradley, Secretary, 

Sharon, David (xould, Trnasurer, 

Stonington, Rev Joseph Whittlesey, Secretary, 
West Greenwich, (S. School Auxiliary,) William B. Sherwood, 
Secretary, 

MEW- YORK.— Anbum, Clark B. Hotchkiss, Agent, 
Bath, (Steuben Co. Aux.) James G. Higgios, Treasurer, 
Bethlehem, Robert Denniston, Treisurer, .... 
Bridrehampton, LI., Rev. Amzi Fruncis, President, 
Brooklyn, L. 1. Jowph Howard, Treasurer, 
Constable, Franklin Co. Female, Miss Sophia Gillet, Secretary, 

Cutchogun, L. I , Female, 

Dashville FaUx, Female, Mrs. Jane Ann Butler, Treasurer, • 

Glen's Falls, E. Hawley. Treasurer, 

Islip and Huntington South, Henry Brewster, Secretary, 

Moriches, Alfred Ketcham. Secretary, 

New- York City Tract Society, Alfred Edwards, Treasurer, 
Do. by Female Aux- Mrs. J. R. Hurd, Treasurer, 
Peru, Female, Harriet Wells, Treasurer, ... . . 
Rochester, Monroe Co. Levi A Ward, Treasurer, . 
Rye, Female, Ann H. Buckley, Secretary, .... 
Setauket, L. I.. Floyd Smith, Treasurer, .s . . 

Sweet Hollow, in Huntington, John Everett, Treasurer, 
Troy, Charles Lvman, Treasurer, . . * . • 

Utica, Edward Vernon, Secretary, 

Westhampton, Li., Stephen F. Grifing, Secretary, 

MBW-JBRSEY— Belvidere, Female, 

Biirliagton« Thomas Aikman, Agent, .... 

Kings'on, Female, Miss Jane K. Comfort, Treasurer, 
Newark, Female, Mrs. Sarah M. Graham, Treasurer, • 

Paterson, in Presb. church, Henry Van Houten, Treasurer, 
Do. in Ref. Dutch church, Ralph Doremiis, Treasurer, 
Perth Amboy, Female, Mrs. Margaret Maurice, Treasurer, . 
Readingtown, (North Branrh,) Martin Wyckoff, Secretary, 
Woodbridffe, Female, H. B. Barton, Secretary, 

PENNSYLVANIA— Philadelphia Branch, Frederick Erringer, 
Treasurer, 

VIRGINIA.— Richmond, Charles Holt, Jun. Treasurer, 
Wicldiff Congregation, Frederick. Co. Femile, 

N. CAROLINA.— Elizabethtown, Bladen Co. Female, Mrs. Jane 

Wright, Secretary, 

Miliott, M. P. Huntington, Secretary, ..... 

OHIO.— Cincinnati, Henry B. Funk, Treasurer, 
JOaytoB* Dr. Job Haines, Secretary, 



For. Tr. Don, 
2 16 
1 42 



10 09 



t 500 00 
1 27 
1 04 

1 96 

2 67 
9 66 

444 64 

1 97 
100 00 

64 0» 

2 54 
900 

15 00 

4 00 

10 00 

272 
25 00 
46 42 

6 86 

4 80 
25 00 
12 00 

1 20 

3 58 
9 75 
3 04 
58R 

20O 00 
133 54 

100 00 

5 58 
1 60 

7 00 
97 00 

300 00 
206 

1 92 

9 95 

son 

10 00 

2 99 
5 09 

3 37 
7 52 

500 00 
120 00 



20 14 

42 00 

4 00 



200 

1 7% 



80 00 



50t 



40« 



3 2B 



70t 
50* 



86T 



10 00 



sot 

30t 



1882.] 



RECEIPTS 



fi 



Marietta, Rev. Luther G. Bingham, Agent, 
KISSOURI.— St. Louis, Mo. and lit. Branch, IVadiaB Ranney, Ar. 
MICH. TER RITORY.— Detroit, E. P. H aetiogs, A gent. 

Tracts sold at the Depository to individuals (includincr $91 21 re- 
ceived by travelling Agents, $20, for ose of room, &c.) 



For, Tr. Don. 



20 
117 

le 



00 
83 

00 



i488 m 



Directora for Life, 

VERMONT.— Cornwall, Rev. 
Jededtah Bushnell, by his ch. 
and cong (in full of $.50,) 

MASSACHUSETTS.-Mbnson 
A. W. Porter, . , 

CONNECTICUT.— Hartford, 

Daniel P Hopkins, 

" Hon. Thomas S. Williams, 
Litchfield, Rev. Joraph E. Camp 

by Mr. William Deming, 

" Rev. Laurinns P. Hickok, 

by do. .... 

Kew-Haven, Prof. T. D. Wool- 

sey, Yale College, by the 

Freshmen Class, 
N. YORK.— New-York City. 

James Brown, <^ Foreign,) 
Ja»per Corning, For. Dis. 
Daniel Fanshaw, 
William M. Halsted, 
Rufus Leavitt, 
George H. Tracy, by Misses 

Mary and Hannah L. Murray, 
Salem, Rev. Samuel Tomb, 
VIRGINIA. — Mount Bethel, 

Hampshire, Co. Rev. Wra. 

Henry Footp, by his cb. and 

cong. (in full or(S50,) 
Smithfield, Rev. William Ma- 

thews by congs. of Smithfield 

and Martinsbnrg, (in part of 

$50,) ..... 

Members for Life, 

VERMONT.— Rupert, Nathao 

Burton, Esq. 

*' Bernice Rayniond, Esq. 

** havid Sheldon, Jud. F.sf|. 
MASSACHUSETTS ^Am- 

herft, Luke Sweetser, 
CONNECTICUT— Hartford, 

Catherine A ndrus, Elizabeth 

Andrus, \^lliam Andrus, by 

their father. Silas Andrus, 
Richard Bigelow, 
Daniel Burgees, Esq. 
Barzilla Hudson, ... 
Henry Hudson, 
Peter Morton, . . 

George Putnam, . . 
Mrs. D. F. Robinson, 
EliphtiletTerry, . 
David Watkinson, Esq. ■ 
Litchfield, Dr. Daniel Sheld<». 
New-Haven, Rev. Jerentiah 

Day, D. D. ... 

Mrs. Sarah K. Hull, 
Mrs. Maria S. WiUianw, by her 

Ikther, .... 

Mrs. James Donaghee (in part of 

~ '!,) by her husbaudi for F.D. 



30 00 

50 00 

SO 00 
50 00 

50 00 

50.00 



50 00 

50 00 

50 00 

200 00 

100 00 

50 00 

50 00 
50 00 



30 00 



30 00 



90 00 
20 00 
20 00 

20 00 



I Mrs. Anna Tucker, do. 
New-London, • Mrs. Abel Mc- 
Ewen, by a ftilale fH^, 
for the Heathen, , 

Rocky Hill, Elen Frances Wi^ 
liams, by Mr. Israel Williams, 

Stonington, Rev. Jose|^ Whit* 
tiesey, by Aux Tr. Society, 

N. YORK— Albany, Samuel 
Sprague, by a member of 2d 
Presbyterian church, 

Camillus, Onondaga eo. Mrs. Sa- 
rah Lawrence, by Mr. Grove 
Lawrence, 

Catskill, Mrs. Van Orden, 

Columbia in Walton, Del. eo. 
Rev. Charles Chapman, by 
congs. of Columbia and Ham- 
den, 

East Granville, Miss Esther 
Beecher, by Mrs. Skinner, 
•* Dexter Hitchcock, 
" Mrs. John Whiten, by 
Rov. John Whiten, 

New York City, Mrs. Hugh 
Auchincloss, 

Robert Bufoid, . 

Mrs. Eliza Lewis, . . 

Drake Mills, . . 

Edward Probyn, for For. DJs. 

George P. Sliipman, do. 

Rev. Charles G. Sommers, do. 

Jonathan D. Steele, 

Thomas Stokes, Esq. For. Dis. 

Rome, Oneida co. Mrs. Pbebe 
JerviK, by J. B. Jervis, 

Utica, John. C Hanisg, 

Vienna, (Phelps P. O.) Rev. 
Levi Griswold, by Young La- 
dies Ben. Soc. (in part of $20,) 

Westford, Horace Kelso, (in 
part of $20,) by his &ther, 

" Charles Mason, (in part of $20,) 

" John Mason, (in part of $20,) 

JJJJI Annual Director, 

gg Jj N. YORK.-BrookIyn. L.L, T. 

20 00 !*.^?^* ^^' ^^^^ ^^^ *^Bd 



25 0«) 
20 00 



25 00 
20 00 

20 00 
20 00 

20 00 

5 00 



3832,) 
_ Jlnnwd Members, 

SO 00 N. YORK.— New-York City. 
SO 00 Ellen T. Brewster, 
20 00 Frances L. Brewster, 
Lewis Thtbott, 

Other Donations, 
VERMONT.— Dorset, Mrs. 
Jackson, $1, Julius Sheldon 
and Son, $1 16, 
Poult nev, William Wheeler, 
CONNECTICUT- — Farming- 
too, the church of Rev. Si- 
meon Hart, Jun. . .. 



tooo 

20 0$ 
SS0$ 
90 0$ 

26 0$ 



20 0$ 
20 OO 



SO OO 

29 00 
90 00 

20 00 

90 00 
20 00 
20 00 
20 00 
20 00 
25.0$ 
20 00 
20 00 
80 00 

20 00 

20 00 



10 00 

50$ 
5 00 
50$ 



10 00 



900 
80$ 
800 



2 16 
1 00 



S$$$ 



Zi 



EECEIPTS. 



[lftS2. 



Hartford, Ladies of Centre 

Church, 
Ladies of North church, 
The following $10 each, viz. 

Dr. L. Bacon, B. B. Barber, J. 
Beach, Hon. Jonathan Brace, 
A. M. Collins, A. Qfuislow, . 
Tkc following^ $5 eoe^ Wil- 
liam Hudson, E. S. Hamilton, 
Cash, A. Willard, E. W. Bull, 
C. R. Comstock, • Daniel 
Wadsworth, J, H. Wells, 
A. W. Butler, Robert Ander- 
son, D. Copeland, I. D. Bull, 
A.6ilman, Fr. Parsons, Esq. 
ThefoUomi^ $2, each, Isaac - 
Wright, D. E. Bartlett, A. 
Chapin, Cash, do. W. R. 
Loomis, N. M. Morse, Dr. J. v 
W. Crane, i. Sage, Geo. N. 
Corning. Rev T.H.Gallau- 
det, S. B. Wildinan,Mr. Ken- 
dall, J. T. Hinsdale, Phile- 
mon Canfield, Rev. H. Hoo- 
ker, Betsey Putnam, 
The following $1 each, A. 
Kingsbury, Electa Simonds, 
E.C.Bull, R. White, 8. G. 
L. Henry Beaton, A. M. 
Bogue, D.W.Clark, Mr. Mor- 
gan, James F.. Cpmstock, J. 
W. Goodwin, Julius Gilman, 
C. Judson, E. W. Greene, T. 
Winch, Jared Griswold, Esq. 
H. Alden, Cash, . • 

Anonymous for For. Dis. $3, 
J. Erukine Edwards, $3, Dr. 
R. S. Kissam, $3, Messrs. 
' Goodwin and co. $20, Cash, 
$5 75, do. $1 43, . ^ 

New-Haven, The foUommg, 
$10, each, Mrs. M. Bruen, 
Jehiel Forbes, William J. 
Forbes, Prof. C. A. Goodrich, 
Mrs. Salisbury, Miss Salis- 
bury, Edward E. Salisbury, 
The following $5, each, A. 
Bradley, L. Bradley, John 
H. Coley, Hon. David Dag- 
gett, Wm. H. Elliot, L. 
Hotchkiss, R. Hotchkiss, W. 
Hotchki8s,T. Jarman, Henry 
Oakes, E. Sanford, Prof. B. 
Silliman, E. N. Thompson, 
J.Townsend, Harriet Tucker, 
Stephen Twining, Prof. T. 
D. Woolsey, 
Mrs. Henrietto F. Whitney, 
^, Mrs. Atwater, for Bur- 
mab, $1, Clarissa Atwater, 
for the West, $2, Cash, $4, 
do. $1, do. for For. Dis. $3, 
Miss H. Lathrop, 12c. Miss A. 
Payne, 50c. B. S. $3, A Lady, 
$1, do. $1, Rev. John S. Stone, 



162 79 
62 36 



60 00 



70 00 



35 85 
125 

23 81 

500 

450 

37 

14 93 

SO 



34 00 



18 00 



36 18 



70 00 



85 00 



|3, Isaac Thompson, $4, . 47 CS 
N. YORK.-47atskili, cong. of 

Rev. Isaac Wyckoff, 
Champlain, Rev. Mr. Kenny, 

fl. Cash 25c. 
East Granville, cong. of Rev. 
John Whiten, • < . 
FishkilU a friend. 
Glen's Falls, E. Hawley, 
Harpersfield, Del. co., B.B. Burr, 
Presbyterian Society, 
Merideth, H. Parsons, 85c. 

Otis White, 25c. 
New-York Ciiy, ThefoUowing 
$10, each, Rev. Thomas 
Cochran, Agent of the Soc. 
for For. Dis. Silas Brown, 
Rev. Elias Cornelius, D. D. 
John S. Crary, Simeon Hyde 
Shepard Knapp, N. Little- 
field, James MfcCall, J. Man- 
ning, A. Post, Henry Rem- 
sen, Wm. H. Smith, Seth 
P. Staples, Esa. Cash, 
The following $5, each. He- 
man Averill, John Campbell, 
B. Deming, D. Hoadley, J. 
Kelso, M. Ketchum, F. Mar- 
koe, A. G. Norwood, Cash, 
G. H. Gurley, |3, H. Smith, 
$3, D. Cheshire, $2, W. 
Mackie, $2, Edward S. Hill, 
$1, Cash, $3, do. $1, do. $1, 
Friend, 50c. A daily cont. $4, 
Tract Assoc. Reform. Dutch cli. 
Broome St. (Dr. Brodhead's) 
William Poc, Secretary, . 
Rutgers St. ch. Members of . 
Rochester, a friend, 
Salem, individuals, 
Stamford, A. Mc Donald 50c. 
James Hume, $1, John Hume, 
$1, R. Hume, Jun. $1, 
Walton, Presb. congregation, 
Westfield, E. Babcock, 50c. 
Dea. J. Babcock, $1, Col. S. 
Babcock, $1, S.Wright 12c. 
Westford, Sundry individuals, 
N. JERSEY.— Burlington, »ho 

mas Aikman, 

PENNSYLVANIA.— Philadel- 
phia, T. T. Pond, 

S. CAROLINA. — ^Pendleton 
dist. Rev. Aaron Foster, . 

INDIANA.-Greensburg, Miss 
Nancy B. Warren, 

OH lO.— A friend For. Dit. . 

CANADA.— A Friend, 
The above list contains donations— 

For the Valley of the Mississippi, Ig 00 

F05 Foreign Distribution, . 803 67 

Whole amount of donations, $3, 173, 38 
Received for Tracts sold, 4, 527, 73 



140 00 



45 00 



20 50 



50 00 

44 75 

53 00 

2 00 



3 50 
12 50 



868 
8 00 

1 33 

300 
1 74 
1 00 

10 oa 

10 00 



Total, . $7,70103 
One half sheet periodical, portage under 100 mile< fcant-over 100 milce H ctfc 



THE AMERICAN 

OL. TU. XSABOB, 1832. HO. 



e« TrvlNa. XT. 
' PROKPT PAYMENT FOR TRACTS. 

At a Meeting of the Eiecutive Cammilteo of Ihe American Tnct 
Society, New-Yoik, Febniuy 8, 1333, the Tollowing preambla uid 
reioIulionB, after seiioaa conBidenlion, wire unuiilnoiulf adopt* 
' ad, viz: 

•■ Whereas the Prondence of God is evidenllj calling thii Socielj (o 
more eStcienl and eitendpd openilions, bolh in our onn countrjr and 
in fafeigD landa, and its only BoareeBof iacome are the sales of its 
publicalions at cost, and free donation! ; — and irhercas a number of 
theSocielj'i BranchcB and Auiiliaries, and iadinduals. have foiled to 
make prampt payment for publications ordered, thereby wilhdraiving 
an equal amount of funds froni Ihe use of ibe Parent Society, and 
concentrBting upon indiTiduds of its Coniaiittee Ihe responiribility of 
supplying the deficiency by heavy and perplexing loans on inleresi; — 
and H'barcas the Committee cannot but regard it ai unreasonable thai 
■uch responsibilities ■honid be continually thrown on members of Iha 
Committee who bave Utiieito giiea their names in Ibe Sociely^i 
Tot. VIL 3 WBOLi No. 7!. 



f 6 PROMPT PAYMENT FOR TRACTS. [Mafcfr, 

exigencies; — ^and whereas the obtaining of extended credits i» 
also manifestly unfavorable to the efficiency of Auxiliaries, as they 
thereby postpone the raising of means at the time when the-sense of 
the necessity of procuring Tracts would induce the community around 
them to contribute most liberally for this object, and thus become in- 
volyed in large and discouraging arrears ; — ^and whereas thie evil i^ 
apparently one of growing magnitude: 

** Therefore, Resolved, That the BrsscbeB, Auxiliaries^ and friend* 
•f this Society, be requested to consider the following terms of pay- 
ment for publicationa sold, and to give this Committer the aid of tbeiir 
best endeavor? in efiecting their adoption : vix. 

*' That (after sufficient time shall havQ elapsed for communicating 
these terms of payment) all Branches, Auxiliaries, and Individuals, l» 
ordering the Society's publications, be expected to accompany their 
orders by remittances in money ; or when that is impracticable, by 
drafts, or permission to draw for the amount, payable at a period not 
exceeding 60 days sight 

** That, in supplymg Auxiliaries and individuals in destitute places, 
the Distributing Committee, instead of giving extensive credits, make 
grants, at their discretion, of a portion of the Tracts needed, on con- 
dition of the remainder being paid for on the above terms. 

'* That the Distributing CommUtee direct such quantities of the So- 
ciety's publications as they shall judge necessary, to be forwarded 
from time to time for the use of the Society's Agents, laboring where 
there shall not be Depositories adequately supplied ; and that the 
Agents be instructed to conduct their sates of the same on the con- 
ditions above-named. 

" That the Society's Agenta be instructed to give their co-eperatio» 
to Anxiliaries, and to direct all their labors, in the places visited by 
them respectively, with especial reference to carrying the above sys- 
tem into effect. 

" That editions of the Christian Almanac for future years, be fur- 
nished on condition that, if payment be not made on or before Febru^ 
ary 1, tho Committee then draw for the same, or so much as may re- 
main due, payable at 30 days sight. 

«* That it be earnestly recommended to the Society's Branches and 
Auxiliaries owning Depositories, to secure prompt payment for all 
publications sold by them.'^ 

We invite the serious attention of all the Auxifiaries and friends of 
the American Tract Society to the above preamble and resolutions. 
The subject is one in which the welfare of the Tract cause, and ita 
consequent usefulnesSi are deeply involved. 1 1 has long engaged the 



I 



I 



I'SS^-T MONTHLY TEACT DISTRIBUTIOK. £f 

attention of the Committee ; and they now earnestly request the 
friendly co-operation of all who regard the prosperity of this depart- 
ment of benevolence, in carrying into efiect the system of prompt 
payment now proposed. It is very desirable that money, or drafts 
payable at sight, should accompany t^Il orders for the Society's publi- 
cations ; but drafts at 60 days can be negotiated, and their value im- 
mediately realized to meet Qzisting claims on the Institution. 

We also request the attention of all interested in the Monthly Dt*- 
fribidion, to the following proceedings on this subject, in the City of 
New- York, and the encouragement therein contained for its faithful 
prosecution* 

tMPROVEMENT IN THE SYSTEM OF THE 

acoxirasziir v&act DZflTniBUTzozsr 

m THE CITY OF NEW-YORK.' 

It having been frequently , suggested that the great objects of the 
Monthly Tract Distribution might be equally, if not in a higher de- 
gree secured, with a considerable diminution of the expense, the 
Board of the New- York City Tract Society, after some consideration^ 
referred it to the City Committee to examine and report on the sub- 
ject. In accordance therewith, the following Report and Resolutions 
were submitted to the Board at their stated meeting, January 30, and 
unanimously adopted, and a Committee appointed to publish the same. 

aSPORT. 

^' The following are among the eonsiderationa which, in the opinion 
of your Committee, urge the importance of the system of Monthly 
Distribution. To say nothing of the influence of our example upon 
others — the evidences of God*s blessing upon this system of efibrt 
were never more apparent-^it was never perhaps more faithfully pro- 
secuted than at present — the hearts of many of the Superintendents 
and Distributers are deeply enlisted in it — it is accompanied in many 
Districts, more and more, with, the faithful personal labors of the 
Distributers — in a number of Districts they have selected individuals, 
whose minds are tender on the subject of religion, as the special ob- 
jects of their prayers and serious efibrts for their eternal welfare-^ 
their general quarterly prayer-meeting, their prayer-meetings in the 
respective wards, and in numerous Distributers' Districts, promise 
much spiritual good, under the. blessing of God — and a most happy 
reflex moral influence^ as many testify with humility and gratitude, 
i9 ex«rted upon Iheijr own hearts. They are also now dispersing the 



tt [momtbit teact DiSTEiBVTioir. [March, 

CireiilanoftheiY«9-Forfc Suae Tempermic$ Soei«fy~tliey have be- 
come a handraud to the Young jams' ^ew^York BibU SoeUiy in re- 
porting to them the destitution throughout the City— ^they are almost 
the only substitute for the labo|v;of the New-York CUy Jlllf«ioii--they 
bring numerous children from their obscure retreats into the Sabbath 
and Infant School, and them and many of their parents and others 
into the house of God — ^they bring to light the wants of many of the 
deserving and sufiering poor— and more than all, they tender the mes- 
sage of salvation through a crucified Redeemer, at the fireside of mul- 
titudes who absent themselves from all the regular and stated means 
of grace. 

'* With all these encouragements to the prosecution of this effi>rt, it 
is apparent thjit, among some portions of our community, the prospect 
of its usefulness is far greater than among others. This, in the opinion 
of the Committee, is undoubtedly tme of families in their accustomed 
places of abode, compared with those occupied in stores and other 
public places of business. Two classes of our population may also, 
perhaps, be specified, among whom the.prospect of usefulness is com- 
paratively small. The one consists of the most ignorant, depraved, 
and degraded, many of whom cannot read, and some of whom seem 
almost to )kave lost all susceptibility of moral and religious impres- 
sion. The other class consists of tho^e who regard the instruc- 
tion of the humble Tract as beneath their notice, and perhaps 
consider all the attention they give to Evangelical religion as conde- 
scension, instead of sitting like humble disciples at the feet of Christ. 
The Committee do not feel at liberty, while it is the command of tlie 
Redeemer to tender the message of his Gospel to tdl^ entirely to dis- 
regard the spiritual wants of these classes; but they consider the 
prospect of usefulness among many other classes far more hopeful. 
They find it difficult to devise any plan of operations which shall omit 
none who ought to be supplied, and yet give the Tract to none where 
there is not a reasonable prospect of its usefiilnoss. They are of the 
opinion that such cases must be referred very much to the ditcreHon, 
of the DistrUnderSf feeling that none but those in whom such confi- 
dence can be reposed should be encouraged to engage in this service. 

" In view of the whole, they unanimously recommend the adoption 
of the following resolutions : viz. 

1. <' That, while it is the duty of the Monthly Tract Distributers to 
entertain a serious and tender regard for the eternal welfare of all in 
their respective Districts, the Board consider it of the highest impor- 
tance that they be guided in their labors by a sound (Htcrctton, and by 
wisdom from above. 

8. " That faithful aflectionate eonoersaUcn, prayeTf and other ^orts. 



1))3S.] WANTS or OUR couiiTRr. ^a 

as opportunities are afibrded, for the conversion and spilritual good 
of those visited, should be considered by the Distributers a no lisi 
important part of their work than the presentation of the Tracts. 

3. " That the Monthly Distributers be instructed to present Tracts 
onh/ in places xohtre families reside, and to those only with whom they 
shall have had such conversation as affords good reason to believe that the 
Tracts will be appreciated and read,*^ 

The Board deem it of great importance that the Superintendents of 
the^ Wards, before delivering Tracts for further distribution, should 
satisfy themselves of the qualifications of the respective Distributers, 
and fully acquaint them with the import of the above instructions. 
And to all the Distributers, the Board would afiectionately say. We 
earnestly desire your cordial and faithful endeavors discreetly to carry 
into effect this improvement in the system, which, although it throws 
upon you additional responsibility, it is hoped by the Board, will com- 
mend itself to your entire approbation ; and the Board feel assured 
that you will be aided in your work by the prayers, the countenance, 
and the co-operation of the pastors and members of the churches, 
and all who love the interests of Zion. 

By order of the Board, 

Z.-LEWIS, President. 
O. £. Cobb, Recording Secretary. 

tCT^ A sketch of the success of the Monthly Distribution in a 
number of places will be found on the cover. 



PLAN FOR SUPPLYING OUR COUNTRY WITH 

TRACTS. 

The plan tlie American Tract Society is now pursuing, as exhibited 
in the Circular of the Executive Committee which was inserted in the 
Tract Magazme for February — that of dividing all the more destitute 
parts of the country into fields, say 180 miles long by 100 wide, em- 
bracing on an average not far from 300,000 inhabitants, and assign- 
ing to each the permanent labors of one faithful Agent—has its most 
powerful recommendation in the results of labors performed in such fields 
within the last two years. We are glad to be able to present an ap- 
peal from one of the Society's Agents occupying such a field at the 
West, as the facts he communicates may be considered an example 
of those existing in other fields throughout the Western States. 



APPEAL FROM A TRACT AGENT AT THE WEST. 

The field in which this Agent has been laboring for eighteen months, 

is believed by him to be as well supplied with the ordina ry and 

stated means of grace, as any other field of equal extent West of the 

3* 



so APFKAi* F&oM THX wESx. [BCarcls 

Alleghany^ It embraces twenty-three coanties, or a territory not far 
from one hundred miles square, containing 478,222 inhabitants, or 
about 80,000 families. 

Tract Societies ate already formed in thirty-five townships within 
this field, all of whfch are engaged in the systematic Monthly Distri- 
bution. The Agent has presented a tabular view of the results of 
the distribution in each township, as returned; which doubtless 
falls somewhat short of what has actually been done. 

Whole number of Tract Distributer's Dutricts, .... 9T2 

Number of familiea in the thirty •4SvetowDsbip8, .... 9,S$4 

Number of families supplied each month, 8,660 

Number of fhmilies in which Tracts have been refused) . . 264 

We regret that want of room compels us to omit the particular 
statements of the Agent respecting the encouragements for prosecut- 
ing this work, and the obstacles encountered in the respective town- 
ships ; and that we can give only a mere abstract of his interesting 
appeaL 

Abstract of the AgenV^ Appeal to Christians at the East. 

In the above field, I think it may properly be estimated, that not 
far from two thirds of the population, either are deprived or deprive 
themselves of the stated means of grace, and in general will be met 
by the Gospel, only as it is carried to their doors^ or as they are placed 
in circumstances which forbid their entire neglect of it. 

The inhabitants being principally emigrants from other states and 
countries, have brought with them their peculiar prejudices as it 
respects religion and the various Benevolent Institutions. All the 
hackneyed phrases of reproach and opposition are afloat here, and 
are met by the friends of these Institutions at every step. Not to 
mention some from whom we should hope better things, the New 
Lights, Campbeliites, Universalis! s, Atheists, Tcists and Infidels with 
which the country is overrun, unite in opposing every systematic 
Evangelical efibrt to spread the Gospel. Some, no doubt, through 
ignorance, but many trom determined hostility. 

The difficulties attending the pro^rress of benevolence at the West 
are not known at the East. I know much has been done ; but I do 
hope no christian has even begun to think of sitting down with the 
idea that the work is accomplished. The camp of the enemy is only 
assaUed-^o, very small advantage (if any at all) has been gained—- 
and I mistake his operations very much, if he does not intend to dis- 
pute every inch of ground till he is finally vanquished, A very strong 
current of opposition is formed by the united influence of errorists 
formalists, Sabbath-breakers, distillers, and the enemies of all good.' 

It IS gratifying, however, that there are among ministers and peo- 
ple here many choice spirits, who are ready to every good word and 
work, and to whom it is a luxury to do good. Among them are minis- 
ters and laymen of the Baptist, Meiliodist, Presbyterian, Episcopal, 

ssociate Reformed, German Reformed, and Lutheran churches ; but 

eir number is lamentably small. On them rests the sUpportofall 



1831t.l APJKAL FROM THE WEST. 81 

the benevolent iiiBiitutions—tkey patronize all with cheerfolness— 
but they are generally in moderate circumstances, and the fulfilment 
of all the duties which seem to deyoWe upon them becomes exceed- 
ingly oppressiye. 

The usefulness of Tracts among this populaUon cannot be doubt- 
ed. They fin^ their way to many a family who entirely neglect the 
Gospel, and preach to them the first sermon they have heard in many • 
months or years. And the work thus blessed of God is not surpass- 
ed in cheapness by any other. For the small sum of twelve cents a 
Oospo^ message can be presented to a family twelve times in a ^ear, 
and may be read by an average of six persons each month. Let the 
christian, who uses ardent spirits, wine, or tobacco, or dreisses in 
costly apparel, ask himself, ** To how many families could my wasted 
dollar carry a Tract every month? To how many souls ready to pe- 
rish might it convey the means of Salvation — cheering the despon- 
dency of the lone widow and her orphan children in their log cabin, 
and smoothing the death-bed of the dying sinner just on the verge of 
eternity 7" Hundreds are doubtless now around the throne of God, 
and hundreds more on their way to glory, who will forever ascribe 
their salvation to His blessing on these publications. Let them be 
sent then to every habitation — to every palace, and to every log-cabin 
in our land and world ; and with them send also fervent and im- 
portunate prayer. At the family altar, in the closet, and in the social 
meeting, let the earnest breathmg of our souls for a blessing upon 
Ihis work, testify to the sincerity of our professions, and our sense of 
our entire dependence on the Holy Spirit. 

Of the thirty-five townships where I have mentioned that Auxilia- 
ries are formed, and the Monthly Distribution is commenced, twenty 
are now in great need of funds to cary on the work. They contain 
3,750 families, and it will cost about $225, to supply them for a year. 
Are there no friends of Zion, or Auxiliary Tract Societies at the East, 
who will undertake to supply them, andf all other townships in this 
great Valley equally or still more destitute? Here is a vast field for 
Missionary labor, which they may thus cultivate without leaving the 
endearments of home. Would it give them no joy, at the hour of 
secret or family prayer, to extend their eye to multitudes here, to 
whom they are ttius conveying the messages of grace ; and who at 
the day of judgment shall hail them as the means under God of their 
salvation? Brethren, let us look forward to that day, and feel the 
motives for immediate action. The conversion of the world must be 
the great object of our lives. The enemies of ail righteousness are 
not asleep in this Western world ; and let it not be said, that its great 
and growing population is abandoned by the folU«wers of the Lord 
Jesus to the ravages of<all the errors calculated to spread moral 
darkness and death over the whole face of it. 



BEAUTIFUL EXAMPLE OF BENEVOLENCE. 

A letter enclosing sixty dollars, has just been received from a friend 
in the country, who says, " On Tuesday evening of this week, I took 
up and read to my family your appeal in behalf of the American Tract 
Society, The immediate conviction was I must de soravthing. I 
knew the funds appropriated for this year (my fiscal year commences 



32 NOBLE EXAMPLES. [March, 

the first of Jvly,) must be nearly or qdite exhausted ; and by looking 
I foaad, thou£^h five months of the year are yet to come, they were 
overdrawn. For the last three ^ears nearly, I have set apart one 
tenth of all my income to be applied to religious and benevolent pur- 
poses. Having a little cash on hand I determined te make my three 
uttle children (all a merciful God has left me of nine) fife members of 
the American Tract Society. Their ages are 1 1; 9, and 7." 

He adds a notice of an eflfort to raise funds in the church and con- 
gregation to which he belongs, which promised gratifying success. 



NOBLE EXAMPLES 

IN THE WESTERN DISTRICT Of NEW-YORK. 

In former numbers of the Tract Magazine, we have alluded to the 
liberal offer made by an individual to the Geneva Presbytery, to fur- 
nish one half the Tracts for the monthly supply of 12,000 families, the 
entire population embraced within the limits of^the Presbytery, pro- 
vided the Presbytery would raise the remaining half of the funds and 
carry the work into execution. The ofier was accepted, and the work 
prosecuted with vigor. 

The same individual now contributes 9500, as the support for r 
year, of an Agent, the Rev. Warren Day, to devote his labors ex- 
clusively to advance the Tract cause in the sixteen Western Counties 
of the State of New- York. 

We have also mentioned that another individual assumed the re- 
sponsibility of furnishing means for the monthly supply of Orleans 
County, so far as they should not be raised in the County, which is 
very destitute, and embraces 3,000 inhabitants ; and that another in- 
dividual assumed the expense of furnishing half the Tracts for the 
monthly supply of Alleghany County, on condition the other half 
should be raised in the County ; both of which objects are now essen- 
tially accomplished. 

Just as the Canal was closing, we received an order from Roches- 
ter for 1-25,000 Tracts, on the responsibility of a single individual, for 
the Monthly Supply for five months of 25,000 families, embracing the 
population of five comparatively destitute counties. The Tracts com- 
prized upward of 1,600,000 pages, and the amount of the bill was 
$1,100. On the lost intelligence from Rev. Mr. Day, he was putting 
forth vigorous efforts to carry into effect the benevolent design of 
supplying each of the more destitute townships, on condition of 
their raising one half the requisite funds. 

Let these examples be followed, and individuals sustain Agents for 
other fields throughout the country, and furnish means for carrying 



1881.] RECEUT PUBLICATIONS. 33 

on the Montbly Distribntioii, bo ikr as they cannot be raised within 
the fields ; and let the destitute of our 13,000,000 bo thus supplied, 
and who can estimate the results that would gladden all holy 
beings in the day of judgment. It would greatly aid and strengthen 
the Parent Institution for all other eflbrts, espedally in behalf of the 
destitute in foreign lands. 



RECENT PUBLICATIONS. 

Blmyon's Pilgrims Progress. 

■ A beautiful edition of this work, 376 pa^, 18mo. with 8 neat en- 
gravings, has just been issued by the Society, the work having been 
perpetuated by the liberality of christian fnends. Great nains have 
been taken in collating this edition with other copies, in oraer to ren- 
der it a correct re-print of the original work. The orikinal Mde notes, 
which <^n throw much light on the text, have been preserred. 
Friee 37| cents in sheep. 

NEW TRACTS. 

^o. S56. Poor Swaizbland. A narrative communicated by the 
Clersyman who visited him, pp. 8. The history of a poor man on 
Rowley-Common, in Kent,^ England, who being dreadfullv mangled 
by a fiill, was confined, chiefiy in one po5ture, on hia bed for more 
than three years. At the end of the first year he was found in greater 
anguish of soul than of body, ignorant of the way of salvation, but 
otruggling to prepare himself for heaven. In these circumstances 
Christ crucified was held up before him, received by him, and honor- 
od in his godly submission during the remainder of his life. A copy 
of this Tract was received from Mrs. White, of Bristol, England, wno 
is now 74 years of age and still actively engaged as the superinten- 
dent of a Sabbath School. A beautiful anecdote concerning her is 
inserted on the cover of the Tract, 

No. S57. ** Life prom thb Dead.** An authentio narrative. — 

pp. 8. The striking conversion of a man in B , Vt. of strong 

mind, and at 56 years of age a decided Universalist, but afterward 
as decided a Christian. Written by Rev. Absalom Peters, of New- 
York ; for the American Pastor's Journal, and since published by the 
London Religious Trac^ Society. 

No. 358. Thrkb Queries to the Rbjectbrs op Chri8tiahitt< 
By Rev. Andrew Fuller. — ^pp. 8. (L) viz : How came you to renounce 
Christianity? — why do Infidel writers so often bear testimony in favor 
of it 7 — why do their principles fail in a dying hour ? To which is added 
the Infidel Rousseau^s testimony to the moral excellence of the cha* 
racter uf Christ and his Gospel. 

No. 859. A viBw OP the Evidences op Christianity. By J. 
Fletcher, pp. 4. — Which contains nine distinct and unanswerable evi- 
dences abstracted firoro an article sppended to an old quarto edition 
of the Bible. 



' pGCEIPTS ' 

WO THE TKEASUKV OF THE AMERICAN TRACT 

Btraftlu HUJIU tudint FlirMtry 19, 1833. 
FltOM AUXIUARV TRACT SOCIETIES. 
EaoiburHi, T. FallBr, Prondonl, 

MMSAChOsETTS.— 'B(i«Wl.,Ainiricui'Tni='lSiicioly 

pu, Biq. TnMum 

Pitufisld, Samual A. Dufonh, Treuurar. 
CONNECTICUT,— Dubiiry. Horu BuU, TiuHTir, 



Fir. TV. iJsn. 



:!h(ac»< 



- E. HodgM,.A(«nl, 

Hiddletoirn, Luke C. Lyman, SecnUiTj, 
NoRk-amBirlck, Rh. Mr. Wilcoi, Treunnt, . 
Sftybniak, ......... 

" SMDUdSacuiH, Fsiuls, Hri.A.P.ClmmpUll, a 

SoBtUaguii, dinrr — - ' 

Simlbrl, AuCurlii 



jpencar, aecrttAi 
Kood, Binary, 



PMkill Luding, F< 

(Ponin CUMribuIii 

Hirliw. FeniiJa. Mi 



uUlii DoaghlT, Treut 

'sail. Brinch," Kn. J. It . Hnrf, Tr™ 
ipropriiUHl by Anat, in Brick Ckun 

fnn AlHo. oTBtiHiekv^. for ds. 

Manros CO., Levi A. W*rd, Tnuurn 



nrk, Archilwld Woodni 

^°Feinle'!TSi« F. W.'._ 
:knnr, Fanuls, Mtu Eml 



ClinplMll. SscrnUry, 



PENNSVLVANIA, Fl>il!,Uelphin Brsc 
MARrLAND.l-B<iliinii^e 'Or'tnci, Cm 
VIBGINIA^Peunburf. A. a.lIaldB 



80UTH.CAllOLLVA.-Ch!.TlMtofc''^lS,"clI?<,lio 


'Bn^i, Ra 


Dajlon, D°.°Jo 


sliHu. D. W-MinB, Tnuar* 




INDUNA—Midi. 


on, (Indians Dnncb,} Maaeg U 


Wildw, Cot 


NEW-VOttR.— Schonocluly, Uai™ CoUBge, A. 
PrtildMI, . . . . . ' . 


P. Cunm^an 



insi.] 



BC€EIPrS. 



NEW-JERSEY. — ^Rahway, Young Mens' Temperance Society, 
OHIO.— Austinburg, Misi J. Austin, Agent, (for Burmah,) 

Tracts sold at the Depository to indiTiduals (including $26 19 
from a travelling Agent,) ' 



FiMT. 

5 



55 

m 

39 00 



245 841 



<( 



«( 



Directors for Life, 

CONNECTICUT.— Bristol, Rer. David 
L. Parmelee, (in fall of $50,) . 10 00 
NEW-YORK.— Albany, Hon. 

Stephen Van Rensselaer, * . 100 00 
Brooklyn, L. I., C. W. Rockwell, 100 00 
Jamaica, L. I., Eliphalet Wickes, 

Esq. 50 00 

Kew»York City, Mrs. John Mc< 
Comb, .... 

" Samuel Ward, Jun. Esq. 
Rev. John Woodbridge, 
D. D. by Ladies of 
Bowery ch., Sc Cong. 
Airs. Mary Ann Wood- 
bridge, by Ladies of 
do. do. • • 

V]RGINIA.-Charleston, Jeffer- 
son CO., Rev. Septimus Tuston, 
by individ. in Harper's Ferry, 
Elk-Run and Charlestown, . 

Mvtnhert for Life, 
VERMONT.— Benson, Rev. Da- 
niel D. Francis, by Ladies, . 
MASSACHUSETTS.— Fall Ri- 
ver, Mary Bacon Learned, by 
Mr. Orin Fowler, 
Granby, (West-Parish,) Ed- 
ward Smfth, 
Monson, William S. Porter, by 
Students of Academy and 
himself, .... 
RHODE-ISLAND.-Smithfield, 
(Slatersviller) Mrs. Ruth Sla- 
ter, . • • • • ■ 
CONNECTICUT.-Milford, Mrs. 
Elizabath Bull, by her sons 
Frederic, Jirah. and Henry, 20 00 
New-Preston, Rev. Robert 
B. Gampfield, by Young 
Gentlemen of his Society, 
" Mrs. Harriette Camp- 
field by Young Ladies of 
Rev. Mr. Campfieid's So. 
Stratford, Elizabeth Lyon 
Linsley, by her mother (in 
part of $20,) 
Trumbull, Mrs. Lueretia S. 

Edwards, (in full of $20,) 
Warren, Sophia Reynoldi?, by 
her father, (in full of $20.) 
•' Mrs. Clarence Talcott, 
by Young Ladies of Rev. 
H. Talcott's Society, 
NEW-YORK.— Albany, Sam- 
uel M. Hopkins, Esq. . . 
Cherry Valley, Alfred Taylor, 
«* John William Taylor, 
" Louisa Taylor, by their 
father Elisha Taylor. 90 00 



50 00 
100 00 



50 00 



50 05 



50 00 



20 00 



20 00 
20 00 



20 00 



20 0» 



20 oq 



90 00 



10 00 
10 00 
10 00 



20 00 

25 00 
20 00 
20 00 



Gottverneur, Mrs. Rhoda H. 
Hand, by Mrs. Lucina 
Parsons, for Val. Mis. 
New-York City, Gerard Beek- 

man, Esq. « . 
Jacob Brower, 
Alfred Edwards, (fiyr For. 

Distribution,) 
Miss Eliza Hallock, by her fa- 
ther, Gerard Hallock, (for 
the Mountain Miller,) 
R. J. Hutchinson, 
Peter A- Jay, Esq. 
Charles Edward Milnor, by his 
father. Rev. James Milnmr, 

D. D 

James Breintnall Milnor, by 

do. (for For. Dis.) 
Erwin Page, by a friend, 
Peter Remsen, Esq. 
Peter H. Schenk, 
Dr. Gilbert Smithi 
Peter G. Stuyvesant, . 
Mrs. Watts, 

David W. Wetmore, . . 
Marcus Wilbur, . . . 
Peterboro*, Gerrit Smith, Esq. 
Richland, (Pulaski Village,) 
Mrs. Ralph Robinson, by Mrs. 
Eliza A. Ward, Middletown 
Conn. .... 
Rome, Rev. Jacob Hetffes- 
stene, by Ben. Assoc. 2d 
Cong. Church, 
Sacket's Harbor, Rev. John 
W. Irwin, by Ladies of 
his church, 
MARYLAND.— BalfimorcMrs. 
Clarissa Hall, by Prof. Frede- 
rick Hall, . . . 
Miss Fanny Hall, by her 
brothers Frederick and 
Daniel W. 
VIRGINIA.— Petersburg, Rev." 
Wm. S. Plumer, by his 
Church and Cong. 
ILLINOIS.— Jacksonville, Rev. 
William Kirby, by J. M. B. 
Hartford, Conn. 
SCOTLAND.— Edinburgh, John 
Dunlop, Esq. . . 

Annual Member, 

NEW-JERSEY.— Morristown, 
Mrs. Letty Hawkins, 

Other Donations. 

VERMONT.— Bradford, Ch. 
and Cong, of Rev. Silas Mc- 

Keen, 

Poultney, Congregational 8oc. 



« 



20 00 

20 00 
20 OO 

25 00 



25 00 
25 00 
20 00 



20 00 

20 00 
20 00 
20 00 
20 00 
25 00 
20 00 
20 00 
20 00 
25 00 
23 OU 



25 00 



20 oe 



20 OO 



20 00 



20 00 



{20 OO 



20 00 
90 OO 



'2 00 



4 OO 
2 87 



S6 



RECEIPTS. 



MASSA0HU8ETTS.~.Weit< 
field, Rot. Isaac Koapp, 

CONNECTICUT. — Danbury, 
i YouDg Ladies'.Union Society, 
Julia A. Whittlesey, Tr. 
Greenwich, E. R. Mead, 

** Rev. Joel Mann*s Soc. 
Hartford, Isaac Bliss, ilO, 
James B. Hosmer, f 10, 
Lewis Weld, $10, 6eo.Blis8, 
$5, Allen Porter, |5, Ezra 
Clark, $5, Charles Bliss, 
$5, E. C. Stanton, $5, Rode- 
rick Terry, $5, S. Board- 
man, $3, W. H. HoUister, 
$3, W. Kin?, 13, H Sey- 
mour, $1, Joiin O. Pitkin, 
$2, A- Colton. $3, Ann Biick, 
$3, Mrs. S. T. Wright, $1, 
P. Thatcher, $2, Rev. J. H . 
Liiisley, $3, S. Page, $1, L. 
Bull, |1, Ladips of South 
Society. $36 58, Ladies of 
North Soc. $1 55, Cash $2, 
Manchester, Frederic Wood- 
bridge, . . . . 

NEW- YORK.— -Albany, Fourth 
Presb. Ch. (R6v. E. N. Kirk's,) 
" Fifth Presbyterian ch., 
" Ed#in Jessup, 
'* Mrs. Edwin Jessup, $1, 

Mrs. Miranda Mills, $1, 
*' Urid Marvin, 
•' faster J. Smith's Cha- 
rity box for the Heathen, 
Aquibogue, L. I., Anonymous, 
Auburn, Nathaniel C. Clark, 
; Brunswick, Daniel Howe, 
(Ibr Burmah,) 
Ephratab, Montgomery co., 

Solomon Cummings, 
New-York City, Ch., and 
Cong, of Rev. Eli Baldwin, 
The following from Rev. Dr. 
Cox's Society, James Ruth- 
ven, $10, James Ruthven, 
Jun. $10, N. T. Jenuings, 
$5, Roe Lockwood, $5, L. 
A. Mills, $5, J. S. Scher- 
merhorn, $3, D. Patton, $2, 
Clemintina Rnthven, $2, 
Eliza Ruthveo Coates, $2, 
Harriot Patton, $1, C. Ruth- 



12 00 



10 00 
10 00 
40 00 



123 13 

1 00 

101 88 
9 04 
200 

2 00 

10 00 

5 

10 00 

500 

3 00 
50 

21 92 



vea, $1» Bather Evans. $1, 
8 T. Clark, 1. Cash $70 06, 
Mite SSc, Widow's Mite SOc. 

The following ftt>m Rev. Mr. 
Patton's Soe., viz. J. A. Mor- 
ton, $19, Geo. Mather, $10, 
H. Page, 5, 0. R. Kingsbury, 
for Burmah, $5, George L. 
Storer, $5, John C.'Baldwin, 
$5, Olivia Pratt, $3, C. B. 
Green, $2, Miss M. Simon- , 
son, $2, C. Pelottbet, SOc. ' 
Cash. $38 47, . . 

From the Reformed Dutch ch. 
Bleecker-street, . ^ . 

" West Presb. church of 
which $50, for Burmah, 

The following %10, each, Mrs* 
B. (for Ceylon,) J. Cram, a 
Friend, by Rev. Dr. Milnor, 
Duncan Mc Arthur, -dr. John 
Neilson, Rev. Absalom Pe- 
ters, Weoki) and Cheesman, 

John P. Haven, $5, James Van 
Antwerp, $5, Dr. J. W. 
Weed, $5, Thomas Brooks, 
$3, John Limberger, $3, D. 
O. Caulkins, $2, David 
Hale, $2, *' Americanus" a 
monthly contributor, $2, W. 
W. Campell, $1, S.Fisher, 
$1, H. Haven $1, James 

Ward, $1, Mr. , $1, 

Cash $20, Do. $20, Do. 5,' 
Do. $5, Do. $5, Do. $1, Dm. 
25c.. a friend $S,Do. $1, C. 
A. Jackson. 94 cts. ... . 

Perry Centre, anonymousj for 
Burmah, . . • 

Peru, Selah Camfield, 

Richland, (Pulaski Village,) a 
Friend, • • ei * 

Skaneateles, Rev. Samu ' W. 
Brace, .... 

NEW-JERSEY. — ^Hacketts- 
town, Rev. Joseph Camp- 
bell, ..... 
Princeton, Ebenezer Mc Dowall, 
PENNSYLVANIA. — Carlisle, 

James Hamilton, Esq. . . 
" Mrs. Sarah Hamilton, 
DELAWARE. — Wilminston, 

WillardHall, . . . 
OHIO.— Madison, Asa Cady, Esq . 



1M81 



a/ 



The above list contains donatioos— . , . . 
For Foreign Distribution, (including $89, for Burmah and 
$10, for Ceylon,) . . . . . . . $239 30 

Fortbe Valley of the Mississippi, 20 00 

For *< The Mountain Miller," No. 254, . .25 00 



94 97 
21 73 
70 75 



70 00 



95 19 

2 80 
5 00 

300 

5 00 



200 
30 

10 00 
500 

19 00 
1 00 



Whole amount of donations, 
Received for Tracts sold, 



$2,794 01 
3,428 90 



Total. $6,222 91 



THE AMERICAN 

OL. yii. APKiz., issa* NO. 4 



THE WORK BEGUN. 

The EiecaliTB Cotnmitlee of the American Tract Society at their 
meelinn, Mujch 1!), 1S33, uQuiimotislj adopted Iberotloning minute, 
vil : Tbe tarn of (3000 having been received into the treaiurf Iqt 
Foreign Diatribuiion, and about gSOOO more having been «ub«cribed 
fiir tbaaame otyect, loon to be paid, 

Resolved, That, with a view to aflbrd SDme immediate aid to ala 
tioQS from which ■pplicalionB have long been Ijing berore the Com- 
mittee, and as an earntit of mors enlarged bensfacliona which the 
Committee trust the hberaliijr of the c)iHatian communii; will faeie- 
mfter enable them to make, thi turn offBOOO be now appropriated for 
the diatribution of Tract* in Foreign landi, to be remitted under the 
direction of tbe Finance Commitloe, u foUowa : via. 

Vou VIL 4 WaoLB No. 7J. 



36 rORZIGN APPROPKIATIONS' (April 

For theme of Amerieao Baptist MwrioDanes in Barmah* . • $100& 

Do. Araericui Miauonariee in China, , . . . 500 

Doi. do. ... Bombay, WO 

Do. dow ... Ceylon, ... - 500 

Do^ do: . . . > SaDdwkh-Itlands, 500 

Do. do. of Proteatant Epi»copal Church in Greece, 300 

Do. do. of A. B. C. F. M. on the Mediterranean, 500 

Do ^ Morarian Church Of United Brethren, 90O 

D& Paris Religioae Tract Society, ... 400 

Do. Lower Saxony Tract Society, Hamburgh, . SOO 

Do. Wm. Ropes, Esq. St. Petersburgh, Russia, 300 

•5000 

Reoolved, That^ in connection with the announcement of the abore 
appropriations, a copy of the followiog letter from this Committee be 
communicated to our brethren laboriug at the several stations: viz. 

Dkar Brethren — Tbc attention of the American Tract Society 
has been turned with deep interest to the wants of their unenlighten- 
ed fellow men in distant lands, and they have unanimously '* Re- 
solved, that they will endeavor, by the Divine blessing, to supply 
Evangelical American Missionaries in foreign countries with as manff 
igtprooed Tracts, or the meoM qf procuring lAem, as shaUj m the opimian 
of the ExecvAwe Committee, he needed tn the prosecution of their labors/* 

The Committee have herewith appropriated for the use of the 
at the sum of $ which they desire you discreetly 

to appropriate, as speedily as possible, in the circulation of Tracts, 
coming withinone or otherofthes& four classes: viz: (1.) Tracts pub- 
lished by this Society ; or (2.) translations of the same ; or (3.) trans- 
lations of portions of the Bible; or (4.) Tracts, translations of which 
into English shall be approved by the Publishing Committee of this 
So<9ety. 

The Committee further earnestly request from you all the infor- 
mation you can impart relative to the want of Tracts in the fields to 
which you have access, or of which you have any particular know- 
ledge. They wish information which will enlighten and interest the 
American churches — and especially such facts as the following : the 
total amount of population to which you have, or probably may soon 
have any access by Tracts; the languages spoken, and the amount of 
population speaking each language ; what portion of the population, 
male and female, can read ; what encouragements there are to be- 
lieve that Tracts, if prepared and circulated, will be read ; what are 
the facilities for printing TracU, and for their distribution; what 
number ef souls are already brought under the influence of the Gos- 
pel, and what co-operation in the distribution would be afibrded by 
them ; what amount of funds you can probably advantageously em- 
ploy, from year to year, if the pecuniary means shall be placed in 



1838.] TOREIGH APPROVRIATIOiri. S8 

jour hands; what evidences you have had of the usefulness of 
Tracts; and all other facts calculated to show what is the duty of 
the American churches in respect to Tract operations in that portion 
of the world where God has placed you. 

The Committee do not wish to burden you with the preparation of 
any labored documents to gratify their curiosity ; but they do wish 
to render you their most cordial and afiectionate sympathy in your 
arduous labors, and to do ail that can he done to promote the great ob* 
ject of your toils, especially in behalf of the present generation^ by 
furnishing means for supplying the whole taieiilightened ^ population 
around you with ^as many Tracts as can be useJuUy put into cireulation ; 
and they wish you to aid them in doing this by communicating those 
plain statements of facts which will show the churches the impor* 
tance of this effort, and make them happy in contributing to sustain 
it. They' wish to encourage you, not merely by furnishing means to 
meet the claims now palpably urged on yoiir attention, but by induce 
ing you to search for opportunities ofusefubuss — to " detfisc Kbertd things^ 
fpr the dying population to which God has opened before you the way 
of access by Tracts ; that thus you, and the American churches, and 
the Committee of this society, may meet them in the day of judgment 
with joy, and that they shall not there say, We pesished, and were 
never told of Christ and his salvation, for there was. *< no man** that 
** cared for our souls." 



$1006 DONATION FROM A CHCRCH IN TROY. 

A letter from a member of Rev. Dr. Tucker's Charch^ Troy, dated 
March 7, says,- the Rev. Sylvester Woodbridge has visited us and 
presented to our congce^tion the claims of the American Tract So- 
eiety. The Lord was with him of a truth — we felt the cause of the 
Heathen, and we manifested that feeling by subscribing on the spot 
f 1000. The following resolutions were adopted. 

** Resolved, That we deeply sympathize with the perishing heathen 
who are anxious for the salvation of their souls, but have not heard 
of the glorious Gospel of Christ. 

"Resolvedf That we do joyfully co-operate with the American 
Tract Society in th6ir efibrts to g|ive to all the nations of the earth a 
speedy answer to the great question " what liiust I do to be saved ?" 

" Resohed, That by withholding our co-operation in this i^lorious 
work, we greatly dishonor the Lord Jesus Christ in undervaluing the 
souls for whichne shed his blood 6n Calvary. 

** Resolved, That the time is come to make a mighty eflSirt,-TBROuoH 
TBS PRBSS', to evanffelize the world, and that the church is furnished 
with all necessary facilities." 

The next day the foliowmg letter was received from the same in- 
dividual : 

*' Dear Brother— Yesterday I told yon what our congregation had 
psmnltcd to do for yoa-*to day I send you the Ju^iUment of it. I en-. 



40 TIACT FIXU) AT TBK WSIT. [Apilly 

doM yon a e^eek for $1000, to be appropriated for the diBtribalion of 
Tract* among tho heathen. 

TRACTS FOR FRANCE. 

An American gentleman who recently visted France, has commu- 
nicated the following intelligence respecting Tract operations there : 

1. Those men in France who are connected with the Tract causei 
are nearly all of the EvangeKed^ pious class. 

S» Gonsiderable is now doing in PariS| and iU environs, by Tract 
distribation at the fairs and other places of public resort, and through 
colporteurs or hawkers. 

3. The Paris Tract Society is in need of pectmiary aid. If the Ame* 
liean Tract Society can appropitate any amount, it would be thank* 
folly receiTed by their excellent Committee, and put to very im* 
portant use. 

The great proportion of Protestants in France, as you are perhaps 
aware, reside in the south and south west part. In the north and 
north east ho wever, are a good number ; and a few scatteiied through 
almost all th^ laijge towns. 

8EI.ECTION OF A TRACT FIELD AT THE WEST. ] 

Young Ladies' Tract Society at BrooJdynf ^Tew-York, 
A Toune Ladies' Society was formed at Brooklyn, New-Tork, March 
$, with the above object — ^the first of this character which' to our 
knowledge has been formed in the country. It has been constituted 
with special reference to a destitute county in Illinois, where a 
devoted missionary is laboring, who, with the christians around 
him, is ready to supply every family monthly with Tracts, but they 
have not the pecuniary ability to procure them. 

Is not this'object one that claims general attention? Should every 
Tract Society in the northern and eastern states, and the young 
ladies of every ehurch, each select and supplv in this manner some 
destitute county, or township, or neighborhood at the south or west, 
(perhaps where their own friends or acquaintances reside,) who can 
calculate the amount of good that would be accomplished 1 

Ma. William Yomob, Agent for the American Tract Society in 
the south west part of Ohio, has given the names of fw<nly-tAreei<es« 
Utute townships, where the Monthly Distribution is commenced — idl 
^whieh need oid» They contain 3,750 families, and the aid requisite 
for supplying each township for a year will, on an average, be about 
twelve dollars. ** Will not Tract Societies and friends at the east," 
he asks, ** take each a township and furnish the means to accomplish 
the work ? In doing it tbey will have a new and specified field to oc* 
eupy their thoughts and enlist their prayers. Through them the Gos- 
pel will be preached to each family, and probaUy to five or six times 
aa^many souls. Without leaving the endearments of home, they may 
thus virtually become missionaries to this great valley. Each will 
have a snot in the moral vmeyard to cultivate ; the influence of which 
may be felt by generations to come. How pleasant must it be, al 
the hour of secret or family prayer, to fix the mind on a spot thus se- 
lectedy when the twelve dollars paved fipom some ttnoecessary ex* 



/I63S..] MBW-¥OaK €irT taact sooibtt. 41 

peniM i» telling to 200 famfliet, or 1200 sonlS) monthly, the tale of Cal- 
vary, and pointing them to the " Lamb of God who taketh away the 
■in of the worl^*'— souls whom they will never see until the trumpet 
shall sound ; but who will there hail them as the means under God 
of their salvation." 

The Committee of the American Tract Society will gladly appro- 
priate donations of 4he above character for any portion of the coun- 
try that may be selected. The name and address of some active 
fnend of religion residing in the place to be supplied, should, if pos- 
sible, be communicated with the donation. 



NEW-lrORK CITY TKACT SOCIETY. 

The Fifth Anniversary of this Society, and Tenth of the New- York 
Female Brancli, were celebrated on Wednesday evening, March 14, 
in the Masonic Hall, Broadway. After prayer by Rev. A.Maclay, 
the Report of the Female Branch was read by the Secretary of the 
American Tract Society, and the Report of the New- York City Tract 
Society by their Corresponding Secretary, Mr. S. £. Morse. Se- 
rious and impressive adaresses were then made by Rev. C. Hyde, of 
-Norwich, Conn., Mr. S. B. Halliday, Agent, Rev. J. PaiSier, Rev. 
Dr. McCartee, and Rev. O. ■ Eastman. Among the resolutions 
adopted were the following : vis. 

Resohedj That the evidence of many souls brousht to repentance 
through the Divine blessing on the faithful devoted labors and prayers 
of Tract Distributers, sho^ws that their duties are highly responsible ; 
demanding intelligence, discretion, love to Christ and the souisof 
men, consecration to the cause, and earnest prayer for the convertiujg 
and sanctifying influences of the Holy Spirit to give efficacy to their 
endeavors. 

Reiolvedf That, in view of the extensive claims of the destitute in 
this and in heathen lands, this society will comply with the request 
of the Parent Institution by making prompt payment for the Tracts 
distributed. 

The annual reports, and the address of the a^rent, contained nu- 
merous evidences of conversions to God by his blessing on these 
labors, some of them of a very touching and aflecting character. Rev. 
Mr. Hyde presented a view of the success which has been granted 
to the* Tract cause since the formation of the New-Tork Reiifiofes 
Tract Society in 1812, and, the motives urging to far greater and no- 
bler effi>rt. The sole object of Rev. Mr. Parker's address was to ren- 
der the 600 Distributers oftlu City more devoted andfmH^ by fasting 
and prayer, and persevering labors, for which the presentation of the 
Tracts affords them a most favorable opportunity — urmng upon them 
the value of the soul, and the responsibility of their worn — there being 
probably not far from 100,000 souls in the city who absent them- 
selves U*om the stated preaching of the Gospel, many of whom are 
addressed on the concerns of their salvation only by the Tract Distri- 
buter. 

The Hall was filled with a solemn and attentive audience. ^ ^ 

4* 



4t vntttvmam or tbaotb. [hpni, 

TOEFVLNESS OF TRACTS TO CHRISTIANS. 

An Agent of the American Tract Sodety desires that the attention 
of all christians should be called to the valuable instructions con- 
tained in Tracts, as a means of quidienin^ them in duty, and faelping^ 
them onward in their christian course, lie adds that he considers 
impressing this duty upon the n^inds of christians to be a very im- 
portant pwt of his labors. 



: *<I AM NOT SATISFIED'' WITH THE TRACT. 

A monthly distributer in Switzerland county, Indiana, called on 
an old man who had nerer read a Tract. He said he " did not want 
any of them, for they would do no good to soul or body." He was 
however persuaded to take the Addrets to Young Chtistiana^ (No. 40,) 
and read it for himself. A few days after, the Distributer saw the 
old man, and asked how he liked the Tract. " Oh," said he, ><my wife 
and I tat down on Sunday morning, and spent almost the whole day 
in reading it We re&d it three times, and I tell you Tarn tiot satisfied 
wUh it." But, said the Distributer, « What is the matter with the 
Tract?" " nothing," said the old man, **but /toonf nwre o/tAem." 

^■^— ^— ^-^»— ■■ 

TWO BARRELS OF SPIRITS SAVED ANNUAIiLT 
BY MEANS OF A TRACT. 

Mr. A. Bagley, agent in North Carolina, says, A man who is not a 
professer of relij^on, and who has been in the habit of using about 
two barrels of spirits in his family annually, has, from the reading of 
KUlTsdgi?s Address^ renounced the use of spirits, and become active in 
the monthly distribution of Tracts. 

Two Tracts distributed by a Lady in J^orth'Carotiruu ■ 

A pious lady, says Mr. Bagley, sent the Swearer*s Prayer in a^bim- 
dle of clothing to a poor famuy. The Tract was blessed to the hope- 
ful conversion of two soqls. The same lady gave a Tract to a boy 
■■ who had been to a horse race, (as a race rider.) On his return he 
read the Tract, which proved tbe means of bringing him to profess 
an interest in the Savior's Rightebasness. 

Tracts made the instrument of a revival of rdigioh. 

A very respectable and pious man, says the sanle Agent in North 
Carolina, Intormed me that a few years ago a bundle of Tracts was 
■sent into his neighborhood and premiflcuously circulated. The dis- 
tribution was foltowed by a revival of religion, as the resultof which 
sixteen or eighteen persons unHied with the church. 



TRACT DISTRIBUTERS' CONCERT FOR PRAYER. 

'AtM>mmunication in a Cincinnati paper a(iJiM>unees, that the last 
J\S(mday in each month is set apart by a nuonber of Tract distributers 
at the west as a <;oncert for prayer for th» blessing of the Holy Spi- 
rit on Tracts, and thp labors of Tract distributers ; and invites to tnis 
subject the attention of all who have an interest at the thit>Be of 
Grace. 



tBdIt]. CONMCCTMVT BRANCH. 4% 

N£W TRACT WAKT£D. 

The Rev, Warren Day, Agent for the American Tract Society in 
the Western District of New -York, suggests that a well written 



Tract showinff the Dutiet which Ch/iisHmu owe to each ofher. especially 
to those of dirorent denominations from themselves, would be inva* 
1udl>le. I know of no way^ he adds^ in which the bleeding cause of 
Zion can be so much benefited at this time, as by some such publi- 



CONNECTICUT BRANCH, HARTFORD^ 

Seventeenth AnniTeraaiy, January 4, 1832. Prayer by Rev. Mr. 
Linsl^, President. Addresses by Mr. L. Weld, Rev« O. Eastman, and 
Rev. Dr. Hawes. Receipts during the yisar, $253 06 in donations ; 
$958 03 for Tracts sold, total $1205 09. Circulated 131.870 Tracts, 
making 891,780 Tracts and books distributed since the formation of 
the society. The Report is an interesting document, presenting a 
view of the ivanis qfthe woii^ and the powerful encitements to Tract 
fdistribution in all languages, from the abundant evidences of cood 
aoeompliahed, as wmI in heathen as in christian lands. We have 
no room for tatracts* Ma. Charles Hosinn, Seeretaryand Agent, 

HUNT8ni«I«E9 ALABAMA, AUXILIARY. 

Fifth Anniversary, held January 17. Addresses were deliverod by 
J. G. Bimey, Esq. the President, Rev. Mr. Shook, of the Cumberland 
Presbyterian Church, Her. I. J. Roberts, of the Baptist Church, Rev. 
J. Allen, of the Presbyterian, and Mr. J. R. Maltbie. Receipts during 
the year $245 39. Cfirculated^l01,067 Tracts, 5000 of which gratu- 
itously; 104 bound vols, and 9479 Broadsheets, Handbills, and other 
occasional publications. The monthly distribution, which had been 
suspended for a1ime« had been revived. The report expresses deep 
regret that the society and its auxiliariofi have been no more active 
in so glorious a cause. 

N£:W TRACTS.: 

No. 960. For ever. — pp. 4. (L.) An awakening appeal, showing 
the miaery of the finally impenitent, chiefly extracted; from chapter 
6, of Baxter's Saint's Rest. . 

No. 2(51. NARRATrvB OF, Miss CATHBRmE Yates. In letlers 
from her aunt with whom she resided. From the London Christian 
Observer. — pp. 19. She came from India to England at the age of 
six years;' and after having buried her sister MargareL of whom a 
notice is inserted on the cover of the Tract, fell into a graduad decline, 
which c6ntmued twelve months, and died February 8, 1803^ having 
delightfully eiemplified the faith, patience, and consolation of the 
Grospel. ^ 

No. 969. To TBOSE comhbhciko a religious live. — pp. 8. Con- 
taining eighteen brief scriptural and practical directions for the chris- 
tian Uul adapted to the present state of the church and the world; 
particulariy- addressed to young christians, but full of instruction for 



44 



New T^CTS* 



[April, 



all who would be the faitfafal duciples of our blessed Lord, and bear 
much fruit to his prais^. Ascribed to Miss Catherine E. Beecher, Prin- 
cipal of the Toung Ladies' Seminary at Hartford. 

Mo. 263. Indecision in Religion — pp. 12. Showing who are un- 
decided in religion, and the sin and danger of sudi indecision. 
Written by Rev. Joseph Brown, Charleston, S. G. being the substance 
of a discourse preached by him in New-York, in 1828, and heaid by a 
young man from Philadelpliia who believed it to have been blessed in 
his conversion. Two years after, hearing the author agafn in Phila^ 
delphia, he applied for the loan of the manuscript, and had a few 
copies printea without the Author'a name, under whose revision it 
has now been published as a Tract. 



PREMIUM TRACT ON LOTTERIES. 

The Committee appointed to airurd the premium of $90 for thb bettTraet on Lot- 
teries, have examined aeveral manuacriptB which have been received, and they re- 
?'et tiiat no one of them is of sufficient excellence to merit the premium oifered. 
he individual who offered the premium proposes to extend the tmie until the first 
of August next, in the hope that iddividuaos who feel the evils of this mode of jram- 
bling may have further time to prepare a suitable Tract for publication. The Com- 
mittee appointed to award the premium, are Rev. B. B. ^Vlsner, D. D., John Tap- 
pan, Esq., and Samuel T. Amistronr, Esq. 

The maauscripu puy be directed to Mr. Wm. A. Kalloek, No. 144 Nassau- 
street, New-YorK, or Aaron Russell, No. 5, Cornhill, Boston. Each manuscript 
nhould contain the name of the writer in a seaded envelope. 



RECEIPTS 



INTO THE TREASURY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

V 

DiiriMg the imontk emding March 15, 1833. 



FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 



For. Tr. Don, 



RHODE-ISLAND.~Providence, Isaac Wilcox, Depositary, 
CONNECTICUT.— Brooklyn, (Windham co. Aux.) Edwin New 
bury. Agent, 

Godien, George Stanley, Secretary, . ..... 

Greenwich, (Stanwich Society,) William Smith, Treasurer, . 

Griswold, Denison B. Tucker, Treasurer, 

Hartfonrd, Conn. Branch, Charles Hosmer, Secretary, 

New-Haven, J. L. Cross, Agent, 

Plymouth, Edward Langdon, Treasurer, 

West-Greenwich, Solomon Mead, Secretary, 
N. YORK.— Albany, Central Branch, D. McKercher, Secretly, 

Bedlbrd, Female, Mrs. Susan S. Nichols, Secretary, . 

Catskill, William H. Coit, Treasurer, 

" (n«w Society,) Edgar B. Day, TreaaureE, 

Coulin, Broome CO., Ezra Carrier, Secretary, 

Franklinville, WUliam Phoenix, Treasurer, 

Lansingburgh, E. R. Parmelee, Secretary, .... 

Moriches, L. I., Rev. Alfred Ketciham, Secretary, 

New-York City Tract Society, Alfred Edwards, Esq. Treaaurer, 

" by Female Auxiliary, (|19 65^ iirom the Collegiate Dutch 
Churches, for For. Dis. . . . . . 

St. George's Church, Fern. Miss Ann Dominick,' Treasurer, 

Potsdam, William W. Goulding, Agent, . - . 



150 00 


k 


15 00 




5 


14 16 


«00 


16 00 


•0 




S3S5 






69 57 


3 73 




300 




366 


• 


34 74 




6736 




600 




300 






10 56 


3 40 




109 98 




81 31 


19 65 


500 




40 00 





ISSf.] 



45 



Saratoga, ScHuytonvine, T. Sirart, SecMliry, . , , 1 W 

49tfllirater, John HiiMer» SttcreUnr, . . . • 6 ^ 

TompkiMvillfr, Stalen-bluid, T. Fitfdaii, Treamnw, 3 dl 

Utiea, Edward Vernoa, Sacretary, . . . * * T7 06 

N. JEESET^Elizabefhtaim, in 9d, Presbyterian ClMKli, . S 98 

' Lnmngtan CoDffr^aUoa, Female, . . « D (K) 

Jfonroe, near Horrittowa, Edwin Ford, Treamrar, . IK 4X> € 00 

Newark, Fern. Mra. Mia M. Macomb, Secretary^ . S 60 

New-Brunswick, A^ dttydam,.Treaaurer, . 16 66 S5 00 

Peterson, iofSd Ref. Dutch Ch. Stolph Doremus, Traasarer, . 1 18^ 

Princetea, Nassaa Hall, Geo. O. Armstroaf , Tv. (ta part af ^HW,) 42 00 

** Female, Bliss F. W. Morford, Treasarar, ' 8 06 

WestAekl, Fern. Miss Mary Piersaa, Secretary, . , 188 
DlS.C0LUMBU^Washingti>a<»ty,J6hfiK«nttedy, Treasurar, * 181 75 

ViMINIA^Pisgah, Bedlbi^d eo.. Rev. John Laftwiek, Treasurer, 10 06 

Winchester, Panlel^old, Treasurer, . . , 99 66 85 00 

** by their Auxiliary, Bloooiery Mills, ... . 1 3 00 

GEORGIA^— Augusta, Dr. Francis M. Robertson, Secvelary, . 30 00 

Macan, Ellis ShotweH, Secretary, . . ^ . . 56 8? 
AI^ABAMA — Concord, Grae^ oa., F««i. Elisabelh F. Caaaiaf - 

bam. Secretary, . • . . . . . 8 eo 
KENTUCJi^T.— RmBeifarffle, (Lagan co, AaK.) George BreaHhilt, 

SecreiUry, . , , . . . ; . - . ■ . 15 00 

OHIO.— ChUlicothe, Rev. Joha P. Bausman, Treteirae, . « I& 60 

Hudson, Portage eo., Prof. ElisHrW^htfTraasarer, . . 97 75 

Marietta, Rev. Lather G. Baacham, AMt, ■ . . . ■ 85 00 
SOCIETIES I«K)T AUXILURT. 
MASSACRUSETTS.— Enfield, Fern. Mary E. Jams, Treasurer, 
W. YORK.->New-Utrecht, Fem. Bib. ^ftiss. and Tiact 8OT»ety, 

Mrs. C. Knapp,. Traasurer, . . . ' . . . 7 i« 
Schafticoka,R«nsselaer'eaH$nrBanMih, . . 

N. CAROLINA.~Fayettevitle, "Brotherly Society,** . , H> 06 
Traete sold a^ the Depositoiy to indiVMoals (paclodiag 875, ftx>itt 
aTravoUiBgAgam,) ,^. , . . . . . . [480 77 



Dirtelmri for Lifu 

C}ONNECnCUT.— Darian, Rer. 

EbeBeserPlatt,(inraU^^,) 96 06 
Green's Farm's. Rev. Tliomas P. 

Danes, by his eh. and Cong. JSO 00 
Greenwich, (SCanwich Soc.) Rev. 

Piatt Buffed, by his eh. and 

cong. (iapartofOSp,) 3137 

New-Canaan, Rev. linopbilas 

Smith, by his Soc. (in fMUt of 

$50,) .... 30 03 
Mew-Havea, Prof. ChanaceyA. 

Goodrich. V'ale College, by 

ela* of 1^ (in fiin of $50,) 30 00 
New-London, Robert Colt, . 50 00 

*" Thomas vr.WilUam8,]f:sq. 50 00 
North-Greenwich, Rev. Channcey 

Wilcox, by his cb. and oong. 50 00 
West-Gteeny!ch, Rev. Jod 

Mann, by Ladies, . 55 00 

N. TORK^Albany, Rev. John 

N. CampbeH, by Ladies vt' 
' 1st Presbyterian church, 50 00 



AlbwBy.--3duisT» Norton. ^ 
Catskin,Rev.t%omaS M. Smith, 

by bis ch. and cbng. 
Coxsackio, Mrs. John Broiik, 
Geneva, Rev. Heary Dwight, 
New-York City, Cornelius Ba- 
. ker, (Foreign,) . . , 
Rev. William C. Brownlee, D. D. 

by Ladies of Ref. Dutch Col- 

lefTiate Churches, (for. Dis.) 
Rav. Thomas Do Witt, D. D.by 

Do. do. (For. Dis.) (in 
^ fuUof$56,) . . /. 
Rev. John Kno^c, D. D, by do. 

(For. Dis.) In (full of$50,) 
Rev. Gerardus Kuyperf, D. D, 

by do. (For. Dis.) 
C. O. Halsted, 

Dr. Marinas WiHett, (in fall of 
^ ^ $50), . . . . 
Schenectady, John Constable, Esi]. 

(Foreign,) . . , ' . 
Troy, Gurdon Grant, do. 



t 41 
3 33 

50 60 



50 00 

50 60 

185 00 

50 00 



50 00 



John T. McCoun, 



90 00 

30 00 

50 00 
50 00 

3p00 

50 00 

50 00 

do. ' S56 09 



• CoBtabuted as fotlows, vmt St. John's ch. (Epi«opai) Rev. Mr. Hawley, 

;14 10. F, Street ch. (Presbyterian,) Rev. Dr. Laurie, $9 17. SoQond Presb. ch. 

^v. Edward Smith, $6 60, First Presb. ch. Rev. R. Post, $90 95. Fourth Presb. 

ch. Rev. Mr, Danforth, $30 85. C»itist eh. (Episcopal,} Rev. Mr. Hatch, $3 68, 

^allecftedby agent, $7, Recaivad ibr Tracts scdd, $30. 



.46 



EKCKIPTS. 



[April, 



100 00 East-lMoomfield, Rev. R. W. 



50 00 

100 00 

30 00 

50 00 



50 00 



Mn. Samual McCowi, (For.) 50 00 

AfaMham Natir, do. 

, Daniel Backett, do. 

George Vail, do. 

AlMp Weed, On fliU of $50,) 

Rer. Henry R. Weed, by Mr. 8. 
McCoun, do. 

N. JERS£Y.^Prineeton, Rer. 
George S. Woodhull, by Lar 
diet ^ hie Society, . , . 

PENNSVLyANIA.^Philadelnhia, 
William Brown, Esq. (For.- 
Dio.) 190 00 

Tliomaa Fleming, £aq. do. 100 00 

John Stille, Esq. do. 100 00 

DIS. COLUMBU^Waahinvton 
City, Hon. Lewis M. Cass, 
Secretory of War, by a 
friend, . . . . 5flf 00 

VIRGINIA.— Blartinsburg, Rer. 
William Matthews, by congs. 
of Martinsbiirg and Smithileld 
(infiillof$500 90 00 

BOMBAY.— Rev. William Harvey, 
by Ladies IndustrionB Soe. 
Sd Presbyterian ch. Troy, 50 00 

MemberM for Life, 

VERMONT.— Brattleboro' (East 
Village,) ' Rev. Jonathan 
MKjree, by his ch. and cong. 21 16 

Montpelier, Rev. Samuel Hop- 
kins, by Ladies, . . 20 00 

MASSACHUSETTS. — West* 
Brookfield, ^ev. Ebenezer 

1» Everett, by a Female Friend, 

Oakham, . . 20 00 

CONNECTICUT. QrigwiM, 

Rev. S. D. Jewett, by Gen-^ 
tlemen of his Society, 20 00 

George Tucker^by his father Wm. 

Tucker, Esq. (in full of |20,) 10 00 

New-London, Charles Butler, Jun. 20 00 
** Miss Frances Bf'Caulkins, 
by a friend, . . 20 00| 

North-Stamford, Rev. B. Fuller, 
by hit ch. and copg. (in part 
of$20,) .... 

Norwalk, Daniel Nash, Esq. . 



Miss Elsie Van Dyck, 



Hill, by Ladies, 
East-Durham, David Baldwin 

Hull, by David Baldwin, . 
Jamaica, Eliphalet Wickes 

Blatehford, 

M John Blatehford, Jnn. 



20 00 

90 00 

90 00 

90 00 
90 00 



** Martha Wickes Blatehford, 90 00 

90 00 
90 00 



u 



20 00 
90 00 
25 00 
90 00 
20 00 
95 00 
90 00 
30 00 
20 00 
20 00 



10 00 



fiangatuck, Mrs. Mary Riley, 
West-Haven, Rev. Samuel Kt 



icb. 



702 

20 00 
20 00 
20 00 



N. TORK.— Albany, P. S. Van 

Rensselaer, . . 25 00 

Btoomingdale, Miss Ann Stryker, 20 00 

Cambri&e, Aaron Crosby, • 20 00 

Catskill, John Day, . . 20 00 
Miss Caroline E. D«r, Miss Julia 
R. Day, Miss Mary H. Day, 
by their fother Orrin Day, Esq. 00 00 

Mn. BenryMcKinstry, 20 00 
Abraham Van Vechten, (in fUll 

of $90,) . . . .18 00 

Coxsackie, Elizabeth Bogardus, 20 00 

Mim Catharnie Conine, . 20 00 

RusselJttdson, 20 00 

Anthony N. Van Burgen, . 20 00 

Mrs. Abmbrnn Van Dyck, . 90 00 



Punnett, 
Eliphalet Wickes, Jnn. 
by Eliphalet Wickes, Esq. 
their grandlkther, 
Madison, Madison co., Rev. Mtn 
Foote, by " Ladies Tr. and 
sewing Society,** . ' • 
New-York City, C. De Forest, 
Lockwood De Forest, 
Thomas R. Grant, by a friend, ' 
ICornelius Heyer, . 
Obadiah Holmes, 
John D. Keese, • 
Dr. Williaqi Rockwell, 
J<^ Steward, Jun. 
James Snydam, 

Patterson, Rev. Epenettfs P. Be- 
nedict, by Ladies (in full of 
$20.) .... 
Ponghkeepsie, Rev. C. C. Cuyler, 

D. D. by a member of his ch. 20 00 

Abraham Varick, Henry D. Va- 

rick, James L. Varick, John 

R. Varick, Dr. Richard A. 

Varick, Theodore R . Varick, 

by theis father Mr. John V. B. 

Varick, . . . 120 00 

Schagticoke, Rensselaer co. Dr. 

Ezfikiel Baker, by Presb. ch. 

Schenectady, Dr. Archibald 

Craig, (Foreign,) 

<' Jonathan Crane, do. 

** Dr; J. C- Maguffin, by 

himself and two friends, do 

" Rev. J. Van Vechten, by 

himself and G. A. Ooth- 

out, do. 

« Giles T. Yates, by himself, 

and Joseph. C. Yates, do. 

Troy, Stephen W. Dana, 

" Mrs. Stephen W.Dana, by 

her husband, . . • 
" Henry R. Lane, by his 
brotherrid-law, J. T. Mc- 
' Conn, .... 
** Mrs. Catharine Lyman, by 
her brother Charles Ljrman, 
■ for Bombay, . 
** Mrs. John T. McCoun, by 

her husband, (Foreign,) 
" RobettD.SUIiman, 
" Eugene P. Stevenspn, 
*» Mrs. Lucy Weed, by her 

husband, 

Trumansburff, Herman Camp, 
Waterford, Rev. Reuben Smith, 
by Ladies, 



20 00 

20 00 
90 00 

20 00 



20 00 

20 00 
S^OO 

20 00 



20 00 



90 00 

90 00 
25 00 
90 00 

90 00 
90 00 

90 OQ 



1B82.] 



ABOEIPTS' 



47 



N. JERSEY^lforrittiywB, Rev. 
Charles Hoover, by Ladies, SO 

PriBceton, Conlandt Van Rens- 
selaer, • • . . 90 
*' Robert Voorhees, . SO 

** Mrs. Gertrude WoodhuU, 
by Ladies of Rer. Mr. ■ 
WoodhvU's Soeiety, . 90 

PE NNSYLVANIA. — Philadel- 
T4iia, Rer. Ezra Stiles Ely, 
D. D by a clergyman of the 
Prot. fipis. ch. Philadelphia, 
for Tracts for Greece, . 90 
** James Leslie, (Foreign,) HO 
** Rev. Thomas McAuIey, D.D. SO 

MARYLAND.T— Baltimore, Dr. 
Samuel Baker, (Foreif it,) 90 

DIS. COL— Washington City Rev. 
Wm. Hawley, by a clergy- 
man of Prot. Epis. ch. Philad. 
for Tracu for Greece, . SO 

VntGINIA Auffusta co., Mrs. 

Elisabeth Hendren, by 
Mossy Creek and Union 
Congregations, 90 

'* Harrisonburg, Mrs. Kilpat- 
rick, by ch- and cobg. 90 

GEO. — Athens, Clark co.. Rev. 
Dr. Church, by citizens, . 90 
« Rev. N. Hoyt, by do. . SO 

Lexington, Joseph Troop Lump- 
k'n. by his father, 90 

ALABAMA.— Limestone coi Rev. 
Robert Donnell, by sundry 
individuals, Beach-HUI, Jack- 
son, CO. Tenn. 90 

Annual Subsiiiiber, 

N. YORK.— Niw-York City, Dr. 
Luke Barker, . . 9 

Other Donatioiu. 
VERMONT^.— Montpelier, Soci- 

ety of Rev. Samuel Hopkins, 93 
MASSACHUSETTS. — New- 
Marlborough, Harley Good- 
win, .... 3 
** A School Instructress, . . 9 
Worthinglton, Ezra Stark weather, 5 
CONNECTICUT.— Remitted by 

Rev. Thomas Cochran, Agent, 5 
Green's Farms, individuals, . 5 
Hartford, Anonymous, (avails of 

breastpin,) . '. ^ I 

Litchfield, a few Ladies, . 6 
New-Haven, Mrs. Joanna Lathrop, 1 
New-London, Baptist Society, 
for Burman Mission, 7 

** Cbagreiational Society, . 47 
Norwalk, Sundry individ. by hsinds 

of Mr. Alfred Mallory, . 100 
Stamford, A. Davenport, $5, Theo- 
dore Davenport, Esq. $10, 
Rev. Daniel Smith, $S, sundry 
individuals, $8 9S, . 98 

aumkagttM, Sudiv Aea dm phy- 
sidan, .... 5 



West-Graenwick, Rev. Joel 

Mann's Society, 
Wdst-Haven, Mrs. Angelina 

00 N. YORK.— Albany, First Presb. 
ch. $50, Peter Boyd, $5,Wm. 
James, $5, Fifth Presb. ch. 
$7 50, J. C. Robie, $1, A. 
Piatt, $1, an infont $1* 

Almond, Alleghany co. J. Carr, 
** Stephen M^jor, 

Cambridffe, Presb. ch. $5, Riia- 
sel Norton, $si, 
OOJClinton, ** Social Circle," 
00 Coxsackie, Sundry individuals, 

Lansingburgh, Presb. church, . 

Middle-island, L. t. Rev. Ezra 
King, .... 

New-Hartford, Mrs. D. Marsh, 
(deceased,) 

New- York City, A IKend to the 
Heathen, (Foreign,) 

Freech. in Dey-st. Lewis Tap- 
pan, Esq. Treasurer, . . 

The foOnriiur $10 <«M, S. M. 
Chester, Sanford Cobb, Cor- 
nelius Dubois and Co. Perez 
Jones, James Trippe, John F. 
Trippe, Wm. Van Antwerp, 
William Walker, Rev. J. D. 
Wickham, 

The following $5, eocft, Mrs. (}eo. 
^bdwi^, Gaius Fenn, John 
L. Graham, D. M. Halsted, 
Stephen B. Munn, L. Nash, 
J. B. Pinneo, 

R. M. Hartley, $9, Mr. Rich- 
ardson, $3, Wm. H. Bige- 
low, $1, Miss Alexander, 
50 cts. Cash $5, do. 95cts. 
a friend, $50, do. $5, do.$l, 
do. 75cts. do 50cts. Si G. for 
Messrs. Robertson & Hill in 
Greece, $B, £. & J. Bussing, 
$S0, Infknt Sunday ScImmh, 
No. 96, $l,Geo. C. Lamb, SOc. 

Otisco, Lydia H. Cowles, 



00 
00 



00 



0( 



00 



00 



95 

00 

00 
00 

00 



00 



00 



67 



00 



00 



94 9S 

leoo 



70 so 
900 
9 00 

700 

300 

80 00 

500 

950 

300 

500 00 

30 59 



90 00 



35 00 



00 Sand Lake, R. J. Knowlaon, 



Schenectady. A Lady, 

The Jolitnrimg $5, each, J. J. 

DegraA James Walker, 'S. 

—I Buldwin, Dr. Vrankeu, O. 

^ McQueen, B. J. Myndhurat, 

2^J Ward & Ross, « 

^Yrkrte doUare each^ D. Boyd, Pe- 
ter C. Clute, T.L. Thomson, 
P. H. Furman, Dr. A. G. 
Funds, .... 
The followimg. $9, each, Jbhn 
Strong, Dr. A. Underwood, 
Wm. Strong, Wm. Lyman, 
J. Matthews, J. Lyons, Rev. 
Wm. James, Treasurer of 
Tract Seeiety , Albert Browa, 

Oms doUiar emeK P'Smith, Dr. T. 
Dnnlap, Cash, C. Oroot, J. 



89 



00 

70 
30 



95 

00 



97 50 

500 

SO 

90 0$ 



35 00 



15 0$ 



4» 



BSeiVPTSb 



lAprif. 



Pricey W. W. Treiwtj, F. 
Fisk, S. Row, J. OUas, M. 
. Vh» GwriiM, P. Prove, Mr. 
Sander*, A. Mynderee, J. De 
Forwl, A. Vw Saalbrd, W. 
CnnniMhaiii, Mrs. Browo, C 
Lyon, J. Kelly, M. Tafpaa, 
B.ev. Mr. McMaatars, N. Good- 
ail, 8. Rom, Caleb Lyan, Jhin. 
Charlee Lyo«, 9&m 

H. Lyon, 2Scti. Widmr*a auley 

6cta. .... 9k 

All the above] dmiatioiia liraai 
Schenectady tot (For. Mil.) 

8tiUwater« Mr. Eddy, 3 00 

Ttw—»ThefaUinnmg $10, «mA> 
Mrs John A. Hall, T. W. 
Blatchford,.8. T. Aiatchford, 
E. Nott Tucker, LoreiUBo D. • 
Baker, P. 8. Redfield, Mirs. 
Joee^kue Brookway, • 
**• Mrs. George VaU, |5, Mrs. 
R. H. Fifeeh, $5, Mr. Geo. 
Fry^ $15, Cyrus Dt Sheldon, 
£mi.$3, ... V 

£M« do/lar «aeA, vis, Mrs. Card, 
three Misses Phelps, John Tay* 
lor, H. Hawey, ». Wasson, 

Cash, $3, do.$l. 

The above doBations*liroin Troy, 
for (For. Distribution,) 

N. JERSEY.—Princeton, twelve 
pupils to academy, 
** Edge Hill Seminary, 
" John Van Doren, . 

7ft« foUowing $5, eacA, Rev. 
A. Alexander, D. D. Rev. 
Samuel Miller, D. D. Rev. 
George 8. Woodhull, C. M. 
Campbell, Rev. ¥tc£. Hodge, 
James Van D^enttr, h JL 
Talflsage, Cash, 40 00 

David Hulash, $4, John Lowrey, 
$3, Geow M. Maclean, $3, Rev. 
John Maclean, $S» Mrs. Hol- 
- Iin8head,41t Mrs. Hicks. SOc. 
C. H, Vancleve, $f , Mvs. B. 
Skillman, $1, A. 8tryker,> 
StOcts. Flora Van TintB,50et8. 
' Mary Salter, SOcts. Noah 
Greeff, SOcts. Cash $2 13, a 
friend, $5, . . . 83 68 

PENNSYLVANU.-Philadetphia, 
Mrs. Blame's Family Am- Bur^ 
man Miaaion, $40 50. Tk» 
JbUowing for For, DioL 
Mrs. Harvey, $5, Mr. Hat-> 



70 00 



18 00 



7 00 
4 00 



3 00 
30 06 
10 00 



ieM, $10) ftw Li«ea, $»^ 
E. M. Jones, SOcts. Daaiel 
Winebreoner, $$» W. W. 
Wright, $10, Jamea Anat, 
$10CaBh$S,do.$S,R.Flem. 1 
ing, $10, W. Johasaii, $5,C. 
Tugley, $S, Mrs.Araat, $3, 
Vnknown, $17, 140 0$ 

Isaac McAul^y, $10, Henry Kkw- 
aer, $10, Adam Beatty, $>« 
Mrs. BacoQr $3, Heary Bond, 
$5, James Wilson, $5^ Cask 
$8, P. Peltz, $5, Mkbael Reed^ 
$5, Cash $S, do. $S, Mrs. Al. J 
beet Barnes, $10, a young lar- 
dy, $10, Elisha Weils, $5, J. 
SeUers, $3, Mra.8aBf«rd,$5, 
Rev.' O. R. Livingston, D. Q. 
$5, John P. Myers, SOcts. 
Cash $3 S5, a lady $10, Cash 
$3, Samuel Hood, $5, . 115 75 

VIRGINIAw— Remitted br Aev. 

T. B. Hurlbut, Agent, 8 4S 

Port RefNiblie, RocUagham oo. 

.individuals,^ t , . -5 33 

GEORGIA.~.Athens» Clark o» 
William Dearinff, $10, Mr. 
Loyd, $i, B- B. Hopkins, for 
Burmiah, $5, E. L. Newton, 
for do. $3, Mrs. Mary Nisbet 
for do. $^ Mrs. Jane Sib- 
bald, $1, 

Bath, Richmond co. Monthly Con- 
tribution, (For. Dis.) 
Madison, T. S. N. King, $3, 
Rev. Dr. Church, $4, 

Mount Olivet, (Columbia go. Miia 
Matilda Harris, for Burmah, 
Miss Mary Hill, for dck. 

Washington, Wilks cu. ** Fem> 
Working Society" (For. 1Kb.) 

Andrew 6. Sims. $10, Miss Mary 
Banham, (For.) SOcto. Wm. 
W. Smith, for Burmah, $3; 
A. L.' Alexander,. $10, A. H» 
Gibson, $1, Miss Mary E. 
Camels, (For.) $3, 

OHIO.— Bluomiug Grove, Fay- 
ette CO. Young, Mpns* Prayer 
Meeting Soc. $3, A. Steele, 
$1, A. Stewart, $1, H. C. 
Stewart, $1, James Stewart, 
$1, .6 0$ 

Hanover, Licking co. three La- 
dies, for Burmah, 5 $$ 

^XIN(HS. — Palestine, EdvrardI 
H. Piper, for Bannah, 



31 00 

7 50 

7110 

10 0$ 
1$ 0$ 

500 



35 5$ 



35$ 



The above list contains donations— 

For Foreign Distribution, (including $109 93, for Bnrman 
Mission, and $48, for Messrs. Robertson and Hill, in Greece^ $3 70 64 



Whole amount of d<Hiations, 
Received for Trmcta sold. 



$6,063 71 
1,750 65 



Total $»,348 44 



THE AMEBICAN 

OL. Til. ^ KtAV, leaa. no 



«, . Bee Ihn labtel, Vraa N«. Hffl. 

RESPONBE TO THE FOKEIGN APPROPRIATIONS. 

OoB d«Rr Brollicc CoIinelhu, when jost entering on bis Whon fur 
Foreign Miaaioiu, lemBiked, that. God seemed preparing the v/aj fcr 
a creat work among the Heathen — wide Gelds of uaefulneai were 
openiDg — young men were coming Forward ss laborers — and he woa 
especiaElf encouraged by the fact, thai the BiNe Sotitty aat ngu en- 
liiling ill tner^a to JumM BitUi, and Ike Tract Sociily lo /vmiih 
SVaeli. 

The SecreUriei of the Ameiicin Board of Foreign Missions, (he 
Bapliat Qeneral Convention, Ibe Episcopal Domestic and Foreign 
Miaaion Society, and the Agent of the United Brethren, on receiving 
the antiDun cement of granit for Tract operations at the stations 
under their cue respaclivaly, have relumed the iqosI gratifying ei- 
preisions of (he encouragenient thereby aflbrded ibem in Ibeir ar- 
duous labors. 

Vol. Vlt. S Wholi No. 74 



50 TRACTS FOR THE HEATHEN. L^ff 

It is also a delightfut fact, in ProTidence, that, on annonndng the 
appropriations, it i^as found, vessels were preparing to saU for aU the 
tUUicns, A Iftrge portion Of tbe grants are already 09 their waj, 
and the remainder will be sent, at farthest, within a yety few weeks. 



REV. DE. MILNE'S TESTIMONY TO THE VALUE OF TRACTS IN 

HEATHEN LANDS. 

" Great," says this lamented missionary, by whose eflbrts^ in con- 
nection with Pr, Morrison and others, 93 TraQt^bfld'been printed in 
Chinese, and' 4 in the Malay, as early as 1823 — ** great are our obli- 
gations, to the Tract Society ; and^^^eai ift the. necessity t1|at exists 
m these pagan lands, for the ezcroiso of its- bei»efi)eeiice» Tracts are 
soon read through^ and easily carried about with onew They niay be 
circulated more widely than the. sacred Scriptures can. If we calcu- 
late either the price, or tbe persona c8|iahle of deriving profit &om 
religious books among the Chinese, we shall find that JC/Ky Tracts 
may bie given away for th^ expense of one New Testament. A Mis- 
sionary among the Heathen, can carry. a hundred Tracts in hisha,nd ; 
and hf ! will ever find great satis&ction, in leaying a,n appropriate one 
in the house where he has been visitiug; or in putting one into the 
hands oi those with whom he has been conversing; or dropping one 
in thcihighway, where i^ is likely to be taken up by some passing 
stranger; or in reading and exploinins; one to those who are mcfined 
to hear. The Tract Society is a most import4nt Auxiliary in the work 
of converting the Heathen to Christ ; and though, in comparison with 
Missionary and Bible Societies, it holds, in some respects, a. lower 
place; in other respects its utility is more immediate, more extensive, 
and mor^ apparent." 



TRACT MEETING IN DR. BEHAN'S CHURCH, TROY. 

The claims of the Tract cause having been presented by tberRer. S. 
Woodbridge, Agent ; a meeting of the Congregation was held in the 
Lecture Room, when the following resolutions were unanimously 
adopted : viz. 

'* Jle»olvedf Thvit we view the Gospel of Christ so ipestimable a blesaing^, that in 
comparisoB with the knowledge of it all the silver and gold in the universe is not 
worthy to be named. 

'• Resolvedj That the way is prepared in Divine Providence to give the know- 
ledge of the Gospel by the press to many millions of the human race, who, unlem 
a gpeedf and eiiicient effort be made on the part of Christians,, must sink upen- 
lightened and consequently tmconverted into eternity. 

** Resolved, That we show our eratititde to God for his great goodtaess in opening 
so wide a door for the difl^sion 01 religious kiiowledge in heathen lands, by a joyftil 
surrender of such a portion of the property with which God has entrusted us, ac- 
cording to our ability, as may be necessary to meet the wants of the dying heathen. 

**.JU»0lvedi That we esteem it an unspeakable privilege to be co-workers witjh 
God in ektending the influence of the Gospel throughout the world, and thus saving 
from endless death, the souls for which the infinitely glorious Jesus shed his blootT- 

** ReMiUfed, That the. more we possess of the Spirit of Christ the more slwU w« 
be disposed to labor in this field of heavenly benevolence. 

*' Resolvedf That we deeply sympathize with the thousands of heatfaeo, who, ia 



iftMr nad«ty wiA Mqwdt tft tlMir «t«iraia dMUny, ve Ignonift ofllM Loid torn 
CIJiM, tfaroofh the kiMwladge^of whoa atone they can escape the wrath to come.'* 

Between $700 and f800 were subecribed at the meeting, and a 
Oommittee appointed to increase the amount by soliciting donations 
from members of the congregations not then present. 



AID FROM NEW-JERSEY. 

In connection with the eflbrts of Rev. 0. Eastman, donations and 
sabscriptions have been ipade in Newark to the amount of $1,000; 
in Princeton, to upward of #400; and in New-Brunswick about 
f too ; most of wiiicn has been paid. 



MONTHLY TRACT DISTRIBUTION IN LIVERPOOL. 

This sjretem, first adopted in New- York, had been prosecuted for 
fourteen months by the Liverpool Religious Tract Society, on pre- 
eentiaff their seventeenth Refiort. The town is divided into 23 dis- 
tricts, 18 of which have been wholly or pextially occupied. W'hole 
number of distributers 99. Average number of Tracts distributed 
monthly 18,500. Total circulated during the last year 388,000. All 
the prominent arguments which have commended this system of eflbrt 
to the consciences of Christians in the United States, are forcibly 
urged by the Liverpool Society^the fact that the great mass of the 
population are lamentably destitute of religious instruction — that 
there are many thousands whom the ordinances of the Gospel do not 
reach-^and that ^e Ttatts are an intibdtzction to conversation on 
the concerns <ff etenity, cafiing sinners to the perusal of the Word 
cfGod,&c 

JFWmi a later qf Mr, SamuU Bope, SecrOary if the LioerpoU RdigUnu 

Tr&etaoeMff, 

V 

** Your reports and the communications with which yon have fa- 
vored us are well calculated to sharpen diligence and to rebuke sloth 
and inactivity ; and he has just reason to fear that his heart is not as 
it should be, who can read these publications and see what yon are 
doing, without being moved to the inquiry, whether he himself has 
done what he could. 

*' Your preratmns for the best Essays on ^ven subjects must do 
much good. The subjects are in general very jndiciously diosen, and 
the influenee of such an invitation to co-operate for the general good 
cannot fail to be extensively felt. ^Here, you are even steiuing a march 
upon the enterprising and zealous body of the friends who coro'pose 
Che London Religious Tract Society. They will not, however, envy 
your prosperity n you should go much further, and eclij>se all their 
doings. In a world still lying m wickedneoB, there is abundant scope 
for the exertions of all. 

" The conquests made over the woiks of Satan by means of your 
Temperance Societies, aided as they have been by the distribotion of 
Tracts in eveiy nart of your Union, calling public attention to the 
fiightfol havoc ordram-cmnking on the moral and physical characte/ 



92 VISIT TO TB£ isti: OF WIGHT. [May^ 

of your people, have, at lenffth, in iome measore, though atill very 
iraperfectly, roused the pubuc here to eone corresponding exertions 
to stem the torrent which here, as well as with you, is capying deso- 
lation wherever it rolls along its resistless sway. This vice is oae of 
the most crying sins of our land ; and 1 am pained to add, that up to 
the present day, it is greatly en the increase, as our public and official 
documents incontestably prove.'* 



IPfFLUENCE OP A TRACT IN FRANCE. 

At the last anniversary of the Paris Religious Tract Society, (which 
circulated during the year nearly 450,000 Tracts,) M. Martin, Juo., 
of Bordeaux, greatly sinected the meeting by the following statement : 
I knew a man, who was an enemy of the Soeiety, and who was its 
enemy because he did not believe the Divinity of Christ. He read a 
Tract on this subject — ^yonr Tract entitled, " Scriptural Viewt of Jesus 
Christ."" This reading, entered on in sincerity and as in the presence 
of God, was the means of his conversion. He now adores the Savior 
as his Lord and his God. This man is known to a great number of 
persons here present— it is his happiness to make this confession be- 
fore you — it is he who is permitted at this moment thus to ad- 
dress you ! 



VISIT TO THE ISLE OP WIGHT. 

This beautiful Island was visited in July, 1831, by Dr. Ives of Ne^- 
Vork, in company with Rev. Mr. Green of Boston, and Professor 
liovey of Amherst Cfollege. Proceeding from Bath, they "passed 
over the almost boundless expanse of Salisbury Plmn^^ where they 
tound here and there '< the small hut, the solitary shepherd, with his 
staff or erook, and his active little dog watching his flock" — all in 
perfect keeping with the interesting narrative in the Tract by Han- 
nah More. 

The natural scenery of the Isle of Wight is described by Dr. Ives 
as unparalleled in beautjr. They visited the grave of the Dairyman^ 
Daughter, " A dozen children were eager to lead the way to it, and 
the well-trodden footpath" showed it was '^ visited by great num- 
bers." The length other grave indicates that she was above the 
ordinary stature. Beside it is the grave of Hannah, her jsisler, who 
died in 1800, aged 27. Elizabeth died the May following, the mother 
the next September and the father in 1816^ 

They then visited the Dairyman's cottage, passing through the 
most delightful scenery. A small garden lies in front of the house 
filled with shrubbery. They entered by a small eate, and a few steps, 
by a winding foot-path, brought them to the door, where they were 
met by a female about 50 years old. " Walk in," said she. " Is this 
the house where the Dairyman's Daughter lived ?" " Yes, Sir, that 
is Elizabeth's brother^he is my husband," pointing to a man now 
60 years old, sitting in a chair with his feet on a smalfbench, and who 
has been an invalid for many years. They spoke of Elizabeth a^o- 
tionat^ly, and evinced much gratitude to Mr. Richmond, whose print* 



Itt2.] fiftA m UCKSTBLY DOTKlBimON. 83 

<Bd miiiMMre, tn t. pNifi cheap 'framo, was aoapended over the fite- 
place. Upon the inside of the cover of Elizabeths Bible^ her name 
Was written with her own hantl. 

** The cottage^" says Di». I., ** is hut one story hi|[h^-«ld and wea- 
ther-worn w^out, aiid thatched with straw* In the little garden in 
<h>nt of it, am a few thick clusters of haftle^ntits, two or three laige 
t»^ees^ a cherry tree, the limbs of which have been trained to attach 
themselves to the side of the house, and thus to ran cfver it like a vine, 
and a number of ctiliimry vegetables. The insicks is neat and com* 
fi>rtahte fpr a small ftmily. The walls wefe neatly white- washed and 
hung round with a few scriptural ptoturee, and H small book-case was 
euspended from it in one cemer of the room coalainiBg some fifteen 
or twenty religious books. A low flight of stairs led us to the cham- 
ber where the sisters died. It is divided into two equal apartments, 
each lighted by a small window in the gable end. The bed on which 
Elizabeth died was standing at the head of the stairs in the west end 
of the house, and Che family told us it had never been removed since 
her death. There are about six acres of land attached to the tene- 
ment, on which the family keep a few cows ; . and upon these they 
«tiH mainly depend for a living. We added our names to a multitude 
Mothers registered in an album kept for the purpose — gave them a 
parting gift, and loft them with many blessings." 

The grave of the Young Cottager, in Brading church-yard, was not 
visited bv this company, who passed on to Shanklin Chine, on the 
beach beiow which, Mr. Richmond had his second interview with the 
Jifiiean Servants The scenery df this spot Dr. I. describes mainly in 
the beautiful language of the Tract wftn that title. N. Y. Obt. 



AN ERA IN THE MONTHLY DISTRIBUTION. 

The monthly distributers in the 14th Ward, New- York city, liave 
•elected neailv 100 individuals as the objects of theur special prayers 
and efierts, that the^ may be converted from Uie '* error of tneir 
ways:" and many of them are reported as inquiring what they shall 
do to be saved. 

One distributer says, I felt it a duty and made it a principle, to see 
every fhttfly in my district, «nd to convene with them oo the suMect 
of personal religion. Many of them were much afiected. Five of the 
nz persons I selected are in an interesting state of nund. They wish 
me to caH often. 

Another bbjb, I never met wHh such kind reception. The Tracts 
are thankfully and joyf^ly received, and much gratitude is expressed 
that so much interest is taken in their spiritual welfare. 

Another says, one of the number be bad selected, is indulging a 
hope. 

Another says, of the five selected one was rejoicing in Clirist, and 
the minds of the remainder are deeply solemnhEed. 

Of the number selected by another distributer, one ver^ interest- 
ing case of conversion occurred. It is the case of a very ^itelligent 
young lady familiar with tbe Script«ffes. She was brought to attend 
serioui^ to the Isubjeet of her saivatioB by the fiuthfal labors of the 



5* 



64 BEAVTIFCL A3IBCD0TE. [May, 

distribater. She is now sttttng at the feet of Jesas, and desires alone 
to promote his glory. 

Another distnbuter found a poor woman with an infant only two 
or throe weeks old in a cellar, defected and discouiaged. Her hus- 
band had gone to New-Orleans—nriie was doihed with poverty, and 
almost in a state of starvation. To this woman the distributer was 
indeed an angel of mercy. She directed her to a pious ladjr, who sup- 
plied her temporal wants, and to Christ as the sinner's friend. She 
nas since found peace in believing, and she now says she would not 
exchange her cellar and poverty for a palace and royalty, if she must 
give with them her hope m Chnst 

About thirty persons are reported as having been hopefully con- 
verted the past month by the blessing of God, upon the emrts of Tract 
distributers in this city. Shall such a work cease? 



ITINERANT XJBRARIES. 

A pubtished article, from a distinguished professor in one of our 
Theological Seminaries, strongly recommencTs the establishing in this 
country of iHneron^ Libraries, on the plan recommended by Mr. Samuel 
Brown, of Haddineton, and extensively adopted in Si^iiand. Small 
libraries, each difiSring from the others, are established in several 
places, and after remaining one or two years, the readers paying a 
small sum for the use of them, each is transferred to another station. 
The reading of well selected volumes makes a deeper impression on 
the imndf than of a short. Tract, and the fact that the libniy is soon 
to be removed, becomes a motive to the diligent perusal of the vo- 
lumes while there remains the opportunity. 



BEAUTIFUL ANECDOTE. 

The Rev. Dr. M'Cartee, of New- York, in delivering an address at 
a Tract meeting in Philadelphia, related substantially the, following 
anecdote, which by request was recently repeated at a Tract meetmg 
in New- York. 

The mention of two of the publications, of the. American Ttad So- 
eiety, in your roport, Sir, (said Dr. M'C-— t->) has excited emotions in 
my own mind, which 1 cannot repress. I well remember when two 
young lawyers, both fiur from Qod, and engaged in the pursuit of the 
luzunes and wealth of this world, met in the city of New- York, whep, 
as one took some legal documents from his pocket, the other, to his 
surprise, discovered among them The Rite and Progress ((fReUgionin 
the Swl. Nor was the surprise of the first any the less, when be dis- 
covered lying on the table at the hand of his fellow, BaxUr^s Saints^ 
Rest, Each appeared at first confused and ashamed at the discoveiy, 
for they had not yet learned to glory in the cross. But a few mo- 
ments however had elapsed, when they mutually found that the at- 
tention of each had been powerfully arrested by those volumes, and 
that each was deeply anxious for the salvation of his soul. Together 
they sou^t the Lord ; and agonizing to enter into the kingdom, they 
both, at about the same time, were enabled to hope in the mercy of 



1832.] BRANCHES AND AUXILIAItlES. 65 

Josiu Ohrist for eternal life. One of tliem having fought the fight and 
kept the faith, has long since gone upward, I doubt not, to rest in the 
boeom of the Savior he loved and served — the other, called, as he be- 
lieves of God, became a preacher of the Gospel of Christ, and still 
lives to proclaim to dying sinners in his native citv, salvation through 
the blood and righteousness of the blessed Redeemer. And now, 
when he finds your Society engaged in sending forth, among your 
otiier valuable publications, these two [Mrecious volumes, he presents 
himself before you to add, this eveninff, his feeble but heartfelt testi- 
mony, to the excellence of the Tract Society. 



FOREIGN MISSIONARIES DIRECTORS FOR LIFE. 

Among the donajtions recently received for Tracts for the Heathen, 
are three of $50 each, to constitute Rev. Dr. Judson, at Burmah, Rev. 
Mr. Abeel, in China, and Rev. Mr. Reed at Bombay, du-ectors for 
life of the American Tract Society; Were these examples imitated 
by others, much aid, and in an agreeable manner, might be afiibrded 
to oiir dear brethren laboring for the conversion of the HeAthea. 



BRANCHES AND AUXILIARIES. 

Indiana Branch at MadUon. — ^First anniversary, January 19. Ad- 
dresses by Rev. W. W. Woods, and Messrs. WiUiam Yonge, and S. 
Woodbury. Receipts during the year #205 ; circulated 534,&5 pages. 
Mr.. Moses H. Wilder, Secretaj^^of the Branch, and Agent of the Ame- 
rican Tract Society, has visited 21| counties^ organized S8 Auxilia- 
ries, and arranged for supplying about 6,600 families mcntlUy with 
Tracts. The loaning system has been extensively adopted, and it is 
believed, that for the expense of one dollar, no less than 30 families 
have been supplied monthly with a Tract. The report contains nu- 
merous strikmg evidences of the usefulness of Tracts. 

The Board of the Htififmlfe JiuxiUary TVact SoeiUy haVe resolved 

fratuitously to distribute thia year 60,000 pages Tracts and 20,000 
landbHlsor Broadsheets; and to supply every Sabbath school in 
North Alabama, on application, with 1000 pages. They also recom- 
mend the general formation of Tract Societies throughout North 
Alabama. 

East Tetmasee Tract Socuty, KnoxmUe, — Twelfth anniversary, De- 
cember 5. Receipts, 1120 23; circulated 90^677 pages, and an edi- 
tion of the Christian Almanac; Auxiliaries 29. The Female Auxi- 
liary of KnoxvUlehave faithfully sustained the Monthly Distribution 
durmg the year ; and received donations to the amount of the same 
wanting only two dollars. * 

MxiUaryf Satetn, .Yl C— Fifth anniversary, February 28. Distri- 
buted near 50,000 pages. Donation to Parent- Society |25. The re- 
pot^ evinces Enlarged desires for the conversion of the world to Christ. 

JhtaaUaryj Pettrsburg, Fa.— Sixth anniversary, April 2. Receipts, 
f 105 40; distributed SBfifS pages, making 501,089 pages, since the 



86 Mfiw TRACtfl. IMay, 

foftHation of the SocieCy. The iMMthly dittiibution is snstaiMd in 
Petersbarg by the Female Tract Societj. 

JiuBSimy, TVoy, JV*. F.-^Fifteenth annif enary, iammry, 18S9. Aud- 
liariee IS. Distribofed monthly 316,886 pagei, to Sunday and other 
flehoois 43,000, Yessels 45,000, Tempeioaee Sooietiee 50,000— total 
454,196. The monthly distribotion is pioeecuted with vigor. *' The 
Tract Do yea %»tad a JWeml ? after proving efficadoas, in the 3d Ward, 
to the salvation of one soal, was sent to a relsAive in the ooontry, to 
whom it was'idso blessed^ as he humbly trusts, in the salvation of 
his souL" 



. BAPTIST GENERAL TRACT SOCIETY. 

Fourteen new Tracts have been issued durine the last year, making 
the whole nmnber 11& Receipts, $4,506; pnnted 385,106 Tracts, 
containing 6^000,160 pages ; circulated 4^677,930. A penodieal Tract 
of 94 pages islssned monthly, besides 1500 copies of the BapM Tract 
Msijiasitte. The Society has 6 Branch Societies, and S80 Aanliariea 
on Its list. The report •contains numerous instances of the usefidness 
of Tracts. 



17 See Interestiog I>onatioii8 and Progress of Monthly Distribution on the cover. 



NEW TRACTS WILL BE ISSUED EARLY IN HAY. 

No. 264. ISaoRon Lovbll.— pp. IS. An authentic, well-written 
history (under a borrowed name) of a cluld of prayer, who in his 
youth and through most of his college course, lived a life of foHy and 
dissipation— was then converted to God— and becaiiie a devoted and 
successful minister of Christ From the pen of Rev, Joshua N. Dan* 
forth, of Washington City. 

No. 965. DuTiBS ov Chuuch Mbsbsrs.— pp. 13. Written by Rev. 
Thomas H. Skinner^ D. D., Philadelphia. An instructive Tract, 
showing theii' duties m referience to their pastor— to one anotheiv-. 
public ordmances-Hspreading the Gospel, ic: 

No. 366. Blind Bbtset^ or ConFORT por the AfmcTBD. An 
authentic narrative— pp. 12i (L.) Presenting an example, not only 
of meekness and patience, but of joy and triumph in God, during 15 
years of extreme affliction and sufierin^. - • 

No. 267. The Infidel. An authentic Narrative.— pp. 4. Wtit- 
ten by Rev. William WiSner, D. D., Rochester, N. Y. A most into* 
resting and instructive history of the conversion of a decided Infidf I 
to the faith of Christ. 

No. 368. To the Confident, the DiffidenV, and the Care* 
&B88.— 9p. 8. (L.) In which each of these classes are addressed with 
great seriousness, propriety, and force. 

No. 369. Shall i come to the Lord's Svpfer ?— pp. 8. Written 
by Rev. Benjamin P. Aydelott, CipcinnatL A very serious, afiec- 
tionate, and Evangelical reply to this inquiry, as presented by ayoun|^ 
friend — showing that savinc conversion to God is ah essential requi* 
site, and that it is the privilege and duty of all whose hearts are re* 
newed, to come to this ordinance. 



1682.J 



J1CGEIPT8. 



57 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIEl^Y 



ng the numlh «imKv ^prtt 15, 1832. 

. FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 
VERMONT.-^-Oeo»ia, Henry H. BaUard, Traararer, 
Kiiint09, Reuben Jenne, Secretai^, . . • . 
Marlboroaffh Female, Huldah C. IVewton, Agent, 

Salubnry, W. MiOer,Arent, 

MASSACHUSETTS^Lonff Meadow, George Reynolds, Tr. 
Middlefield, General David Maek, Jun., Agent, 
Springfield, Henry KirkhAm, Treaanrer, ... 
RHODE-ISLAND.— Bristol, Female, Miaa Hannah Cbwdi, See 
CONNECTICUT^Darien, Charles Whitney, Traasurer, 
East Haddam.-.-Femal«i, Mrs. S. B. Parsons, Agent, . 

GoillbrdvHenry E.Hodges, Agent, 

Hartford, Conneeticut Branch, Charles Hooner, Secretary, 
Huntington, William Mills, Treasurer, . 
JVew-HaTen, J. L. Cross, Agent, 

Do. Female, Mrs. Henrietta F. Whitney, Treasurer, 
Norwalk, Alfred Mallory, Treasurer, < , *^ 

Norwich City, F. A. Perkins, Esq. Treasurer,- 
Ridgefield, J. A. Scott, Agent, ... 
Saybrook, Amos Sheffield, Agent, .... 

(Miaron, Charles F. Sedgwick, 8e«relary, . . . 
West Greenwich, Solomon Mead, Secretary, 
NEW-YORK^AubvD, Clark B. Hotehkiss, Agent, 
Bethlehem, (Salisbury Mills, P.O.) Robert Denniston, Treasurer, 
Bridgebampton, L. I., Rer. Amzi Francis, President, 
Catskill, Edgar B. Day, Treashrer, . 

Do. Female, Miss Jane'G.Sayre, Treasurer, 
Chatham, Columbia County, Hoses RayBK»d, Treasurer, 

Do. Female, Mrs. Catharine Hutchinson, Secretary, . 
Dashnile Falls, Female, Mrs. Jane A. Butler, Secretary, 
East Granville, Female, Lucy Savage, Treasurer, 
Hoahen, Orange county. Dr. 4[. S; Cranei Tr< 



Harlaemi, Female, MimLaatida, Doughy, Treasurer, 
Hopeville, Otsego county, William Clarfc, Treasurer, 
Hopewell, Female, Apn R. Swartwout, Treasurer, . 
Lansingburgh, E. Parmelee, Secretary, .... 
Merideth, Delaware couiity, . . ... 

New- York Citv Tract Society, Alflred Edwards, Treasurer, 
Do. by Female Branbh, Mrs. E. B. Lethbridge, Treasurer 
which $50 is appropriated to constitute Rev. David Abeel, 
sionary» a Life Director of American Tract Society, . 
Rye, Female, Ann B.Buckley, Secretary, . . 
Scienceville, Greene county, Julia A.'Ives, Preaidentt 
SianeyPlains,HuffhC. Johnston, Secretary, 
Sweet Hollow, in Huntington, John Everett, Treasurer, 

Troy, Charles Lyman, Treasurer, 

Windsor, Broome county. Deacon Marcus Sage, Secretary, 
NEW-JERSEY.-«Baskingridge, Horace Sheldon, Tressurer, 
Bloomfield, Juvenile, Robert R . Kellogg, Secretory, / 
Marksbor Congregation, Gratitude, P. O., 
Peterson, Edward Sexton, Secretary, • . . . . 
Perth Amboy, Female, Mrs. Margaret |laurice, Treasurer, 
Pompton Plains, Female, Margaret Berry, Treasurer, . 
Somerville, Female, Ann M. Grriffith, Treasurer, 
Woodbridge, JPemale, H. B. Barttm, Seiiretary, (for BurmahJ 
PENNSYLVANIA.^HolmeslNirg, WiUiem Bartonlett,Ag«Kt, 
Philadelphia Branch, Frederick T. Erringer, Treasurer, 
MARYLAND.^Hagerstowa Fem., Mrs.Rebeoca L. Martin, 
DIS. COL.'-Alexandri*, Female, Mrs. E. S. Ladd, Secretary, 
ViR GINIA.-^Ftrny iltoj Major Johv Kw% Tre^rarer, 



ForTr: 



300 

934 

53 38 

54 00 
S56 
5 69 
5 79 

800 00 

494 

14 00 

4 39 

5 74 
138 94 

8 75 
878 
900 

9 76 
37 63 

7 95 
960 
660 
640 
00 
00 
99 

6 81 
94 
69 

900 
895 



mis- 



Sec. 



4 
9 



6 
1 



9 70 
917 95 



163 67 
903 

8 00 
J6 00 

100 00 
10 97 

9 40 
6 14 

600 

94 

450 

500 

•7 50 
300 00 
13 00 
85 00 
98 40 



Don. 

10 00 

1 00 

1 00 

909 



13 00 
681 

10 48 
60 00 

14 00 



169 



300 

97 85 



50 00 
300 



10 
9 00 

19 00 

99 00 

9^ 

197 



lis 



BE0E1PT8. 



[Itoy, 



Petersburg, Charles p. Jamts, Secretary, . . . < 
RiohoMBd, Charles Holt, Jiin., Treasurer, •„*.,• 
Shady Grove, Brunswick county, B. B. Wilkes, ProsiAeiit, 
Winchester, Daniel Gold, Treasurer, ' • , * ^. L,»^^i^ v 
Do. by their Auxilia^, BarrisoriMinr, (Pureign Dnlnbot^m,) 
Do. by do. do. Smithfield, ielferson. county, . 
NCHtTH-CAROLINA.— Greensborough, (Guilford Co. Aux.) 
Loaisburch Female, Harriet B. Bobbitt, {Secretary, 
Milton, Martin P. Huntingrton, Secretary, . . . • 
Oxford, Rev. Joseph Labaree, . • • ^ • . . ^. . 

Raleigh, contributed by Mr. John Pnuroae, to re-estabhah thew 

Depository, 
8alem,WiUiain 



ForTr* 
11 00 

5 00 
31 50 



,18 46 
90 00 

4 00 

151 00 



Salisbury, Michael ^rown,Taaa«irer, . . . V »' ' 

SOUTH-CAROLINA.— Charleston, So«th GaxQluia Branch, R«r. 



35 00 



Dan. 
900 



500 
30O 



95 00 



Josqnh Buown, President, 

ALABAJfA—Huntsville, Samuel Goltart, Agent, 

MISSISSIPPI ~N»tchez, G. Tichenor, Esq., Treasurer, 
TENNESSEE.— Knoxville, James Park, Treasurer, ^ • • 
ILENTUCKY;— Richmond, Female, Elifa ». CnldwaW, Secretary, 

OHIO ^Dover, Asher Cooley, Treasurer, •.'•„♦ 

Hudson, (PorUge County Aux.) Prof. Elismr Wright, Treasurer, 
PaiasviUe, Silas Pepoon, Secretary, . -.• 

tr. WEST. TER.— Prairie Du Chien, Gen. Joseph M. Str«et, Sec. 
SOCIETIES NOT AVXldiARY. . _ 

MASSACHUSETTS.— Amherst, (We«t Parish,) Female, Miss H 
Shcpard, Treasurer, (Foreign Dittributiim,). » • 

CONNECTKXTT.— Meriden, . . . . • • • 

NEW-YORK.— Cooperstdwn,. H.S.Bradford, Treasurer, . 
NOVA SCOTIA— Halifox, Edmund A. CraWley, Secretary, . 
Tracts sold at the Depository to individuals, (iacludmg 914 61 
from an Agent in Ohio, ' * > • • • ' 



30 €0 
100 00 

flOOOP 
160 00 



1 50 

13 (K) 

944 

750 



4 00 

16 00 

560 81 



50 00 

5 oa 



300 
350 
350 



13 00 
28 50 



50 
100 



Direetors for Life, 

N. HAMP._Keene, Rev. Z^S. 

Barstovlr, by his ch. ahd eong. 950 
MASS.— Middiefield, D. Mack, 

Esq., 10<> 

R. ISL.— Providence, Nicholas 
Brown, Esq., (in part for per • 
petuating Pilgrim's Pr^grois,) 100 
CONN.— Danbury, Rev. Anson 

Rood, by his elk and OMg. 
Fairfield, Rev. John H. Hunter, 
bykdies, ....... 

Litchfield, Hon. B. Tallmadge, 
Monroe, Rev. Daniel Jones, by 
his ch. and cong. (in full of 950,) 
Norwich, Rev. James T. Dicken- 
son, by Aux. Tf act Society, . 
Gardiner Greene, (fnt Bur- 
mah, in addit. to 92,000) 950, 
William P. Greene, Jun., 950, 
James Lloyd Greene, 9^, by 
their father Wm. P. Greene, 

.Esq 

Rtdgeaekl, Rev. Charles G. Sel- 
leck, by his ch. and oeog. . . 
Stoningten, Rev. Joseph Whit- 
tlesey, by Lad. Ben. Soc. and 
individuals, (in fbll of 950.) . 
V^ilton, Rev. Samuel Merwin, 
(in part of 950,) by ladies, . « 



00 
00 

00 
50 00 



00 
00 



SO 00 
50 06 



tt 



it 



150 
50 



00 
00 



N. YGtRK.— Bainbridffe, JabezS. 
Fitch, in part for perpetuating 
Baxter's CaU, ...... 

New-York City, J. Boorman, ^aq. 

Miss Martha Hallock, by her fa- 
ther, Rev. William A. Hallock, 
(in full of 950,) . . . . . 

Capt. Silas Holmes 

Rev. Heman Norton, by Union 
Presbyterian Church, * . . 

Pelatiah'Perit,(Por.Dis.) . . 

Charles Starr, '. 

B.L.Woolley, (For.Dis.) . . 

Oxford, Chienango county, Rev. 
James Abell, by Lad. Ben. Soc. 
and several gent, (in tuU of 950,) 

N. JpR.— LawrenceviUe, Rev. 
Henry Axtell, by his ch. and 
cong.'(inftill(^950,) • • . 

Newark, Jesse Baldwin, Jun. . . 

BURMAH.— Rev. Adoniram Jud- 
son, D., D., by South Bap. Ch., 
(inflillo£950,) . . . . . 



80 00 
30 95 



Mcmhers for Life, 



N. HAMP ^Danstable, Rev. 

Handel O.Nott, by his ch. . . 

MASS.— Amherst, Etten Bmgs 
Angier, by her great grandmo • 
ther, Mrs. Hcpislbali Bastmtti, 



50 00 
100 00 



30 00 
350 00 

,50 00 

50 00 

900 00 

50 00 



89 00 



aooo 

50 00 



4185 

90 00 
1^00 



18312.] 



B60SIPTB. 



50 



w IHnfortk K« Basga^ WiUiam 

F.BangSfby their mother, . 40 00 
„ Amelia Hennetin Ciary, by 
her mother, Mrs. H. £. 
Clary, ....... 20 00 

„ David Eaetman, .... 20 00 

„ Sarah P. Ferry, hy her mo- 
ther, Mrs.* Ann E» rerv* . 20 00 

Lanesboro, Rev. Henry Bt Il9ok- 
er, by hiach. and ^og*^ . «. . 26 70 

Moaatm, Mrs. AUrecT Ely, by la<« 
diesofRev.Mr.|:iy|cSpc. . 2138 
„ Mrs. Rufus i^nt, . .*. . 20 00 
jf tin, Joel Norcross, ... 2d 00 
„ Mrs. A. W. Porter, . ... 20 00 

Stockbridge, Benoni C. WeUs, by 
Auxiliary Tract Society,. . . 20 00 

Williamstown, Mrs. Laura Whit- 20 00 
mao, ....,..,., 20 00 
„ Mrs. Lucy Whitman, . . 20 00 

CONN.— Bridgeport, Mrs. Polly 
Sterling, by her husband, Sil- 
vanus Sterling, Esq., ,, . . 20 00 

Chatham. (Mid^e Haddam Soc.) 
Rev. CharleS' Bentley, by Mr. 
Henry S.Ward, ..... 25 00 

Danbury., Mrs. Alida Q, Rood, by 
ladies of ch. and cong. ... 20 00 
„ Mary E. Stone, by her father, 20 00 

Fair Haven, Rev. John Mitcliell, 
by ladies, 28 44 

Jewett City, Mrs. Harriet King„ 

(in part of |80,) ...... 8 00 

Leiianon, Mrs, Eliza Ann Bull, by 
church and congregation, . . 20 00 

North Stonington, Mrs. RssseU 
Wheeler, by her husband, . 20 00 
„ Cyma WilJiams. Esq., . . 20 00 

Nonvich, Baniel h. Trumbull, by > < 
hisfhther, ..'..... 20 00 
„ Mrs. Harriet WiUianu, by 
Gen. William Williams, . 20 00 

Reading, Rev. Wm. L. Strong, 
by hie church and cong. . . 20 00 

Ridgebnry, Rev. Nathan Burton, 

by his ch. and cona. .... 20 00 

■Stonington, B. Franklin Babcock, 

by his mother^ 20 00 

„ G^n. William WiUiams, . 20 00 
„ Mrs. Lucy S. Rodman, by . 
her husband, (in part of |20,) 10 00 
,, Gurdon TruQiball, Esq. do. 5 00 

N. YORK.'Albany, Miss Marga- 
ret Ten Eyok, ..... 2000 

Bloouingburgli, A. H. W. Van •- 

Vechten, by S, Van Vechten, 
(in part of 120,) 1^00 

CaUkill, William Wynkoop, . 20 00 

Champlain, Clinton county, Rev. 
Ezra D. Kinney, by Benev. Soc. 
in his church, ...... 20 00 

Lansingburgh, Cornelius Lansing, 20 00 

Middletown, Otsego county, Mary 
A]UiIoffalls,(For.Dis.). . . 90 00 



N«w-lCork City, Miss Cathwriae 
B. Beers, by. her father Mr. C. 

Beers, 20 OQ 

„ Bev.JohnM.KrebSjbymem-. 

ber^ofRutgers-street Church, 20 00 
, „ A|rs. Sarah H. Kretw, by la- 
dies of do. do. . . , . 20 00 
„ RufUs L. Nevins, .... 2& 00 
„ Francis Wetmore, . <« . , 20 00 

Owege, Tioga county Mrs, A^y 
E. PutaaiL . ^ ...... 28 00 

Pleasant.Vafley, Owen Ward, by 
Ladies* Sewing Society, far 
, Burmab, . . . . /.. '• • 20 00 

Troy, Miss Blwadena Vanderhty- 
den, (For. Dis.) 20 00 

N«< JERSEY-— Lawrenceville, 
Mrs. Juliet L. Aztell, by Soci- 
ety of Rev- H. Axtell, ... 21 00 

Morristown, Morris S. Johnson, 
by Ira C. Wliitehead, Esq„ . 20 00 

Newark, JjBsse Baldwin, . . 20 00 

New-Brunswick, Miss Hannah 
Englisb, ........ 2000 

„ George Augustus Nicoll, by^- 
his father A. y. Nicoll, . . 20 00 

VIR.— Charlotte eo., Miss FraQ- 
ees L. HaQiner, 20 00 

Warm Springs, Bath co.. Rev. 
James Paine, by his cong. . . 20 00 

Winchester, Miss Betsey Ann 
HaUiday, by Mr. George Barn- 
hart, (in part of $20,) ... 5 00 
Mary Hansel, (in partof |20,) 10 00 
Jemima .Hiner, do. . . 10 00 

Annual Subscribers, 

N. YORK— New-York City, J. 

W. Bleeecker, S 00 

„ Mrs. John Peck, . . . . S 00 

Other Donations, 

MASS. — ^Hinsdale, Congregation- 
al Society 13 27 

Northampton, few female friends, 
for BuUer, Montgomery coun- 
ty, Ohio, 12 00 

Stockbridge;afriend|l-K!o.25cts. 1 25 
CONN.-^Rev. Israel G. Rose, . 1 36 
Bozrahville, Congregational Soc. 8 20 
Bridgeport, Socie^of Rev. John 

Blatchford, . 30 00 

ft Society d Rev. Dr. Hewitt, 
, (inoiudihg$7 for Burmah,) . 44 60 
4 Miss Alisa Burr, for Burmah, 4 00 
Fairfield, Miss Mary Burr, $1 for 
Vail. Miss., and $4 for Burmah, 5 00 
^ Sundry individuals, ... 9 00 
Green's Farms, Mr. Aaron Sher- 
wood and wife, 2 00 

Huntington, alady, (For. Pis.) . 10 00 
*' Rev. Thomas Punderson's 
Society, ....»..• 4!* 01 



60 



H£CEIPTS< 



[Majr, 



Jewett City, CoDpregntional 8oc. 33 96 
Lebanon, indmduals, .... 30 00 
Mohegan, six indtviduab, ... 1 00 
Monroe, Rev. Daniel Jones' Soc. S7 25 
New Canaan, anonymous, . . 1 00 
New-Haven, Profetsor Andrews, 10 00 

„ Wm.Leffingwell, for Browns- 
ville, Jackson co.. Ills. . . IS 00 
New-London, Mividuals, 1 00 

Newtown, Mdivadml^ .... 13 50 
North Sto^wtoft, R«v« JoMph 

Ayre, |3—Cyros Wheeler, |3— 

Uajor D. Wheeler, |3-H>ther 

donations |5 95, . . , . . 13 S5 
Norwich, eoRected in Society of 

Rev. C. B. Everest, .... 54 
Oronoke and Patney, ladies, . . 5 
Reading, individuals,, . . . < 4 
Ridgefietd, individuals, ... 19 
Stonington, Charles P. WiUiams, 5 

„ ^ndry individuals, ... 31 
Stratford, individuals, .... 18 

„ Oronoke Society, .... 7 
Trumbull, individuals, .... '5 
Wilton, gentlemen of Rev. S. Mer-^ 

' win's Society, 34 

N. YORK.— Albany, Mrs. Vein 

Schaick, $9— cash $5, 7 

„ A friend fl— a lady $5, 6 

Brooklyn, L. I., Mrs. S. N. Lewis, 5 
Catskill, Rev. Mr. Simonson, (.For 

Burmah,) 5 

Cherry Valley, sundry inds. 
Greenbush, young lad. in acad. 
Hudson, Olive Taylor, 



40 
2 
5 
5 



12 
00 
13 
00 
00 
53 
00 
02 
54 

00 

00 
00 
00 

00 
00 
82 
50 
00 



J.ansingburgb, A. C Lansing, . 
Now-York City, John A. Daven- 
port, $10— Augustus Wynkoop, 
f 10— Mr. Roberts, |5— " Ameri- 
canus," $4~S. Coleman, fl — 
cash 32 cts.— a friend, |2 50— 
do. $5— fern, friend, fl— a lady, 
$5— left at Depository, suppo- 
sed by mistake, $5, and 12— X. 

Y. Z. |2 50, 53 32 

„ Individuals of Rev. Pr. Cox's 

church, . 115 50 

„ Union Presbyterian church, 50 00 
Princeton, Rev. F. Fraser, . . ' 2 00 
Schenectady, Faculty and Stu- 
dents of Union College, ... 52 50 
Smyrna, Isaac Foote, jun. . . 10 00 

Troy, Miss Lee, 5-00 

N. JER— Newark^ First Presby- 
terian Church, . . . . . 230 SO 
„ Second, do. do. . . 67 (IB 
„ Third, do. do. . . 89 5^ 



„ Mr. and Mrs. Van Cortlandt, 
„ Widow's mite. 



II 09 
25 
300 



„ Mrs. Sarah M. Graham, . « 
New-Brunswick, a lady, $20— Hiss 
Elizabeth Grant, for Bombay, 
$12— Prof. T. Strong, $10— 
Mrs. Engliah, i5^Jndg» Bray, 
$5— cash$I^R«r. Dr. MiUedo- 
lar, $5— R«r. Dr. Caqnon, $5— 
Rev. Dr. M'OMImi, $5— Miss 
ReheMa English, tS—diild of 
Catechetical Class, tresb. Ch. 
$2— Rev. /. H. Joofes, $3— 
cash $1, ... ^ .... 8L 09 
„ Collected at Anniv. of Aux. 
New-Brunswick, ($3 of which 
for Burmah;) . . . . . 74 05 
Orange, First Presbyterian Ch., 28 OO 
PENN.— Philad. a lady, (for. disv) 5 00 
VIR.— Bedford, Mrs. M. O. Left- 

wich, $1— T. L. LeftWich, $1 , 2 00 
Botetourt county, a Ariend for 

■ Burmah, . 5 00 

CharlottesvillCf Mrs. Mary M.Carr, 2 90 
Dinwiddle, James Eppes, ... 2 00 
Farmville, sundry individuals, . 20 25 
„ Dr. John A. Moorman, for 

Burmah, . 5 00 

Hanover, Mrs. Rebecca Rollard, 2 0(0 
Richpiond, a lady, by Mr. A. Con- 
verse, 6 50 

Williamsbui|ri Jacob C. Sheldon^ 5 00 
Remitted by Rev. T. B. Hurl- 
but, Agent, 5 00 

N. CAR. — HiUsborough, a young 

lady, for China 5 00 

GEORGIA.— A lady, .... 5 00 
OHIO.— ChiUicothe, MissCIarina 
Backus, (deceased,) in part of • 

legacy, 603 00 

Cpshocton, inds. for Burmah, . 10 00 
Elyria, Rev. John J. Shipherd, 2 00 
Sturgoonville, W. Strong, Esq. 1 00 
IND.— Salem, Dr. Burr Bradley, 2 50 
N. WEST. TERR.— Prairie Du 
Chien, " A Well-wisher," 9 00 

The above list contains donations — * 
For Valley of the Mississippi, . $$i5 00 
For Foreign Distribution, (in- 
cluding $147 for Burmah, and 
$5for China,) . . . . . $325 00 

Whole amount of donations, $3,371 54 
seived for Tracts sold, * 2,948 46 



Total, 



$8,320 02 



Donations to the Library. 
Daniel Cooledge, New-York, 
Ellwood's Sacred History of the New Testament, 1 vol. 
Sufferings of Quakers in 16th century, 1 vol. 



THE AMERICAN 



^ AMERICA!! TRACT SOClETf . 

TbIe Seventh Annual Meeting of the American Tract Society was 
held in the Chatham-street Chapel, New-York, on Wednesday, May 
9, 183S) at 10 o'clock, A. M. the President of the Society, S. V. S. 
Wilder, Esq. in the chair, supported by Hon. Stephen Van Rensselaer, 
Vice-President; and Hon. John Cotton Smith, of Counocticat. 

The Meeting was opened with prayer by Rev. Jacob Brodhead, D. 
D. of the Reformed Dutch Church, New-York. The President deli- 
vered a brief introductory Address. The Treasurer, Mr. Moses Allen, 
read the Report of the Committee who audited his accounts ; and the 
Annual Report was read by Mr. Willi am A. Hallook, Corresponding 
Secretary. The following resolutions were then presented, and una- 
nimously adopted ; — 

Ob motioa of Rev. Thomas De Witt, D. D. of the Reformed Dutch 
Church, New- York, seconded by Rev. Jeremiah Day, D. D. I^resident 
of Yale College, 

Resolved, That the tteport now read be adopted and published under the direc- 
tion At the Gxecutire Committee. 

On motion of Rev. RufVis Babcock, of the Baptist Church, Salein, 

Massachusetts, seconded by Rev. John Codman, D. D. of the £vange- 

lieal Congregational Church, Dorchester, Massachusetts, 

JHegolvtdt That the promptitade and liberality with which numerous churebea, , 
Auxiliariea, and individuals, have contributed, within the pist year, Ibr supptyinf 
our own country and foreign lands with Tracts, demand a public expression of 
gratitfide to God. 

On metion of Rev. Oman EastnMin, visiting and Financial Secre- 
tary of the Society, seconded by B^v. George A. Bajtter, D. D. of the 
Theological Seminary, Prince £dirard, Virginia. 

Reiolved^ That in vieiitrof the spHritvd Wants of these United States, and of tb« 
agency this nation may exert itii the conversion of the world ; this Society, with 
thQ blessing of God, and the co-operation of the Christian commuuity, will proceed 
immediately to the work of supplying syKtematieallythe entire destitute populatioa 
of oor Gouirtry with Tractii accompanied by the pray era and labors of Ihitliful I>i)itri. 
buters. 

Vol. Vn. 6 Whole No. 75. 



02 6BVCNTH ANNUAL MEBTlNa. [JllOe^ 

On motion of Rev. Sylvester Woodbridge, Agent of the Society, 
seconded by Rer. Daniel Sharp, 0. D. of the Baptist Church, Bostoo,. 
Mass. Vice-President, 

Resolved^ That th« nmnerous and urgent calls which are flow ffreBettted to tibt* 

Sociewm behalf of the Pagan world, together with the fo^ilitie* which are afforded 

bjT the Providence of God, for conveyiagto them the saving knowledge of Ghrit^ 

devolve on us a most aolemn responsibility to supply with approved Tracts all oT 

, «very nation to whom God ^t^^teiu before us the wgjf of acceaa. ^ 

On motion ef Rev. CbarleaP. M^IIvaiRe, of the Episoopal Cbvrch, 

N. Y. seconded by Col. Isaac Trask, of Springfield, Massachusetts^ 

Resolvedt That this Society invite the serious attention of Ministers,^ and 
Christians gennndly, to the powerfMl moral inflaence. that with the Divine bless- 
ing may be exerted by prayer aiTd labors for the salvation of men, in coanectio» 
with the systematic distribution of Tracts ; and that they be requested t» give to the 
Society's Agents, and idt engaged in this great work, their cordial and active co- 
operation. 

On motion of Rev. Thomas M'Aqley, D. D. seconded by Col. Alex- 
ander Jones, of Providence, R. I. the officers for the ensuing year 
were then elected. Rev. Oman Eastman was elected viisiting and 
Financial Secretary of the Society, and Mr. Jesse Talbot, Assistant 
Secretary. Tlie Society then adjourned by singing the Dozology in 
long metre. 

The audience was largo, and a deep solemnity reigned throughout 
the entire exercises. It seemed to be the general feeling that God had 
gone before the Society in his Providence, that he was now present 
by his Spirit, and was calling the Society to great and ardlious labors 
for conveying a knowledge of Christ to millions of perishing men. 

The Rev. Dr. De Witt dwelt on the character of the Society as 
exhibited in the excellence of its publications, all pointing the sinner 
to Christ— the harmony of the Committee, consisting oif difler«it 
denominations but united as Christians in promoting the cause of 
Christ — ^tbc usefulness of Tract Distributers, who were infant How- 
ards, in seeking out the wandering and the lost — the reciprocal indu- 
ence of this and kindred institutions on each other in blessing our 
country and the world. 

Rev. Mr. Babcock urged the solemn obligations of the Society to 
persevere, and enhrge its benefactions for the heathen. The |fll,000 
appropriated for Burmah was n^ more than we expend in one year 
in supplying two considerable towns or villages in our country— and 
yet the population of Burmah i| ^s large as that of the United States. 
He imagined the Missionaries looking to the eiibrt the Society has 
commenced for then\, as to a little cloud of the size of a man's hand 
in the distant horizon— and they inquire with intense solicitude 



1632.] SEVENTH AKNUAL MEETING. t3 

whether it shall vanish out of their sight, or grow till it shall cover 
the heavens, and pour upon them a shower of spiritual blessings. 
r, Dr. Godman expressed his delight in the character of the Society as 
Ibrmed by a union of different denominations — he believed all Burmah 
and millions more would bless God in eternity for the labors of that 
denomination to which the brother belonged who had just sat down. 
Bev. Mr. Eastman urged, from the most weighty and impressive 
considerations, the duty of entering systematically and perseveringly 
on the work of supplying all our destitute population with Tracts, 
accompanied by prayer and faithful labors for their salvation^— not as 
an effort for two years merely, but for life — not to the exclusion of 
effi>rts for the heathen, but regarding our nation as a part of the great 
whole* and the influence this nation should exert for the conversion 

* 

of the world. 

Rev. Pr. Baxter related a beautiful anecdote qf a Tract, given by a 
student to a family on James' River, which was the means of the 
conversion of the mother, father, and three other members, and was 
afterward sent to two other families in Kentucky, where it was in 
the same manner blessed to five individuals. 

Rev. Mr. Weodbridge presented a view of what God had done, in 
his Providence, in the different ages of the Church, to prepare the 
way for the immediate diffusion of the Gospel by Tracts to three 
HUNDRED MILLIONS of the heathen world, and the impracticability of 
reaching the present obnbrationof heathen by any other means, 
and urged on all present to make a resolution in their own minds, as 
in the sight of God, what they would do for the Society during the 
year, not only by contributions, but by cfibrts and by prayer. 

In consequence of this suggestion, Rev. "Di, Milnor afterward rose, 
and said that he had received a note from an individual on the stage, 
pledging 91,000 for foreign distribution within the coming year. 

Rev. Dr. Sharp said he believed the Board of the Baptist General 
Convention had been informed of as many as twenty in Burmah who 
had been brought to embrace Christ by means of Tracts, having never 
seen a Missionary or a Bible. It now devolved on every man to <' do 
his duty" for sending Tracts to the heathen. 

R^v. Mr. M^Uvaine said he had attended the anniversaries for many 
years, and never was so impressed in hearing a report, with the feel- 
ing that Providence is calling American Christians to a great and glo- 
rioos work, nor so struck with a sense of the presence of the Holy 
Spirit, in the hearts of the whde assembly. "The work of sending 
the Gospel to the heathen,?' he sliid, <*does not interfere with the 
Supply of the destitute in our country. Let the tide of benevolence 



64 ANNtrAi KSPiHit* [Jisn6i 

T»e liigii enongh to reftcfa all the hesthien, ttnd it wiH ^ertdnly <yrer- 
flow our own land.'' The condtict of tlie disetpleB at the sea of Tiberini 
farnished a volume of instruction. When told to feed the multitude, 
they did not first sit down to see whether th^ had enoUgh folly to mp* 
ply their own wants. We must go to this work on our knees. There 
was strength to accomplish it no where heneath heaven. Thousands 
of Missionaries, and Bibles, and Tracts, cannot convert theworld-*wo 
must carry the work to God by iaith. The distance between us «nd 
the miHenium was the distance between us and primitive faith. The 
press placed us in some important points on a level with the Apostles. 
We might avail ourselves of it as they did of the gift of tongues ; but 
the Apostles were only twelve in number, while we could multiply 
presses indefinitely — all wis now want is their liEuth^God would then 
hear our prayer and bless our labors. 

Rev. Dr. M'Auley urged on every minister and Christian to remem- 
ber this work in the closet, and around the family altar— *to bear it on 
their hearts, and spread it before their fellow men on every proper 
occasion. What he would wish to do was to stereotype the whoU 
impressior^ of that nueting on the heart of every ptnonpresentf tlaXii 
might become a living principle of action. 



EXECUTIVB COMAIITTfiE. 

FirBLI8HIH« COMklTTSS. 



Rev. James Milnor, D. D. of the 

Episcopal Church. 
Rev. Thos. M* Auley, D. D. LL. D. 

Phila. of the Presbyterian Ch. 
Rev. J. Knox, D. O. Ref. Dutch Ch. 



Rev. Samuel Green, Boston, Mtf- 
s^cbusetts, of the Coi^r^a- 
tional Church. 

Rev. Charles G. Sommers, of the 
Baptist Church. 



DlSTRfBVTINO COMHITTEK. PIKANCE COMMITTES. 



Thomas Stokes, 
Dr. James C. Bliss, 
Dr. Marinns WUlett, 
William Forrest, 
Jasper .Coming. 



Arthur Tappan, 
Dr. John Steams, 
Moses Allen, 
Richard T. Haines^ 
Timothy R. Green, Esq. 



ABSTRACT OF THE SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT. *- 

The Executive Committee of tl\e American Tract Socibtt, id 
presenting their Seventh Ahnual Report, feel that the Society are 
called to re^nder their most grateful acknowledgments to God for the 
pecuniary aid received, the co-operation of his children, and his blesi^ 
mg on their labors ; and that God is now spreading before them two 
great departments of efibrt— the on^ in our own country^-<-tbe other 
m Foreign lands-*each demanding their immediate and their noblest 
endeavors, 



NSW. KimucuxiQNei. 

Fortif-iw. New PaUicmtiona have been imanimoualy saBcikned and 
atereotyped since the last Anniversary, making the whole number of 
the Society's Poblicatians six. kundrtd and fnarUm, in seven different 
languages, ezciasiye of Tiacta approved for pubucatioa at Fofeigp 
stations* 



AMOUNT PRINTED AND CIHCDLATED, 

Pritttod daring the year« 5^^,750 88»S47,Q00 

Do. siHce formation of the Society, . . . 29,996,487 463,665,982 

CircidataddttriDf the year, 4,957,372 66,160,457 

Do. since formation of the SMioty,. 25,411,086 384,837,720 

Of Tiact No. 9H ThtMomdamMakr^ 140,000 oopicv hav« been 

printed daring the year, and of No. 241, Hepe of Future RepenUmee, 

136,000. 

GRATUITOUS DISTBIBUTIONS. 

Fmrein, „-.--. 590^483 

8hipeforForBif»Ports» .r:^ ^ . . . 84,440 

Navy, 111,14(1 

Benevolent Inatitutioaa, ....... 256,850 

Sunday School*, ' 100,469 

Collei^ea, 42,876 

Ittdlvidualt, ; 1,199,750 

Diitrihtttedbf ifeatfl, fi27,07a 

AiwllsiM% . 92Q,«2» 

TetaJ, "^ 3,473,H0 

DeUTer«4 to Directors and Members,..........,..,.,.! ,315,000 

RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURES DURING THE YEAR. 

MUeeimed, dnrinf the year endinf Kay lat, Ibr tracts sold, 

essentially at cost, . ^ *37 43Q gg 

Oonations from Branches and Auxiliaries, ...... 1^661 76 ' 

Do. ftmn 12s Life Directors, ........ 8,099 95 . 

JDo. froas 335 Life BCeabersi, 5,907 66 

Annual 9ttbieri|^tieias and other Doaatioiia, 8J|^5 41 

Total amount of donations, 924,474 78 

TMalr«DMFl« darter tlw rear, •CMOS <nr 

Paid, dwiag <hf jonr* 

For paper, 121,139 95 

Per printtnir, stereotyping-, engraving, folding, stitching, and bind* 

Ing, including expense of Ghristtaa Almanac, S&861 61 

BxpensA for supplying destitute portions of o«r connttp, inolndinir 
agency at New-Orlean^ St. Louis, and Cincinnati, aad servJces of 
nil tbe8oeieCy*s tTAveling Agents, eleven of whpm are laboring at 

the West and South, 412^08 

Appropriations for Foreign distribution, 5 044 aq 

AU«thtr expenses, nsfaQT items in the Trenaurer'srepon, .... tfJSas 06 
JRltoBfsrfiaawaQf io(h«TreMiM7« . . . . s 9^67 

t4iUi,mame, 101,905 07 



(96 AiftmAL, Bsponr. [June, 

The Committee feel that, in view of the above statement, they are 
called to render especial thanks to God. Five months ago the Society's 
expenditure had been 8,000 dollars more than its receipts, the defi- 
ciency being supplied by loans. Now those arrearages are met; all 
bills which became due previous to May 1 were then paid ; and 5,044 
dollars have been remitted, as the beginning[ of a great work, to which 
the Committee trust God has called this Society, in conveying a know- 
ledge of his Gospel to millions sitting in darkness and the shadow of 
death. Indeed, it has been while laboring for the destitute abroad, 
that Grod has supplied the Society's pecuniary necessities, a circum- 
stance to which the CommittOe will more particularly advert in pre- 
senting the claims from the foreign field. 

Branehea and jSuxUiiaries, 

The number of New Auxiliaries recognized during the year, is 146, 
making the whole number now on the Society's list, 997. If to- these, 
there be added 664 connected with the Society at Boston, and 439 
connected with that at Philadelphia, and 1227 others to which 
the Tract Magazine is sent, the whole number of Auxiliaries, directly, 
and indirectly, connected with the parent Society is 3,297. Some of 
these, however, have become inefficient, if tiioy have not entirely 
ceased to act. 

Visiting and Finandtd Secretary, 

The Committee are gratified to announce, that, in view of the in- 
creasing operations of tneSociety, and the claims of our own country, 
and of the world, they have succeeded in obtaining the services of 
Rev. Ornan Eastman, as Visiting and Financial, Secretary of the So- 
ciety, with special reference to planting and directing the Society's 
agencies, promoting the activity of Auxiliaries, and obtaining funds. 

' THE CLAIMS OF OUR OWN COUNTRY. 

Whether we regard the'value of the souls of our own countiymen, 
or the influence this nation should exert in the conversion of the world , 
the duty is clear to do all we can to bring every individual of this great 
community to embrace the salvation ofiered in the Gospel. And it 
cannot bo overlooked, that ^this Society has now great facilities for 
reaching quickly our entire destitute population. Not only are its 600 
publications, in seven difierent languages, stereotyped — Depositories 
established in all the principal towns — and Auxiliaries formed— but 
its plan for supplying our whole country is matured, and sufiiciently 
tested by expenence ; and what is more, in the system of distribution 
DOW adoptCMi, God is adding a double efficiency to this entire depart- 
ment of benevolent operations. 

The work to be accomplished is to induce the whole community of 
intelliffent, humble. Evangelical Christians in our land to take in their 
hind tne awakening Tract and go, '< every man" to his neighboTi and 
every man" to "his brother, saying, know the Lord," and to perse- 
verein this labor of love, relying on the power of his gracious Spirit, 
till "they shall all know Him, firom the least of them uQto the greatest 



1632.] CLAIMS OF OUR OWN COUNTRY. B7 

• 
af them,'' and God sball "forgive their iniquity and remember their 
mn no more." The Committee invite investigation to the character 
«nd legitimate inflnence of this work as one that God has commanded ; 
and they have no fear, that by any serious mind, they shall be consi- 
dered as having attached to it an undue importance. 

Mmisters of the Gospel to supply the destitute millions of our coun- 
try are not to be found ; and yet "by the' foolishness of preaching" 
God will save them that believe. What then shall we do but to take 
the messages of his grace on the printed pa^e, so like to the original 
Gospels and Epistles, but whi<^ the art of printing enables us to mul- 
tiply almost beyond any conceivable limits, and present them at the 
firesida <^ our dying fellow men, bespeaking their attention, and 
1>esecching them to be "reconciled to God." 

Suppose families are found who cannot read — what better can be 
done for them than to read to them and explain and impress upon their 
inind and conscience the word of life. 

Till heaven and earth pass away, God's promise must be verified, 
that he that spiritually " watereth" others, " shall be watered also 
himself;*' and who shall estimate.tbe reflex spiritual blessings that will 
descen^ upon the churches, when, girded by prayer and a living faith, 
they jinse in the strength of God, to the serious endeavor of bring- 
ing an their fellow men to the knowledge and the obedience of 
Christ. 

Where is the minister of Christ whose heart would not bound with 
joy to see all his flock thus laboj-ing for souls, in a humble dependence 
on God for a blessing. How would our churches and our Sabbath 
schools be filled. Mow would the Bible be sought for and read.' 
What npnibers, through the influences of the Holy Spirit, would be 
led to see their ruin by sin, and embrace the only Redeemer. 

Take an example in the city of New- York. The superintendent of 
« Ward embracing 36 Distributers' Districts, at the monthly meeting of 
tiie Distributers for prayer, in January last, inquired of each Diatributer 
whether there were not in his District some individual, or individuals, 
for whose salvation he felt there was special encouragement to labon 
It wais made, a subject of prayer and of^deep interest. One Distributer 
at length fixed his mina on one individual, another on two, and 
another on three or more, till nearly 100 individuals — their names 
unknown to any but God and the respective Distributers — were 
selected as special objects of their prayers, their ardent desires and 
afiectioBate labora for their salvation. A new irapuise seemed to 
pervade the heart of every Distributer present. Thev felt as if they had 
an ot^t before them, and one in which they could do nothing with- 
out the marvelious displays of Divine grace. They went to the throne 
of mercy. They went to the obiects of their affectionate solicitude, 
and their mouths were filled witn arguments. Access was easy. 

At their meeting, in Fefnvaryf one Distributer reported that an indi- 
vidual with whom he had three times conversed and prayed was 
anxiotw for her soul. Another, that the minds of four individuals 
were vety tender, one of whom seemed bowed down under a sense of 
her lost condition as a sinner. Another said, "the five whom I had 
jeiocted i left ia teai&" Another, tha$ two i^dividiials appealed tniiy^ 



ANNUAL BJBPOBT. [Jooe, 

• 
convicted of sin, one of wbohi seeined alinost ready to SQirender* 
Another, that one person was then rejoicing in Ood. Another, that 
two had hopefully submitted to Christ. 

At the meeting, in Marchf one Distribater reported that one person 
waft indulging a hope, though he was so ignorant it was difficult to 
judge of its soundness. Another, that one of the live selected was 
hopmg in Christ, and the minds of the remainder were tender. Ano- 
ther, that an intelligent young lady, who had been brought by the 
labors of the Distributer to attend earnestly to the subject of religion, 
was then sitting at the feet of Jesus, and desired alone to promote hi» 
glory. Another, that she found a poor woman, with an Infant only 
two or three weeks old, in a cellar, and almost in a state of starvation. 
She provided means for supplying her temporal wants, and directed 
her to Christ as the sinners' friend. She had since found peace in 
believing, and now would not exchange her cellar for a palace, iC with 
it she must surrender her hope in Christ. 

At the meeting, in ^prU, one narrated his conversations with eight 
persons, one of whom was hopefully converted, and most of the others 
li^ere senously impressed. Another reported, that a widowed female^ 
hy the blessing of God on the Tracts and labors of the Distributer, wa9 
indulging a trembling hope. Another, that one individutU bad pro* 
fessed faith in Christ by uniting with a Methodist C^mrch. Another^ 
that an intelligent widow, who had been long, as she thought, wait- 
ing God's time, but making no eflbrt for her salvation, gave pleasing 
evidence of a change of l^art. Another, that of the five selectedL 
|rhom the conversation of the Distributer had been the means ox 
awakening, two were r^icing in the Savior. 

Let Buoh a system of eflbrt, in its general character, and spirit, be 
discreetly and afiectionately carried out to the utmoat huiitB of 
the population of oar beloved country^et prayer ascend from 
«U who love the Savior and the souls of men*— and who can 
doubt that God would bear, and that a multitude which no man can 
number would be brought to repentance. Let our whole American 
2ion thus arise, pastors and. people, and take hold of the strength of 
the Almighty, and what but a. mUlenial day shall bless our nation, 
and ere long our world. 

A plain man, in New-Tork, unknown to the Committee by nam^ 
yufho has eleven souls in his family dependent on the labor of his band* 
for their support, has sp felt the importance of this work that he ha* 
resolved to contribute for its promotion |I34 a year, and nowregularljr 
pays #2 a month into the Society's treasury with that intent. ** Let 
the American Tract Society," says this plain man, ** undertake ia 
earnest the work of supplying our whole country, and I am snre^ 
neither the co-oi>eratiDn ot Christians, nor the blessing of God will ba 
wanting to give it the most gratifying success." 

But how sliall tliis great work be brought into action thronghoot 
our land ? Would to God that every minister and every Christian 
would ask this question witk a praeHcal a^ieation to Muueff-^fot by 
bis grace, it would soon,, to a great extent, be done, A work of this 
kind is already going on, though very imperfectly, in many hundreds^ 
if not aomie tbouaands of places in our land. It atk arrested the atteft% 



IM2.] CLAtUS OP OUR OWN COUNTRY. W 

Hon of almost every intdligent ani^ actit:|» Chnstiap. An^ /et it ie 
generally m operation wkem the most active chiirclies exist, and 
ivherethftpeqplf), are bf^^t i|upplie4^Hb thc^M^ted.ip^ane o( grace. 
Probably three fomiht <^wr pojniaidn, inchtding ^riu)$i aU the more desm 
4U^^pa^<Hfitf m^,mn^^ Ay <M«i er «W imirid ^fpr^ 

B4 t^h^cfos ih^^Sodety djff^ tgpt^ tke pr99^ci4m ^<^«rw|twn:*.? 

.l^qthinii^ ^4tiH>*«^. the. qQ-()pf»ation of. Ct^rifi^ii^nQ Ap4 the We«ing of 

.CH>4*-'9U^ lf3t. Coriatifuis pea^ an4( la}>Pr» en^* cpntr|bu|^ tM tlw^t 

bl^e(8iq£begri^tcc|,i^i4 t^^i^no liiQitJtQ.thp gpo^.they noiiy ap^imn* 

plislv 

1h^{)If^]>OQ,wiiichthi|ComiaiUe(^ liave alfe^y. ^nt^ro^if t}w(>Qf' 
diyidlpg.oof.wlipiei^l^abi^d.tatri^ry ii^tp ^fida^ 9^ aa Imfl^M.a 
fi^tt^fnidovQl^ Agjpnt, nfiWi all:tlie CbirisiiaA cq-qpeiation UiM <;^ Ue 
aWBpiinoaed within its Uiiuts, qofi ifn occupy nft ta efioct the,qfMemMic 

^^l4y. <i^ l^^ .ont^f I) popuifiUon. 

An estimate l)^re folloFs* based on a calculation of tlieext^t of 
our more destitute population and of our mhabited territory, shqi9(ing 
that at least tMriy such fields exist in our. country, each of vlpch 
demands the labors of one qualified Agent. Eleven Agents are new 
in* the fidd chiefly at the South and 'West. The Beport cpntaios 
mCny important facts commdnicated by them respectively, shpwing 
the great importance and necessity of tliis system of operation for the 
supply of thjCieileBsive destitutions of owr country. 



Thp;igrs^o}Ati^ d^tlib^(|l9^» «i^«.oA^ of tj^ese Age&la, "fiinuakcaa 
nenr 0139: iA thie h^atqiy oC "^riH^ts, Us qfiect <^ tbe pnbli« mind may 
be. sp g^^ a,a to reqx|ij:e much more system ip it than haa yet been 
intrpduced. But Cew m^n could probpibly be more useliiUy employed 
tl^an oni9 st^tipped in ^ew-yorK, w^^ should do i^hing else than 
Ue($p hui^^e upon the wants of the countryi aiul prepare, or eanae to 
^ mi^refT monthly, 1^ Tn^t, new, tun^ly* intereating, and adapted 
to the n^Uon^ tp\ ^kiifa it o^ight, ii;^ a short time, by, your. Agenta and 
Bistrihv|ter% be i^ent. Su^di a mfm should be a giant in intielleetual 
s^ 9tpral stI;«^gth i fpr he wmdd pre^tck to the kir^ett emgreg^Um tkU 
9i4^<ifth^ othft: morU. Ha wouM n^ an 4p9Coiiiipiui prcocAo', or rather, 
JQ}f^TnifA Soc^ty would bo such, having the everlaatiog Gospel to 
me^cb i^ evaij creatiica* It MTOj^d ^a the tcaa of life with its monthly 
fiiiUfli tpVci^ ^i Maaa \i^ iiati^V^*' '*; -^i 

*thA CouMwUea wiU not dw.ell longejr. on the duty of prooeediog 
immediately thus to occupy our country^ H must be apparent to ail 
that thia is a gi^eat worH* |t vi^ require the laboirs of* many, men ; the 
vigbrpqa co-operatipn of U^fi inends iS ZioQ ; aud hberal oootiibutiQBS 
6.ut wiOi ^he Savior'acpnin^i^d to^ publish the Gospel to vtzry crea- 
ture, sounding in our ears, can we refrain from it } Is there a heni^bted 
soul of all our 13,000,000, wandexing in the mazes of sip, i^d crowd- 
ing his way down to death, whom we shall omit, and say, *' We will 
l^ye t^at soul to i>eash t The 9avior came down firom heaven and 
died tc( uniold to him UlA way of salvAtioir; but we cannot convey it 
te hi«i» It nfdl reqyiia too much labac— U will poiaioa^inueh money!*' 



70 ANNUAL BBPQRT. [Jullfi, 

yet that soul, both the Committee and the Society muat meet in the 
presence of Christ at the day of judgment. 

CLAIMS OF FOREIGN AND PAGAN LANDS. 

The Committee have dwelt on the duty of supplying our own coun- 
try; for its millions have peculiar claims. But a world lies in 
wickedness ; and the Savior's dying command makes no distinction 
of nation or of clime. The Providence of God, m the openings for 
usefulness abroad, has reproved the Society's delay. Numerous calls 
from foreign lands had been presented in liie year preceding the last 
anniversary, none of which were met; and thougn the Society then 
resolved to supply American Foreign Missionaries with Tracts, 
seven months of the year had elapsed before any thing effectual 
was done, and the Committee were then some thousands of dollars 
in advance of the Society's Treasury. It was felt that special exertions 
to obtain pecuniary means could be no longer deferred ; and the result 
showed that the Spirit of God had gone b^ure the Committee. 

The Report proceeds to mention the efibrts made for awakening an 
interest in the community, the liberal contributions received from 
various churches, auxiliaries, and individuals, and the appropriation of 
115,000 for foreign distribution, as the beginning of a great work lo 
which Providence seems manifestly calling the Society. 

American Missionary Institutions have now laboring in foreign 
lands not far from 80 ordained ministers of Christ. They have six 
printing establishments, and 13 presses at their commana, including 
two now waiting for opportunity of conveyance. The languages m 
the most important pagan nations are already acquired ; and the 
nations seem waiting for the tidings of salvation by Christ, on the 

S^es of Tracts, sent by thousands and millions, to those whom the 
issionary voice cannot reach. -Each of these Missionaries, their 
wives, the Assistant Missionaries, the Teachers and pupils in the 
schools, and the converts from paganism, not only may be in perfect 
accordance with the nature of their work, but must be in order to their 
highest usefulness, active and efficient Tract Distributers ; and the 
degree in which the usefulness of their united labors may be thus 
enhanced, is incalculable to any but the Omniscient mind. In this 
view the Committee wish not only to furnish them the Tracts they 
urgently call for, but to animate and encourage them to increased 
exertion, till all their duty, and the duty of Chrbtendom in this 
department of benevolent cfibrt shall be discharged. 

The importance of these operations will more distinctly appear, by 
presenting with*somO minuteness the prominent facts, bearing on this 
subject, at the several stations to which the grants reported have 
been made. 

Gen(tumy — Lower Saxony Tract Society at Hamburg* 

A letter from a member of the Committee of the Society at Ham- 
burg, dafed December 16, 1831, says, "The Tract Society esta^ 
bliflued here in 1820, is laboring under many disadvantages, and 



I8d2.] CLAIMS OP rORfilON LANDS. ^1 

^068 not meet with that support from Germans which it deserves, so 
that its Directors are coYistantly placed under the necessity of apply 
ing to friends in Great Britain tor assistance, but even then, are thQ 
means ncft ade^ate to supply half the existing wants. I would, 
therefore, earnestly solicit the powerful co-operation of your Society, 
in our warfare ai^ainst priBcipaiities and powers — ^against spiritual 
wick^ness in high places. 

" The moral aad religious state of Germany is such that it demands 
the most strenuous efibrts to counteract the spreading infidelity, and 
a* there is no liberty of conscience, every effort to preach the Gospel 
te the poor deluded people is opposed with the greatest violence, 
both by the Lutheran church established by the government, and the 
civil authorities. In the paie of that community indeed, a man may 
preach whatever » most congenial to his depraved heart, regardless 
<^aU Scripture authority ; hence the thousands oi' Socinians, Arians, 
and Universalists, who, under the disguise of Lutherans, preach any 
thing else but what Luther preached. And what is sUU more lament- 
able, is that by far the majority of the Evangelical part of the minis- 
ters and the people are not at all clear in their views of the truth ; and 
the doctrines of free grace, and tlie moral obligation of the believer to 
keep the law of God to the utmost strength, communicated by that 
giaoe, are alike decidedly opposed. 

** From this very briefviewof our Society, and the field it occupies, 
jott will be enabled to form some idea how much we need the assist- 
l«ce ef all who love the Lord Jesus Christ in truth.'' 

Hussia* 

A communication from an American gentleman, received soon after 
his arrival in this country, from St. Petersburg, and accompanied by 
translations of Watt's Divuie and Moral Songs, and Mrs. Gilbert's 
Hymns for Infant Minds, in Russ, says, 

** To the Tract cause in St Petersburg, I earnestly recommend 
your holding out effectual aid. I have witnessed so inuch of the 
blessed effects of Tract distribution to even the remotest parts of the 
empire, from that city, that I am exceedingly anxious that the present 
season should not pass by unimproved. It would require some time 
to tell you of all that is doing by the little band of faithful Christians 
there ; of their liberal contributions, not only to all the benevolent 
operations among themselves, but to those of other, and some very 
distant countries j ef their enlightened zeal in their Master's cause ; 
«f their exertions m finding new ways of doing good ; and of the won- 
derful efilects which have come to our knowledge of the distribution 
of Tracts in various parts of that vast empire. In my opinion there 
IB no part of the world, where so wide a field of usefulness, 6y the 
distribution of Tracts, is opened, as the immense empire of Russia 
now presents." 

J^tditerrantttn, 

The American Board of Foreisn Mianoas innre stations at Malta, 
Greece, Syria, and Constantinople, the printing for which is all done 
at Malta, where are three presses, and fonts of typo for printing in 



tS AnyoiU' liiieasT' [Josef 

English, tUlian, Oreek» QrecooTorkiih, Armem^, AimenQ^Tur^ioIlr 
and Arabic. In ArmeDO^Turkiflh, 21 TiftcU have 9^xe9Aj becu) pdntedi 
40 in Italian aad 60 ia modern Greeks 

Greece* 

The AiBatiean £|»i«eopal HkMionariM ij| Gfafeeee lunre tm^ec tfaeir 
direction two printing preesea, and in Jaaiuunr l^fE, bad tranalaled 
mod publishsd aditioiu of two of the Societ]^B Tracto : *' Convenation 
^with a Yoanf Traveler" and ^ ConveraatioQ between two Friends*" 

** Greece,** aajs one of the Bltfatoocries, ^efli^tf now more than 
■ever, an extensive field for the distribution of the wotd of God and ef 
Kefigious Tracts grofuAoin^'^and I am constrained to behcvei a veqr 
limited one for the m^ of either. The pe9{^ are still as eagei a« ever 
to receive and to read the Gospel and Tracts, but thejr have nadis so- 
l^tle progress sinc<» the dose of their revoliUion, and have beenso cn^ 
elly mttmfed, that their condition can scarcely be s^ to be a4 all imr 
proved, and tbej are not able to purchase uookAr A mnbitttde are 
scarcely able to purchase the neeessarias '^i lift. Yet their apirilual 
wants •i:^t to be supplied. Can your Society contribute towaiil 
it ? This is the only question — ^that it will be a blessed work, thera 
eaa be no doubc At Samos, when I was there, in Senl^niber )mtr 
with Mr. King, I never witnessed any thing more astenislung tt^ tl|9 
eagerness of the people to obtain a Tract. We distributed in a cou- 
ple of hour&a box ofbooks^ toas impatienl! a group as I ever witnessed 
on any occasion : and when we had given tlus hist one^ our Itl^ie hut 
on the beach, where we were waiting to depart, was thronged with 
eager applicants, and we had to call m assistance tp get rid of them : 
even after we had pushed off* from the beach, eight or ten lads follow- 
ed us, and one, bofder than the rest, jumped into the sea, and swam 
to our caique, holdiog on the side^ and begging us to give him at least 
«ne litUt hook,*^ 

Sanehoieh Manif. 

Connected with the Aoaerican Mission here, ate two praases. There 
are in the Islands 961 scboels, in which about an equal number of 
natives are emploved as teachers^ and net far from S&fiOO readery, 
being nearly one-fourth part of the ealire nonslaiioiu 

" Perhaps,'' sayseae weU acquainted with the state of ^eaie Islandfy 
*'never^ since the invention w printing, isras the press employed so 
extensively as it has been in these Islands^ with so uttle «ipense, ajad 
so groat a certainty that^ery page c^f ka productions would be x«ad 
with so much attention %nd profiL" 

The American Missionaries laboring here among the millions who 
speak the Mahratta, have under their direction a printing press, at 
which, from January 1, 1829, to November 20, 1890, 3,223,700 pq^es 
were printed in Mahratta, and 772,500 in Enghob. They have tnirty' 
five schools, anbracing about 1,000 boys anafiOO girls , 



163t] cLAucii on 1*091^ LAsmn, 9t 

The Americftn Miisionariies her^, Uboring aiuonff a popolaHoii of 
firom 8,000,000 to 10,000,000, weakipg the TamuU nave under their 
<iare 89 mhoole, containioff S^SG? papmi. The Jafiba Tract Sodety, 
Jwte, 1831, had pablithed 31 Tracts ifi their general series; 7 m 
in their childrens** series;. 1 in a. miscellaneous series just eom« 
laenced ; and 1 1 hand-btfite, all in Tanul. 

Six Tracts, of which EogUsh translations Uare been submitted' to 
the Publishing Committee, have beep approved in Taraol, and' tke 
Swearer^s^ Frayer aad* Francis J^twipofrt have b€|en translated into the 
saijEie language. 

In a letter from jQLet. Mr. WinsloW* dated October $}, \9Sl^ he 
iays : — *^ The donation oC #900ft:om the American Tract Society^ We 
now consider as exhausted. In respect to further aid, could yonx' 
Society provide the means of supplying, not only the tens of thousands 
in Jaoha, but sonye of the miliiens on the continent with Tamul 
Tracts, we have only to say the fidd h large enough for their henewh 
lence. There are even in Jafiha, vast nuoibers who can. read and pro* 
fit by the reading of suitable Tracts; and we, having several native 
helpers, and a tderable acquaintance witb the hinguage, alter a resi- 
dence among the people of ftora tw(^e to fifteep years, are al^e to 
prepare Tracts, and distribute them to advantiige. itideec|) >» regard 
to the preparing of Tracts and other books for the natives, we oHen 
feel that we ought, before we are removed from the work, to empley 
oui experience m it more than we have done, not. only as a present 
beneiil^ but as a fjiturq aid to those who may be engaged in the same 
work ; and had we more mfions of making our labors more extensively 
useful and more permanent, by prioHng such books as we could pre- 
pare, we should wtdoubtedly do more, Fbr ourselves, as indf viduab, we 
eertainly hvf9. na cbums— bul aMMNK) HeftUieQ0«. MaUpiiie4ft«% and 
QathcUcs in Ceylop. speaking ihe Tamul lavguage^ among whoma^ 
many schools in wnicb ^f^hundreds, if not thiiusands of children and 
youihf Me to read printedbooks intdHgUfff, while no smau portum of the 
adults are able anduHlUng to do lAe same;— and fiom eightioten mmiom 
OS theCeAtiikeQt, sneaking the same language of whauitast wuotkers 
can aUo read mid wish t^ read, have c\a.vm 09 Ctuwi^ai^ bensitol^nc^e!; 
vtd as their voice cwwot reafib joiiy we plead fiuc th«m» and trt^t we 
«batt belieani'^ 

Burmh» 

The foUomng facts relative to the Tract canse in tbia iiUereat. ag 
country wereeowmnnicatod by theReT. Dr. Bolle% Secretary oJT tbe 
Baptist General Convention, VQd«r date of Soston, Apiil 2, 163^ in 
reply to a letter aAnouncing a^ aipropdatioa ef fliOOQ by the Cod9* 
mittee, for Tract operations tbere. 

** the Board of the Baptist Gen<^ Conv^tion a^ patii^ed wi^i 
the interest taken by the Committee of tfa^ Anieric«« Txact ^oeietyi^ 
the circulation of Tracts in Bunnab- Helpieneeded* tlM>i4^ onr fundf 
bave bitberto enabie4 HS te keep in full operation tbe wy presa we 
bad there. A second planter and press will probably i«ftpb tbi|t coun* 



r "s 




74 Al^NCAL REPORt. . tJUn^, 

try <Am fiumUk, while a third printer, and two additional presses now in 
readiness, will be sent out by the first opportunity. To maintain rova 
presses in constant operation will require larse sums. No where, pio*- 
hably, can Tracts be distributed to so great advantage, or with better 
prospects of success. All our issues have been in Burman> though 
preparations are now making for printing in Talaing." 

Mr. Bennett, the Missionary printer at Maulmein, e&presses his joj 
in welcoming a new Missionary, but his regret that another printer 
and another press had not been sent. 

"With the press I now have," he says, " I cannot supply the de- 
mand. Brother Judeon, who is in Rangoon, writes me, < we want 
1000 Tracts per toedlc;' but it is totally impossible for any individual 
to furnish this quantity in t)ie given tune. that I had two presses 
and some of our Tracts stereotyped, I would then try to meet the de- 
mand, and as it is, I will do all that Ici^n.' " 

The following is the manner in which Dr. Judson, writing from 
Rangoon, cheers and encourages this devoted Missionazy printer in 
his work. 

« Do not think 

much labor and care, . c- u - n jr * 

who a»k for them ; and tbe most which are given are called for at my 
residence. From Rangoon they are dispersed all over the empire. 
Business brings qien down to Rangoon on the various rivers which 
here enter the bay ; and if a man sees another with a Tract in bis 
hand, he inquires where he obtained it?' is answered,* and away he 
goes to procure the eternal truth for himself. 

<' I am more and.more convinced Burmah is to^ be Evangelized by 
Tracts." " After diligent inquirv,'' he adds, <*I,do not bdieve that 
more than one in a hundred are destroyed." 

The letter from Dr. Judson, which has excited so much attention, 
it appearSjWms a private letter to the Rev. James Grow, of Thompson, 
Ck»nn. who had expressed his interest in the Burman mission^ and re- 
mitted a donation to Dr. Judson. 

In his journal of the dame date with that letter. Dr. Judson ex- 
presses the overflowing of his heart, as follows : 

« The great annual festival of Shway Dagong is just past, during 
which I have distributed nearly 10,000 Tracts, giving to none but 
those who ask. Priests and people, from the remotest regions, are 
alike eager tx) get our writings. I tihmiMi have given away double the 
number if I could have obtained supplies. But poor brother Bennett 
cannot, single-handed, and not yet familiar with Burmese printinc, 
answer all the demands which we make upon him from different 
quarters. M&y God forgive all those who desert us in our extremity. 
May he save them all. But surely, if any sin will lie with crushing 
weight on the trembling soul, when death draws near — if any sin will 
clotne the face of the final Judge with an angry frown, vrithoringig|> 
the lastiiope of the condemneo, in irremediable, everlastitig despair, 
it is the sin of turning a deaf ear to the plaintive crj often millions of 
immortal beings,, who, by their darkness and misery, cry day and 



1632.] CLAIMS OP FOREIGN LANDS. 76 

night, « Come to oor reacue, ye bright sons and daughters of Americi^ 
Come and 8a»e us !^ * 

The following facta were communicated by Dr. Jaddon, under date 
of July 20, 1831. 

« I have sent Moung Chaw-doke with 3000 Tracts up the Lainc 
rirer, which breaks off from the Rangoon outlet, a little above Rai^ 

Soon, and joins the great river Tiiigdij,«, below Prome. It passes 
irough a populous part of the country, where the word of life has 
never yet been published. Moung San-loon has left me this raorninfi 
with 2,500 Tracts, to visit the neighborhood of Old Pegu on the East- 
and Moung Chway-too will shortly leave with 3000, for the large 
towns of Panta-jriau and Bassein on the West. These disbursements 
have reduced roe to my last 1000, with which we shall endeavor to 
hold ouL in> expectation of the reinforcement which is near at hand." 

The following is the letter from Dr. Judson to a member of the 
Publishmg Committee, accompanying English translations of the four 
Burmese Tracts, above announced, (p. 10,) as approved in Burmese 
dated, Rangoon, July 9, l8Zh 

''According to my promise a few months ago, I send you, accompa- 
nying) faithful translations of our four standard Tracts ; the three 
first done by myself, and the 4th by brother Wade. For many mooths 
we have been distributing between two and three thousand octavo 
pages p^r day, giving to none but those who ask. How the Tract Fund 
holds out, I know not: I suppose it does not hold out at all ; but that 
the money eomes from the mission fund. I am not aware of any 
supplies that have been received, except the scanty remittances from 
the Baptist Tract Society, the two donations from the American Tract 
Society, and 24 reams of paper from the London. However, Tracts 
we must have, and will, until the Agent of the Boaid refuses to pay our 
bills, and the Treasurer becomes insolvent Let the Board look to 
that May God help them and us in time of need, even as we aire 
endeavoring to help others. . 

" P. S. Beside the above, two of our largest Tracts are composed 
of extracts from Scripture, the one from the Old Testament, and the 
other from the New." 

Nor can the Committee omit the following curious incident among 
the Kai^ens^ communicated by Rev. Mr. Wade : 

" The vnld Karens who live five or six days journey beyond this 
have heard of the Gospel, and some hundreds of Tracts nave been car^ 
ried among them ; and though there are but few that can read, they 
were all|SO earnest for the Tracts, and there not being enough for au 
who desired them, that they cut the Tracts up into bits, that they nUght 
have a few words or a few lines of the sacred writing to keejt in their 
housesj" 

What means this excitement, pervading, as it were, a whole nation, 
if' it is not a clear indication, in the language of Dr. Judson, ^* That 
the great renovation of Burmah is dra#mg near." Think, too, of the 
influence this intelligent people may exert on, China. Have they 
already, through the mresi, engrafted tneir religion of Boohd upon the 
religion of China! Shall they not, ere long, be the instrument of con- 
veying to them the knowledge of Qhrist ? On the northern frontier 



Chinese, unong whom both languages are spoken. Soae of that 
D^pulatipa h^isr^ alrea4|( «iiibrai:«<i Cbriftiftaiiy* ^et the gkuioas 
work spread among them — g[ive them a f\iU supply otObiiMse Bibles 
«ad Cbif9e»e T^t0-rth9y niU h»yeea«y dci^&U^.milUenarrrandthe 
fiDol J. Wt going b^foTQ iIno^ who> can calcoUtA. Uw xeaalt.. The 
heiii:t t^at c<>^ld wi^h<)lll Tra<^ from Burjna^, wUttUm* wiilLEefi}- 
ri^nqe to.tb^ c<>av(^ioa qf W own H]^QQO,OQa, Qsmh^sk^uAJ «> 
for t^ coff^i^eraioii qi e)|imi» miuA b^.colil:indee<k 

. c¥m 

U the po^^tioD' qf Uie ^orl^ba 800,000^000, and that of Chfofi 
M6,60(^600, which is not far from the average estimate of Geogn)- 
pherS) then China embraces me-third^of the popi4atiqn(tfthii ^io5e^ and 
lii this Tiew presents a atnmger cliura on the prajers knd efib^Xs, 9f 
Christians t-han any other country. 

Bvt iHeftpwet of the Press in China renders its claim on this Sppiety 
peculiarly urgent. The Chinese are % reading people, and they vene- 
Mi9 their language aft if it ha^d been constructed apid given thi^iii 
directly by their gods. " A Ohinamanj" says Rev. Mr. Ab^eL "ii,ev«ir 
refuses a boo^ if hp can read, ana there is little doubt bpt he genQ* 
raiiy finds out its <^tents." ''A i^ative uni^cqaainted with letteris!, 
wm go through his village to have the book i^ad^ rather than rentaiii 
ignorant of it*'* 

The mportanoeofdiffu^mgreligioin knowledge in Chiqa, through 
the press, ha^ for many years bee^ felt bj som|^ of the ablest aD<;l 
most devoted servants orCnrist. As early as 1812, the Rev. puf^^* 
iiflon had eompiepced the p;reparatipn of Tracts for China^ and in the 
Ibllowikiff year, the luipentedl'Rev. Dr. Milne, late jpancipal of tii^ 
Atng^Chtnese QoUege at Malacca, entered on Ivs usej(al l^^>or^ fpir 
that interesting country. Morrison still lives, and is vigorously pro- 
secuting his work, having cqmpleled.the translation of tnQu ei^tife. vo- 
lume of the Bible, of which two editions have been prm ted. 

In February, 1814, Dr. Milne thus wrote to the fryeada of the Tifi^t 
cause in England* 

<* Allow me, in the n^^ of l^ee hmdred itifttibfM of Pagans, a cop? 
aiderable proportioQ of whom can reaipl, ai^d eft oftohomy^derstja^the 
$ame kmgut^e, to entreat that your Chnstifih DQxievol^nce nyiy b^ 
extended to them. Such 'ip the political. state of this country at |»re* 
sent, that we are not permitted ^o enter i(, and publish by t|ie living 
voiee the glad tidings of salvaUpn. Tracts may, howe^ef^ pei^etrate 
•U«ntly^ even to the chamber of the Emperor. They easily piit on a 
Chinese .coat, and may walk without fear through the breadth and 
length of the land. 

i; ** The Ckinesfl people re^ much; and Mr« Monisen iofermft m^, 
that TradSj iBCulcatine th^ worship of their d^rab idols, and tlra tf: 
eiting of their aacred oasaica, have be«B in use for ages among th^« 
They are sent to the temples hy inc^vida^ls^ who conceive trnit tni^ 
have obtained &vora firom their gods : and are difttribnted gratis to 
«U who will receive them. The ctrculatioii of Tracts ie ho new thinff 



1892.] CLAIMS OP TOBEIGN LUfDB. Tf 

la Chiim ; fhougb, alas I the matter of ibeni has been of UtUe moment ; 
BO doabt of dansBroua conaequence.*' 

Before Milae died, lie had Uie pteasure of receiving) aa a brother in 
Chriat, the Chineae printer Lbamooa-pa, whom he inatraoted in the 
Chiiatian relii^on, and through whom, ee well aa by Ae Tracta he 
wrote, *' he being dead yet apeaketh.** In M^irember, 1830, Dr« Mor- 
liaon comroonicated the cheering intelligence, that Lbano-a-fa had 
then himielf prepared nine Tracts, md had printed and circulated 'm 
the interior of Chua upwards of 7,000 Tracta on the most important 
•objecta. 

In a late communication he informs^ that the mne Tracta written 
by Lbang-a-fa, are intended to explain the Chiiatian mtero, and 
from thence to exm&the vain auperatitiona by which the Chineae are 
deladedj and adds, *Uhe latter part of this design is executed in i^ 
manner that no European now living, with whom I am acquainted| 
could equal." 

The following important testimony is also home by Dr. Morrison : 
'*It has long been my conviction," he writes, *' that Tracts constitute 
the most available' means of diffusing Christian knowledge^ under 
present circumstances, in this great empire*" 

The language of China, as is weH known, diArs very widely in ita 
eonstruction nom all other languages. It is not alphabetic, composed 
of letters, out of which words are formed, but consists of some thou- 
sands of characters or signs, each representing an idea. These cha- 
racters are arranged in columns, and read from the top of the pase 
downward, the oraer in wluc-h the columne are read being from right 
to left. 

Out of this construction of that sinffular language, grows a fact not 
less curious to one who uses our language, than important in esti- 
mating the power of the ^ress in China z-—the amne books are read (y 
those who sj^eak djfferetit diaUets, \ 

^ From mtercourse had with persons belonging to CoeAJn-CAjno," 
f aid Dr, Milne, " I hfive had an opportunity of satisfying myself, by 
writing and conversation, that the wHtttn language of that country, oif 
Tung-Ktng, and of Htdnan, is the same in all respects, (in form and 
idiom,) with that of China. This is pretty generally known, but I waa 
not so well convinced of if before. It wiliopen a wide door for the 
word of God. May it have free course, and be glorified !" 

A Tract Pistributer, at some great festival in China, where men of 
different tongues, throughout that vast empire were congregated, like 
the " Parthians, and M^ea, aiid Elamites, and dwellers in Mesopo« 
tamia,*' on the day of Pentecoat, might speak through hia Chinese 
Tracu, to every one in the language ** in which he waa bom ;" and 
though it would be nothing strange in their own eyea, it would be 
•caroqly leas mysterious to one^ acquainted only, with European lan- 
guages, and scarcely less efiicaciousin making known to all the won- 
dertul works of God, than if the i^ift of tongues should be revived aa 
a atanding miracle, (if such it might be odled,) for the difiunon of 
the gospel in China, 

Who, with a living faith in God, can view thia fact, and not beUeve 
that He will use ths febis is a powerful instrument of d ifRi a ing • 



78 ^ ANBniAL BEPORT. [JuDe, 

knowledge of his Son amon^ the idolatrons millions of that vast em- 
pire. And who will not wish to hasten in sending men to prefMra 
these publications in that language, and means to circulate them, till 
ofall the 266,000,000 of China, not one who can read shall fail of 
having in bis hand, at least a Tract that shall tell him of the Savior 
throogh whom alone " life and immortality are brousfht to light" 

It is an astonishing fact, that the Burmese, by diffusing Bdohddisra 
in China, thrmigh the wess^ have«engra(led it o» tho religion of Con* 
facius, and in no small deme changed the religion of an empire — and 
with the power of the Almiffhty Savior for our help, and under tho 
ioflaences of his spirit, shaU not GHaiSTiANiTT be introduced into 
China through the inedium of the press 7 

In closing their notice of the openings for Tract operations in China, 
the Committee add the following description of Chinese printing, by 
Messrs. Tyerman and Bennet. 

'^ We were much pleased with observing the process of printing in 
Mr. Medhur8t*s office. Nothing can be more simple or more efiective 
in its kind. All the characters are cut in wood, of a fine, but not very 
hard texture. Each block is an inch in thickness, and the width of 
two pages. Being planed and smoothed on the upper surface, to 
receive the characte/s, these are, in the first place, carefully written 
upon paper, which is laid upon the wood with the written side down- 
ward, and then pasted over. Before the paste is dry, the paper is 
peeled efi|' when the characters are seen transferred on the face of the 
block. The blank spaces are then. accurately cut away, by means of 
a sharp-pointed tool, and the written parts remain m alto-relievo, 
about the eighth of an inch high, like letters and 6guresin metal types, 
or pictures in what are called wood-cuts, among us. Mr. Mednurst 
employs two Chinamen in this work, to whom he pays 7 rupees (about 
$2 66) for every 1,000 characters. Each man will execute about 300Q 
of these in a month, or 100 a day, on the average. The blocks being 
finisheil are placed upon a table, at which the printer sits. Tho paper, 
squared reaay to the proper size, is laid dry before him, and, on a 
board at his right hand, the ink, whicn is little else than soot and 
water well tempered. With a brush, made of fine vegetable fibres, he 
first blackens the characters ; then, having nicely, with both hands 
spread the paper over the same, with another flat, soft brush, he rubs 
the sheet aown upon the face of the block ; this, when taken offy 
exhibits the perfected impression. A clever printer will throw off 
several thousands such copies in a day. The paper is manufactured 
from the bamboo, is exceedingly thin, and never printed on both sides," 
—Vol. III. pp. 41, 42. 

Thus a Cninese printer may cariy with him on foot the materials 
for printing a number of small Tracts, to any part of the empire ; 
stopping wherever he finds they are needed, and paper can be ob* 
tained, and striking ofiTas many copies as he can circulate ; and thus 
he might proceed from year to year multiplying and difiUsing the word 
of life wherever he should go. 



1832*] DIVINE BLESSING. 79 

EVIBENCE OF THE DIVINE BLESSING. 

Monthly Di8lribiUion in J^tw-Ywh City, 

In Octobeff a Distributer reported 29 names obtained for the Tem- 
perance Societjr, nearly all or whom were heads of families, and had 
been in the habit of drinking ardent spirits. Among them were a man 
and his wife who appeared to be earuestij inquiring, *' What shall we 
do to be saved ?" The man had long been a workman in an intidel 
printing-office, and was first awakened by the Tract JExomtne your 
hopes for Eternity^ accompanied by plain and earnest, but tender ex- 
postulation.— -^~A lady had attended a femaU prayer meeting^ esta- 
blished by the monthly Distributers, and had there received deep 
religious impressions. She communicated them to her husband. 
Both gave evidence that they had submitted themselves to God, and 
both were rejoicing together in the hope of pardon through the merits 
of the Savior. 

In ^ovembeTf a woman was found indulffinff a hope in Christ, who 
dated her serious impressions from the faithful conversation of the 
Tract Distributer, during a season of sickness a Tew weeks before.-— » 
A poor woman, who died fuH of the blessed hope and joy of the 
Christian, attributed her changed character and prospects to the 
blessine of God on the Tract Poor Sarah, ■ A lady, of infidel 
principles, had received the Tract for October, Examine your hopes for 
Eternity: . On reading the title she said with emphasis, ** Examine 
your hopes for Aternitv ! What are my hopes for eternity?" After 
pungent convictions she was led, as she trusts, through the influences 
of the Spirit, to lay down the weapons of rebellioi^, and accept of 
mercy through the Savior she had so long denied and rejected. 

In December, two men were found, one of them a merchant, who 
had been induced, by the Tract on Gambling, to resolve utterly to 
relinquish that vice for ever. A . Distributer found three indivi- 

duals deeply anxious for their souls, all of whom had been brought, to 
a sense or their sinfulness through the monthly Tract's. A man, 

who had been confined by. sickness three or four months, had been 
led, by the blessing of God on the conversation and prayers of the 
Distributer, hopefully to surrender his heart to the Savior. 

In January, a Distributer, who spends a day previous to each month's 
distribution, in fasting and prayer, found ten individuals deeply con- 
cerned for the salvation of their souls, eight of whom had received 
their impressions from reading the Tract Christ the only Refugt, 
A woman, who had long neglected public worship, and lived without 
Ood, had been awakened to a sense of her siutulness by the Tract 
Examine your hopes for Etemily — had submitted herself, as she hopes, 
to God, and had found joy and peace in believing. -A young man^ 
who formerly received Tracts only to destroy them, had his attention 
arrested by the Tract ITorM qfa DoUar, It reached his heart, and hope- 
fully led him to embrace the Savior he had so long despised. A 

woman, hoped that, through the blessing of God on tne kind exhor- 
tations and instructions of the Distributer, she had become a child of 
God. She has since publicly professed her faith in Chri8t.'--;^A 
mas, who formerly despised Tracts, was found on a sick bed reading 



80 



AmmAb RBNHm 



[Jtonc, 



the IMrymm^* IkmrkUm with inCeiia» intercit. He Ua-beoomc, it w 
hoped, a pardoned sioncr A voang lady> whose attention had 

been arrested by the Tract ChiiSl the only Refuge^ was found hoping 
ahe had become a new creatare, and had o^red herself for adniissibn 
to the church. 

In J^ebruary, a yoottf lady, who had h«en vttj gay and thougbtleM, 
after reading Cmtt the mfy Refiige^ repeatedly^ and with many team, 
waa led to submtt to the Savior, and is now rejoicing in his mercy.-—— 
A poor woman m» found in great distress of mind, and almost de- 
spairing of the mercy of Christ. The Distributer represented to her 
the fullness of the alonement, and the doty of immediate repentance, 
and while engaged in prayer with her, she hopes she was brought to 
aubmit to God, and she lias since given good evidence of & change ef 

heart. Another woman was hop^iilly brought to embrace the 

ofkn of mercy, and several others' were found inquiring for the way 

of salvation. One of the District Ptmer Meetings vna attended 

by more than eighty persons, the Spirit of God was evidently present, 
and many who had lived without religion became deeoty afftct^ML 
When the hour arrived for closing the meeting, almost all remained, 
and many appeared to be under t»& most solenm impresvknn. Th^ 
were dii«eted to Christ, as their only refugo, and tif^ of the number, 
it is hoped, gave their hearta to Him. 

ICT 8eetinkittgm^lsn9C»rfih€ Divine hlemng on tJn eescr* 



RKCBIPVS 

BnrO XBfi T«.I$ASUB.T OF THE AMSiUCAN. TRACT S0CIETT» 

. JVM»^^raie to Jiniy 1,1639. 

Tkfi Receipts t^om AaxUiajry, wA other Sodetie^ and Life and Amraal Oiroe-^ 
tors, aadMeiabeti being embodied in tlie Seventh Annual Jleport, are here omitted. 



Other Donations. 

▼BlIliONTv^New-Hnven, Vn. 

ClOoe Hoyt, IS, for Bunnabt 
Rev. Joel Pisk, for do. $1, . S 00 
MASS.— Pern, Rer. Joseph M. 

Br0ir«ter*8 soeiety, . 18 00 

PlwttMd.lkHidTaekard, . . 1 00 
Windsor, Rev. Gordon Oorraaoe, Si . 00 
Suodry individuals of Rev. 
Mr. Dorranee's society, . 13 35 
CONN.--CMewold,N«than Beleli. 
ert l|0, De«oQn A, Hunling- 
ton, |10, Joseph Lester, $10, 
Mrs. Qarah E. Lester, $10, 
William Tucker^ Esq. $10, SO 00 
Sundry Individnals, . .96 79 
HwlMi, Levi Noidin. . 3 00 

Hilford, childrea of two dittikt 

•choeli^ . 3 00 



Mohegan, Six individtialai, . ' I 
Newest, in Lisbon, Indtiriduala, 10 
Jforth-Branford, Miss Martalier* 

rick, a lepcy, . . .100 
Salem, Mrs. E. Hyde, . ] 

Stonington, Mrs. Charles R. Phelps, 3 
NEW-TORK, Albany, 1st Pres. 
hyterian ehacchf for Bar* 

mah, 

Augusta, WInthrop H. Chandler, 
Cooperstown, Rev. Mr. Smith's 

eoDgregeatioB, . 
E^Mt^Bloomiield, Frederick Lee^ 

$1, J. Ported, $5» . . 
French-Greek, J. Nash» 
Glen's Falls, Presbyterinn congre- 
gation, 

Sstwickt Ote«fl» twmtj, Jh^ 
D. fl«^e,tl, sftiMd,!!! 



30 
10 



e 



OO 



OO 
00 



00 

OO 



00 
90 



$» 



SiQ$ 



IMS] 



BficmiffSft 



n 



New-Tork |eity, FrvakliB-ttnet 

Churoh, <R0?. Mr. Duboii,) It^ 38 
JamM Brown, . 16 It 

A wellirish^r, 85 cts, a firiendl, 
$3, do.f l.athaiik offeriiig,|2, 6 35 
Peter Lwllow, . 3 60 

Salem, First ^inccM^rated Preb* 

byMnaa cobgreffation 80 00 

Sherburne, Samuel StebbiiiB, 8 00 

Spriof field, Preebjrteriao^on^pre* 

gMiim, \H^ 



8teek«nni, ladividimk, 

Troy, IBdwafd H. Walkte, fte- 

ceaaedi) a legacy* 
Westfield, Individuab 'ferjjUtt- 

mah, 

WotceMer, Otsego co. % Crop- 

N. itJ^SKt!— BfUMver, StinAilr 
mdividuals, .... 

P£NN.-J»hiladelphia, Mrs. Wft- 
-liam L. Boothi 



The receipfts frolki April 16 to May 1, iucldde iSoiMtloilli-^ 
1)1 part (br perpetuating *'BaltePsCall,^' . . . . 
For Foreign Distribotiofi, (including #189 to Ibt Bnrmkh,) 

Whole amount of Donations, . » ... 

AeciBiVeA for Tr«bU sold, .... 



Total, 



ttsom 

479 65 
68f387 'ov 

I6,i^ n 



860 

80 

51M 
tOM 



[Fr^ Ma9 1 to May 15, lliSS. 



nmOM AUXILtART TRACT B001ET1B8. #>»% Th Dim. 



VERMONT.— tIeuMii, Mimhftl R. Mtwilam, Sm. 
Castleten. Dr. John Perkins, Agent, . . « « 

Rnosbargh, Amas Boutell, Treasurer, . . . 

Fairfield, Benjamin Wooeter, Presitteat, .... 
Grand feto, Miss Reynolds, President, ... 

Middlebwy, Jedediah S. Bushnell, Agent, 
Poultney,W.P.Noy«ft,S»eroury, .... 

XASSACIIOSETTS— Lee, H> Bar«lect, Tlr«aMrM', 
PittsfieM, Oavid White, TrMMir^r, .... 

Washingwn, Beikshirbvottnty, Rev. OUob ICn^;lit, AgeftI, . 

RIIODG4sL AN D.— Providence, Paris ISiR, SecMtaiy, 

CONNBCTICUT^Bethel, ApoUos BenediMt Ssttrataiy, 
Bethlem, Rev. Pwrt Omieh) Presideftt, 
Brooklyn, (Windham county, kan.) IMwta fitiwbursp', At^ent, 

Danbury, Horace BullfTreasurer, 

Hamden, (Mount Carmol Socfecy,) Rlite Dfokeranai, Twis su r* , 
Kent, Female, . . .....' 

Madison, Wm. C. BurfiiMll, Treenufeir, • . . , 
Northfield, Lyman Waner, J«n. Seeretary, . 
North Greenwich, Rev. Mr. Wilcox, tVesmirer, . 
Reading, Rev. William L. fitaroBg, Agent, 
Southbury , Rev. Thomas L> Shipmatt, AgeoC, 
South Woodburv, Fern. Mrs. Eliza Prestoll, Agwl^ 

Stratford, Asa Curtis^ Treasurer, 

Wallinglbrd, Lw Cannon, Treasurer, .... 
W^terhury, L. B. Minor, Treeeurer, . . . • . 

NEW-TORk^-^AmeUrdam, MoutfroiiMiy ceoufy, 
Baiubrid|e, Fern. Blrs. Cyntliia Hunger, Seeretary, 
Bedford, Fern. Mrs. B. B. Nichols, Secietury, 
Fattemuts, Female, ........ 

Catskill, Ed|ar B» Dey, Tf«asttrer, .... 

Champlain, Clinton county, Kev. Ecra D. Kinney^ Agent, . 
Clienango, Broome eouniy, Rev. )Petor L«»ekwood, Treesmvr, 
Claverack, Female, . . . - 

Clyde, Waykie county. Fern. Mrs. A. M*Cnrdy, Trestnfer, . 
Colcheeter, Delegare county> Fein. MisB SaTrii Downs, JloreBt, 
Dashville Falls, Fern. Mrs. L. M. Butler^ TieasMer 
Dunkirk, T. Faraham, Treasurer, . * . 

Durhiti, Fen. Mn. Eudeua Booth, T l wu t i, 



15 80 

480 

10 60 

485 



600 



60 00 
305 



ua 



700 

861 

lb 00 



«» 



[189£. 



East Hampton, Rw. Joseph D. Condi t, Agent, . 
Elaabethtown, Nathan Perrv, Treasurer. 
Fort Covington, Rev. John A. Savage. Secretary, 
Gouverneur, Fem. Mrs. Lucina Parsons, President, 
Harlaem, Fem. Mrs. L Doughty, Treasurer, . . 

I Harpersville. Broome county, Uri Smith, Secretary, 
HaKwick and Fly Creek, Albert North, Treasurer, 
Jamestown, Fem. Mrs. Harvey, Secretary, 
Lisle, Norman Marsh, Treasurer, . • _ •. • . 

Livonia, Livingston county, Fem. Mrs. Sarah Beecher, Agent, 
Jf arbletowt^ Lewis, J. Hasbrouck, Treasurer, 
Maryland, A. T. Bigelovv, Treasurer, . • • „ • 
Middlelown, Delaware county, John Dixon, Jun. Treasurer, 
Montgomery, Orange county, Rev. WiUiam Blam, Secretary, 
Mount Morris, Mrs. Lucrelia C. Sleeper, Secretary, 
New Rochelle. Fem. Mis% Sophia Brewster, Secretary, 
NewWindsor, Silas Corwin Treasurer, •„ • 

New-York City Tract Society, Alfred Edwards, Treasurer, 
Do. by the Fem. Branch, Mrs. E. B. Lethhridge, Tfeasuter, 
Oyster Ponds, Rev. P. Robinson, Agent, .... 

Peru, Harriet Wells, Treasurer, 

Plattsburgh, WiUiam Weed, Treasurer, .... 
Riverhead, George Miller, Treasurer, • ; • p, rj^*. 
Roxbury, Delaware connty. Rev. Fosdic Harrington, President, 
Rvft Fem Ann H. Buckley, Secretary, . . . • 

aTthEMi, Putnam count/, Fem. Rosanna Jackson, Secretary, 
South Hampton, Rev. Daniel Beers, Agent, .... 
Spencertown, Rev. Joel Osborn, Agent, . ... 

Springfield, Fem. Nancy Griswold, Treasurer, ... 

Troy, Charles Lyman, Treasurer, 

Utlca, Edward Vernon Secretary, , „• • * ™ * 
Waltiu, Delaware county, Miss Hannah N. Scyihour, Treafurer, 
West Hampton, L. I. Jaber Foster, Treasurer, . - 

NEW JERSE Y.-^Bloomfield, Z. B. Dodd, Treasurer, . . 

. Hardieton, North Presb. Church, Fem. Mrs. M. Fairchild, Sec 
Kingston Fem. Miss Jane K. Comfort, Treasurer, 
Aleiidham, Fem. Mrs. Johnson, Secretaiy, • • • • 
Princeton, in Theological Seminary, Richard Webster, Secretary 

Do. Fem. Miss P. W.Moribrd, Treasurer, . 
Rockaway, Miss Emily Beach, Treasurer, . . 

PENNSYLVANIA.— Erie, Fem. Enuly Wight, Secretary, 
Honesdale, Rev. Joel Cambell,. Agent, . . . • 

Philadelphia Branch, Rev. J. T. Benedict, General Agent, 

MARYLAND.— Baltimore Branch, C. A. Hall, Treasurer, . 
Do. by their Auxiliary, Tarry Town, (for dis.) 

VIRGINIA^Fredericksburg, Wm. H. White, Agent, . 
Shepherdstown, James M'Murran, Treasurer, 

'' Winchester, Daniel Gold, Treasurer, • •. ;,„•..; 

N. CAROLINA.— Oxford, Aux.Depos. F. M. Wiggins, P. M. Agt.; 
GEORGIA.— Augusta, Benjamin Hall, Treasurer, 
KENTUCKY.- Lexington, Luther Stephens, Agent, . . - 
OHIO.— Hudson, (Portage co. Aux.) Professor Llizui Wright, Tr. 

New Philadelphia, Azor Abel, Esq. Secretary, . . 

MICHIGAN TERR.— Dexter, Fem. Mrs. Elizabeth P. Clark,Tr. 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 

MASSACHUSETTS.- Pittsfield, Mite Society, in Fem. Sem. for 

Hopn, Montgom. co. N. Y. . . . • * a ' - * 

CONNECTICUT.- Lyme, young ladies', Elizabeth Hart, Sec. for 

Perry. Montgomery county, Ohio. 

Middlebury, Benevolent Society, R. Townsend, Treasurer, . . , 
NEW-YORK—Chautauque, Sunday School Union, 

Windham, Green codnty, Fem. Elizabeth B. Strong, Tr. v . 
NEW JERSEY.— Mendon, . •. . . 

Tracts sold at the Depository to individttalfl, .... 



F^. Tr. 

3 00 

587 

10 00 

5 15 

2 00 

5 4 
18 24 
18 00 

6 90 

3 25 
9 19 
8 32 
5 00 



6 00 
1 00 

1 64 
500 00 
274 16 

4 91 
3 50 

8 77 
3 74 

5 44 

2 80 

3 50 
SI 07 

2 14 

50 00 
105 75 

5 31 

6 19 
11 54 

9 00 

2 14 

3 75 
500 

70 

6 00 

5 00 

14 65 

460 00 

165 04 

36 35 

36 

172 75 

8 40 

iOO 00 

69 14 

50 00 

525 

500 



Don. 



10 00 



525 

13 06 

3 50 
10 00 
.2 00 



11 41 
1 75 
1 00 
1337 81 



3 50 



520 



500 



3 75 



10 00 



2 00 



12 00 

13 00 
625 



laas.] 



KBpSIPIS. 



e$ 



30 



30 



30 
50 



Direeicrs Jbr Life, 

CONNECTICUT.— New Haven, 
Prof. Josh. W. Gibbs, by Soph. 
Class, (in full of $50), . . 

JNorth Branford, Rev. Judaon A. 
Root, by Fein. A. T. S. (in full 
of$50,) . . . . 

North Woodbury, Rev. Grove L. 
Brownell, by ladies, (in full of 
$50,) . . . ; ^-30 

Wilton, Rev. Samuel Merwin, by 
Ladies, (in Aill of $50,) . . 10 

NEW-tORK.— Albany.Rev.Wm. 
Lockhead, by Ladies, Third 
Presb. Church, (in full of $50,) 30 

Bloimiiiig Grove, Hezekiah 

Howell, Esq. (in fuU of $50,) . 5 

New-YorkCity, Rev. Joseph Hurl- 

but, . • «,* 

Rev. James H. Mathews, D.D. 

by Ladies of South Dutch Ch. 52 

South East, Putnam county, Rev. 

Robert B. E. M'Leod, by Fern. 

NEW J KRSEY.— Newark, Rev. 
Philip C. Hay, by Ladies, (in 
full of $50,) 

Parsippany, Rev. John Ford, (one- 
third Foreign,) 

PENNSYLVANU.— Philadelphia, 

E. F. Backus, Esq. .125 

Robert Earp, Esq. . 50 

James Kerr, Esq. • SO 

Members for Life, 

VERMONT.— Bridport, Rev. Da- 
na Lamb, by a female friend, 

MASSACHUSETTS. Granby, 

Miss Pamela Smith, 

Pittsfield, Mrs. Martha Gold, 

Rev. J. W. Yeomans, by chil- 
dren of his congregation, .SO 

Westfield, Rev. Emerson Davies, 
by Students of the Academy, . 20 

Williamstown, John P. Whitman, 20 

RHODE-ISLAND.— Bristol, Rev. 
Jdbn Bristed, by Fem.Mission- 
ary Society, St. Michael's Ch. 
for Greece, 

CONNECTICUT. — ^Bethel, Rev. 
Erastus Cole^ by Ladies, (in 

£irtof$aO,) 
lyn, Rev.Ceorge J.Tillotson, 

by Ladies, (For. Dis.) . . 
Esaex, Miss Eliza. P. Champlin, 

by her father, Captain H. L. 

C%amplin, ."O 

Jewett City, John W. Fanning, 

]B«i.(infullof$20,) .18 

Mrs. Dolly Porter,* do. . 5 

Kent, Mrs, Almira L.Adams, . 90 

Jn. R. Blair, by his grand mo- 

tbar, Mn. Lemah D> Raymond 20 



00 

00 

00 
00 

00 
00 
00 
50 

50 00 



00 
00 

00 
00 
00 



20 00 



20 
20 



00 
00 

OO 

00 
00 



.20 00 



11 
20 



38 
00 

0.0 

00 
00 
00 

00 



Lisbon, Dea. Wifliam 'Adamt, (in 

Aril of $20,) . . , 10 0$ 

" Eunice Averill, do. . 5 0<^ 

" Captain John Bingham, do. . 5 00 
" Joel Hyde, do. . 5 00 

'* Ehsha Morgan, do. . 5 00 

*' Mrs. AUce SafTord, do. . 10 00 

" Mr8.JuIia Huntington, (in part 

of $20,) 1 00 

" Dea. William Lee, do. 3 00 

Mansfield, Mrs. Sarah Atwood, by 

Fem.A.T.S. . .30 00 

New-Haven, Prof. Denison Olm- 
sted, by 8 division of junior 
class, (in part of $20,) . . 11 00 

Sharon, Rev. Reuben, H. Close, by 

himseU; . . 20 00 

South Britain, Cyrus Mitchell, . 20 00 

Soutiibury, Mrs. Mary D. Shipman, 

by Rev. Thomas L. Shipman, 20 00 

South Groton, Rev. Timothy Tut- 

tle, by Ladies, . . . 20 00 

Stonington, Elisba Fazton, . 20 00 

NEW-YORK.— Cauajoharie, Rev. 

Ransford Wells, by Ladies, . 20 00 

Catskill, Ann Maria Person, ^ . 20 00 

Colchester, Del. co. Mrs. Jerusha 

Downes, by Sarah Downes, . 520 00 
" Miss Sarah Downs, . . 20 Oft 

Durham, Rev. Jonathan Cone, by 

young people of his society, . 20 00 
*' Luther Hayes, by several 
friends, . . ' . . 20 00 

Fishkill, Rev. Robert 6. Arm- 
strong, by Ladies, ' . . 20 00 

Goodwill congregation. Orange 
Co. Rev. William Blain, by 
ladies, (For Dis.) . . 20 0$ 

Jamestown, Rev. Erastus J. Gil- 
let, by Fem. A. T. S. . . 20 00 

New-York city, William Forrest, 20 Od 
Mrs. Gouverneur W. Wil- 
kins, 85 00 

Rome, John Jay Slocum, by Miss 

Abigail Bishop, Hamden, Con. .20 00 

Sag Harbor, Marcus B. Osbom, 
by Bible Class, (in part of 
$20,) 12 00 

PENN.— Philadelphia, Janes At- 
wood, . . . . 20 00 
Thomas Earp, Esq. . . 20 00 
Hon. John Sergeant, . . 20 00 

VIR.— Winchester, Miss Betsey 
Ann Haliday, by Geo. Barn- 
hart, (in part of $20,) . . 5 00 

TENN. — Winchester, Rev. Jo- 
seph A. Copp, by Ladies of 
Curab. Pres. Cong. . 90 00 

OHIO.-^harlestown, Rev. Da- 
vid L.Coe, by Ladies, . 20 00 

Pleasant, Marion co. Zadock Al- 
len, by his aunt, Mrs. Anna 
Allen, Hamden, Con. . . 20 00 



<S4 



iKECfilPTS* 



11892 



soo 

2 00 
2 00 

fido 

1 00 
200 



6 00 
10 00 



Ift. tSIiAND.— FroTidende, Cd* 

AlekMider Jones, . . ' 2 00 

2 >NN.— Greenwich, Lfltira tl6W«, 2 00 
wett city, Nathaniel Colt, Em. 2 00 
KEW-Y^K^LudlowvUle, P. 

O. Ttfbipkins CO., Theodore 

L. Cuy!«r, .... 
New-York city, MiM Hdlen Noe, 

Mr«. Harriet Van NMtrahd, 
Sur-Harbor, J6b Hedges, 
N£W-J£KSEY< — CohMclleat 

Farm», Mrs. M&tthlas Brant, 
r£NN.— Philadelphia, Ndthahiel 

ClkMincy, Esq. 

Other Donationt. 

VEft.— Httbbardton, Fern. Chari- 
table Soc. $3 for Burmah, 
^ for Sombay, . 

MASS.— Boston, Reir. Wm. C. 
Woodbridge, annual donat. 

CONN.— Abington, sundry indi- 
viduals^ . • 

Andover, Rev. A. Miller's cong. 

Bridgewater, church and congre- 
gation, .... 

BrooKfieTd, individuals, 

Brooklyn, collection at n&ohthly 
eoftcdrt^ (For. Dis.) . 

Franklin, Rev. Dr. Nott*s feoc, 

Greenwich, 2ophar Mead,' . 

JKent, cbureh and congregation, 

Mansfield, few individu«ds, 

New-Haven, Sophomore clast, 

North-Brauford, gentlemen of 
Rev. A. Root^s societv, 

Korth-Woodbury, ohurcb &nd 
coiigregation, ... 

Norwalk, Mrs. Sarah Lockwood, 

Washington, Col. Perry Averill, 

Womibury, South soc., sundry 
individuals, . . • 

N. YORRi— Albany, Ladies Tr. 
Soc. Ref. dutch church, 

Amsterdam, C. Bartlett, . 

Joseph Clisbie and S<Hi, $5 
each, .... 

Auttfsta, Oneida co. Stlmuel Hoas, 

Be«kmantowii, ** O^ E," for Bur- 

mah, . * * * * 

CanandaigHtt) Ura. R. A. Lester, 

(1, Mrs. £. Shephard, $5, 



Mrs.K. m 0ablMU,'&r Val. 
Miss. $10, Mrs. Harriet 
Martin, for Bunnt^, $4, . dO m 
Clinton, a contrfbutidn, . ISS 71 

Daafaville, a friend for CHina, . 1 25 
Leno^ Second Ohiirch, . . 3 Oo 
Newr-Tdrk city, AMAynioua, 
fiO 25, a friend, 25 cUl. ttn- 
known ftrlend, $1, « tt. H." 
for For. Distrib. fl 50, A 
lady, $6, Mrs. Livinnton, #5, 
R«kA. Haclay,fIO, . 
Orange co. Female friend, 
Sag-Hhrbor, Job Hedges, . 
Sanff^rfield, Abner Townsleir, 
Walton, tM, co. Mist Radfael 
Boutotot .... 
West^ld, by Rev. Wm. fivans) 
West-Hfcmptonr L. 1. Fein. Tract 
distributers) for Randelpb) 
Montg. CO. Ohio; 
Wbitesboro, Ret. John Frost, |5, 
sundry iadilidtiB]0,ff 3 60, 
Joel Root, $3, Wm. Walcoft) 
$10, B. S. Waloott, |5t 
N. JERSi:Y.-^Ailgiista, iK. Bb- 

a«a GttMin, 

Newark, Miss Frances ForHtai, 
laM 4»f thd feecbnd PreUby, 
churck,. a legacy, . . 
New-4Branstriek, Mrs. Maria 

Soudder, for Ceylon^ . 
PENN.— Ghance^tM-d, York, e6. 

M. Wallace, for fiurmab, 
Philadelphia, Female iVaet So- 
ciety, IstPreshy. 6hunjb,ftr 
Burmah, . . 68 7S 

Five cUldrMi ef a wld«Wj$25, 
Rev. Dr. Sicinoer't chliroh» 
sundry iadtvidttals,$10t cash 
$5i James Gray, Esq. HIO, 
Mrs. M. CarsweU^llOiSladyr 
f lOt Mrs. Alman, $3 26, Miaa 
Agnes Painter, $2 50, Jacob 
Tanoy, $S» A. Mite, $1, Mrs. 
Edgar, t2« «ash by Rev. Dr. 
Ely, $3 75, as aged lady, for 
Barmah, 50 eenli, . .. 88 01 
Pikft CO. Miss Darling, . # 5 W 
VIRGINIA— Mlddlebnry, Lon- 
don OIK Mra. Catharine Pow- 

ell, 1 OO 

K£NTUCKY.^F^ette eo. Mrs. 

D. Logan, for Bunnah, . Z ^ 

The above list contains donafioB»~ 

For Valley of the Mississippi, |34 C0 

For foreign Distribution, (including |8d 25, for Bunna]i^.$20f 
for Greece, $3, for Bombay, $5, for Ceylon, and $1 25, for 
China,) . . . ' . . i mi% 



13 73 
SOU 


950 
U94 


10 00 
15 22 

5 00 
SI 16 

625 
10 00 


Is 00 


S3 79 

lO 00 

100 


37 84 


40 00 
500 


10 00 
300 



500 



38 10 
2 00 
300 
300 


1 m 

100 


i2 0(r 


18 60 


18 00 


7» 


100 OO 


soa 


50» 



Whde araonnt of donationa, 
Heceived for Tracts sold, . 



Total, 



t 



m 
t 



$2,449 59 
2,SS3S» 

:|5,403 18 



THE AMERICAN 



o« Hemolt of Thanu Huiildi PiMo, Bcrin i, Nn. I 



TWO BESOI.UTIOHS, 

Xnotrto by the American Trad Society at their laM >nniver- 
Hry, demand the leriODS ittentian of etery frieoJ of the Society, 
and cab be cartU4 into effect only by laiwrioun effort and liberal 
canlribulioni, attEnded by (he blssaing of God in answer lo prayer. 
Tbe fdlowing it Ibe 

KEaOLUnOPf FOE THE SDTPLr OF OUR OWN COUNTRY. 

Reiolied, Tftol in view of the ipirUual wanit of these United 
Slala, and ofiht agtncv Ihii nolion mos exert in the coarcniim of lite 
atrld, ihit Socitly. iHlh Ike bleuing of God and Ihe eo-npiralion of 
the Chri^ian ammanily, witi proceed mmtdialtly lo the uork ofitip- 
plging ij/ilematicaJh) the entire dtitili^ papvlation of our envnlry ailh 
Tract; aecompamed by At preyeniatd labtn offaiihful DiiMlmtiTi. 

VVou II. 7 Whole No, 78. 



86 CLAIMS OF OUR couNTBY. [July, 

The plan of operaUon, which the Society is parsuing for the sop- 
plj of our own countrj, is to divide the inhabited territory into fields, 
each demanding the permanent labors of a devoted Agent. By the 
estimate in the last Annual Report, there are thirty such fields in our 
country, each 180 miles in length by 100 in breadth, and embracing 
on an average about 300,000 inhabitants. The object of the Agent 
is to get an adequate Depository established at the commercial centre 
of his field, and then to rouse the Evangelical commcmity to the work 
of presenting Tracts statedly, by gift or loan, to every family ^ and ac- 
companying them by prayers and latbon for the i^faritual welfare or 
the entire population. « 

The grand argument for this system of effort is, that a very large 
portion of our population do not attend on tbe stated means of grace, 
and there are not ministers of the Gospel to carry it to them in their 
places of abode. This is the prominent, if not thecmly system hithert<^ 
devised for reaching them ; and when faithfully prosecuted is one of 
the most effective means of usefulness. 

TractSf for carrying the system into effect, are stereotyped, and 
can be printed as fast as they shall be required ^ and Depositories, of 
greater or less size, are already established in all our principal citie» 
and towns. 

Jfineteen iuidiivmdl Agents are required to supply the SO fields de- 
signated by the Committee— 11 beinfj; bow in the field. They must 
be men of devoted piety ; who live ibr the conversion of the world to 
Christ, and who are willing to consecrate their most devoted and selfr 
denying efforts to advance his cause. 

Means must also be contributed. Tbe woiii is a great one^ — wbe- 
ther we consider the labor to be performed— the contributions re* 
quired— or the gloHoas harvest,, which, by the Messing of God, may 
be gathered. 

Efforts for the systemaiie distribution should also be made by Chris^ 
tians in every part of the country— not waitinf^ for Agents, who can 
with great difficulty be obtained^ and must be supported by the con* 
tributions of the churches. If tbe work cannot immediately be exr^ 
tended to all tbe destitute of our conotry, let every Christjaa do what 
is in his power, that at least the destitute among wbtm God haji 
placed him, may be supplied. 

EESOLUTION FOK SUPPLYING FOREIGN AND PAGAN LANDS. 

Resolted, TheU the numerous and urgent eaUs which are notp pre- 
smted to this Society in bthalf rf the Pagan world, together wUh the 
facilities which are afforded by th^Prwridence of God, for conveying Ur 
them the saving knowledge of Chiistr devolve on us a most soUmn re- 



tS&m CLAIBIS OP VOREIQN LANDS. 87 

tponnbUUy t» tupply teUh approved Tracts all of every nation to whom 
Qod opens before u» the tO(»y qf access. 

The R«r. Rufus Babcock, of the Baptist Church, Salem, Mats. 
who offered this resolution, after urging^ the duty of embracing the 
whole family of man in our endeavors, as God^s command, and the 
way in which alone we can expect his richest blessing, thus pro* 
ceeded: 

This Society cannot afford to neglect the wants of the dying hea- 
then. Withholding from them not only tends to poverty, but to ruin. 
There is no path for us, but onward; and while we trust in God, who 
has smiled on our incipient efforts, and in his strength, go onioardf 
millions at home and abroad will rejoice together. 

The report speaks of having commenced the work of supplying the 
destitute in foreign lands: It is this which I could wish to have writ- 
, (en on evenr memory, on every conscience and heart to^lay — the 
work is only commenced. In the distribution of your S5,000, the 
largest sum was generously and judiciously sent to the Burman em- 
pire. Her population is not less numerous than our own ; and for all 
her millions, already able as her male population is to read, you give 
4BIO0O. A sum not more than twice as large as a single populous town, 
in the interior of our privileged country, thinks it necessary to expend 
in order to place a single Tract each month, in every family ; besides 
•11 their other religious instruction of Bibles, and preachers, of reli- 
gious books and Christian interoourse. Suppose all this amount, 
which you have been able to appropriate, concentrated on one such 
town in Burmah ; considering their deficiency in other privileges, it 
would not be prodigal ; but then, all the rest of her teemmg millions 
are left in utter dafkness. And when by accident any of her sons 
have heard, in their distant dwellings, ** that there is an eternal God, 
and an eternal hell," and hasten to him whom they call ** Jesus Christ's 
man," and earnestly ask a book to tell them how to serve the one and 
escape the other — he who has given away the last of your Tracts, and 
who " cannot sit still and see the dear Burmans, flesh and blood like 
ourselves, and like ourselves possessed of immortal souls, that will 
shine for ever in heaven or burn for ever in hell." — he must go away 
and weep, because ** these rocks, these icy mo»n/at7M hate crushed him 
dovon for many years.*^ Deeply does he feel and clearly does he see, 
that this appropriation is but a beginning of the work ; and wo to us 
and to the professed friends of the Redeemer in this favored land, if 
we do not feel and act under the abiding conviction that the work is 
but begun. 

The situation of our missionaries in foreign lands is not unlike that 
of the servant of Elijah on mount Horeb. The resolution of the last 
anniversary has excited hope in them ; and again and again have they 
gone forth, and looked toward the sea, to discover our promised aid ; 
and though often and long they have returned in disappointment, yet 
now they see a little cloud arising. Shall it be to them, as to the ser- 
vant and his master, a sound of abundance of rain 7 Shall it spread 
itself ever their horizon, and send 4own upon the morally parched 
nnd sterile plains of China and Bnrmah, of Greece and Germany, of 



88 CHINA^ [^^9 

Prance, Russia, and the Isles of the Sea, abandant showers of heaven- 
ly blessinofs ? Yes, Mr. President, a thousand hearts here present, 
and thousands more in unison with ours, which have felt the virtue of 
a Savior's cleansing^ blood, will say, in the name of that God by whont 
we have set up this banner, that little cloud shall spread, till in Hi 
folds of mercy the heathen world are embraced and brought home 
to God. 



From the Journal of Rev. Elijah C. Bridgman, American Missionary in Chuus^ 

Mat 10.— While the Chinese government will not tolerate the pub- 
lic preaching of the Gospel, the grecU means of introduciitg a know- 
ledge of Christianity toiU be printed Dracts and books. In accordance 
with this view of the subject, the preparation and distribution of books> 
bave been leading objects of attention froita the very commencement 
of the Protestant mission to the Chinese; and they must continue t<^ 
be so, until every one that speaks that language shall read in his own 
tongue of the wonderful works and mercy of God» 

The Ciiinese may be called, with great propriety, a bookish people. 
They have their historical books, their moral, religious books, and 
all other kinds of books — CkrisHan books only being excepted. And 
even these are beginning to find their way among the dense and nu» 
merous population that use the Chinese language. Probably in na 
one language on earth are so many hitman beings altle to read the word 
of God, were it universally distributed, as in the Chinese. It is most 
astonishing, and most lamentable, that so little effort has ever beea 
made to give the Bible to the people of this ancient and extensive 
empire. This subject demands the serious and careful consideration 
of all those whose acknowledged duty it is to publish the Gospel to all 
the families and individuals of the human race. It is very desirable 
that Christians should know how little has been done, and what there- 
is to be accomplished, in the great work assigned them by tbeir Lord^ 
and Savior Jesus Christ. 

Though for centuries the art of printing flourished here, while evea 
its existence was unknown in Christendom, this art is doubtless, \tk 
the hands of Christians, destmed to be of all instruments the most 
powerful to break down the bulwarks of idolatry, and to give the light 
and life of Christianity to the inhabitants of China.. 



From a Utter of Rev. Mr. Bridgman to the American Bible Societif.. 

Take a survey of this field : from Canton pass up through Formosa^ 
Loochoo, Japan, and to Corea; thence pass westward along the Rus* 
sian frontiers for more than 2,000 miles, to the centre of Asia; from 
thence, in a south-eastern direction, travel down through Tibet, Siam, 
Fenang, Malacca, across the equator on to Java ; and by a circuitous 
route, including the numerous islands of the Indian Archipelago, re- 
turn to the place of your departure ; and you will have included, in 
the vast area, a large proportion, perhaps one third part of the hummk 
famUy. Though there art many different Umguages and ditUectt unlhin, 



1^2;] CLAIMS OP roR£io^ LANbd* 89 

ihese limitSf yet ihrough&ut the tohok the BUthf if posttssed in the 
Chinese language, can be read. 

There is another fact that ^ives the Chinese a strong claim to the 
attention of yoor societyt They are a reading people. In this respect 
they are, probably, superior to any pagan nation of ancient or mO" 
dern times^ Buddhism, with all its absurdities, has worked its way 
into every nook and corner of the empire, through all the grades of 
eeciety, by means ef books ^ unlhoul the aid of teachers. Give the 
Chinese the Bible and at once, a very large proportion of the popula- 
tion can read it. Thousands are now accessible, and would willing- 
ly receive the Bread of Life. There are, indeed, many considera- 
tions to urge onward the missionary ; but, in spite of all he can do, 
the Bible will find its way into the interior of the empire before him. 
It has gone there already, a pioneer to prepare the way of the Lord. 



EAGERNESS FO& TRACTS IN GREECE. 
The Rev. John H. Hill> Episcopal Missionary to Greece, in his jour- 
nal of a voyage to Smyrna, in company with Rev. Jonas King, thus 
describes their distribution of Tracts in a small port where they 
spent a Sabbath ; 

On our voyage we had given some Tracts and Gospels to the crew. 
This was soon noised abroad, and we began to have applications in 
abundance. A little magaeine which we had taken possession of to 
shelter us from the scorching suit, was at once filled with inquirers 
for books. To get rid of the crowd, (for we could not breathe,) we 

F laced the box of books just outside^ beneath a low window^ in which 
sat all day. One after another, from boys of 'five years to men of 
seventy, pressed for books. To those wh0 couTtf read, they were 
given without hesitation — those who could not were sent away with 
tears in their eyes. By one o'clock the crowd became so great, and 
the demand so urgent, that wc had to call in the aid of our old cap- 
tain, and when all our Tracts and Scriptures were gone, they con- 
tinued to press upon us wkh the most eame#t petitions. In several 
cases, those who had received a little Tract perhaps, brought us back 
in return presents of grapes, apples, eggs, Lc, and one brought us a 
plate of excellent Moustalevri. 

ABERDEEN TRACT SOCnSTY, SCOTLAND. 
A very kind communication has been received from Mr. Willum 
Clark, of this Society, expressing their joy in every measure of suc- 
cess granted to the American Tract Society and other Christian efiTorts 
in this country, and in the delightful bond of union which unites 
Christians of the two countries in their efforts to Evangeline the 
world. We regret that our brief limits do not permit the insertion 
of the letter entire. 



WINCHESTER, VA. AUXILIARY. 
Fifth Anniversary, May 3. The Report presents a view of the ra- 
pid progress of the Society in each year since its formation-^showing 



00 PENNSYLTANIA BRANCSL D^Jf 

the manifest smiles and blessing of God. Receipts the last year 
$579 67, of which $95 were in donations. Value of stock in the 
Depository $403 27. Circulated 361, 230 pages Tracts ; 195 Pikes 's 
Persuasives, 76 Saint's Rest, 61 Rise and Progress, and 86 other 
bound volumes. Circulated since the formation of the Society 715,582 
pages, exclusive of bound volumes. The monthly distiibution has 
been prosecuted in Winchester, embracing between 500 and 600 fa- 
milies. Gratitude is expressed for the care taken by the Parent So- 
ciety, that its Narrative Tracts shall be truly authentic — for the har- 
mony of different Evangelical denominations — and for what is doing 
to send the Gospel by Tracts to the Heathen world. 

TAts Society, from its formation^ has always paid in adtance far 
all publications ordered from the Parent Sodely. 

A Family conterttd, and a revival of Religion commenced^ hy means of a 

Tract of four pages. 

A young man in a neighboring county (says the Report) was ar- 
rested by the Narrative of the facts contained in the Tract ** Quench 
not the Spirit,^* in a sermon. Under deep conviction he left the place, 
while a number of others remained by invitation to receive personal 
conversation from a minister. Such was the influence of the case de- 
picted in the Tract on his mind, that after restlessly wandering about 
many hours, he returned at midnight to the same place of worship, 
and there, in solitude and silence, on the very spot where be had been 
invited and refused to come, knelt down and surrendered himself to 
God, and found peace in believing. The effect of this young man'a 
decided change and bis consequent urgent entreaties, was the hope- 
ful conversion of a family^ consisting of his mother, sister, stepfather, 
and a servant. And to this remarkable and powerful influence on this 
family, may be distinctly traced a gracious oa/pourin^ of God: s Spirit,, 
which promises to gather scores into the kingdom of God. 



PENNSVLTAIflA BRANCH TRACT SOCIETY. 

Fifth Annirersary, held in the Fifth Presbyterian Church, Philit- 
delphia. May 29. Rev. Dr. Cathcart, of York, presided and opened 
the meeting with prayer. Rev. Dr. Livingston read the Annual Re- 
port. Addresses were delivered to a hirge and attentive auditory by- 
Rev. Dr. Leiand, of Charleston, South-Carolina; Rev. Mr. Bogue of 
Norwich, New-York ; and Rev. Dr. Cox, of New York city. Among 
the resolutions adopted were the following ; 

Resolved, That ito view of the claims ef the Parent Society for tfie destitate ii» 
this and heathen lands,, this Society feel the importanc&of makjnr premptpavment 
for Tracts purchased^ r f j 

Resolved, That with the aasistance of Christian benevolence, and the blessinrof 
Ood, this Society will cooperate with the Parent Society in supplying the destitute 
in our country, by eetablishiag^ thfrsyslemaei<> distribution of Tract* wherever prac- 

J:mou$a Circulated^ 

parinff the year there have bean received, ........ 7730 90# 

IVlToIttmesRiseandProfreaa, and Saint's Rest, equal ta, . * ^ 'ljw|43a 



1833.] TRACT soGiErr, boston. 91 

1760 Children's TractSt Broadsheets, Handbills, abd other publica- Pogf. 

tions, equal to 405,000 

11800 Almanacs, equal to 415,500 

Which, added to the number of pages as per last Report, make the 

business stock of the year to be, 6,875,824 

Whole amount of pages circulated this year, 5,856,413 

Total received since opening the Depository, .... 31,860,866 

Grand total circulated, 28,166.127 

ReceipU and Expenditurtt. 

Receipts during the year for Tracts sold, $3,174 5S0 

For life members and directors, 167 00 

For donations, 777 47 

Balance last year 806 34 

Amounting to . . . 1 4,385 01 

Remitted to the Parent Society, $2,286 66 

Paid for printing Report, Mapzine, Almanacs, &c 416 61 

Expenses of the Depository, including rent, salaries, &c. . 1,230 00 

Caah on hand, ^1 74 

Total amount, $4,385 01 

Special attention has been directed to the wants of the large German 
population of the state, for whose benefit not far from, 60 Tracts have 
been stereotyped by the Parent Society under the supervision of the 
German Committee of this Branch ; Rev. Samuel Helfenstcin has per- 
formed three months agency among that population ; 47,000 pages 
of German Tracts have been gratbitonsly circulated the last year, 
and a German Christian Almanac has, for several years, been annually 
printed. 

The Monthly Distribution is on the increase, having been adopted 
in 60 or 60 cities and districts. 

The Philadelphia City Tract Society hitve d^ributed during the 
year 1^34,800 pages within the city and suburbs ; gathered 200 chil- 
dren into Sabbath schools, and found 260 families destitute of the 
Bible. 

The Report presents urgent motives for mora (horooghly supply, 
ing the population within the field of that Branch, and rendering more 
aid in meeting the wants of other destitute portions of our own coun- 
try, and of the perishing Heathen. 

Executive Committee, 

Rev. Drs. Skinner and Livingston; Rev. Messrs. George Boyd, C. 
R. Demme^ C P. Krauth, P. Wolle, H. Bigihause ; Messrs. C. Schrack, 
and Greorge Blight. 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, BOSTON. 

The Eighteenth Annual Meeting was held at the Park-street Meet- 
ing-House on Wednesday evening, May dO. Hon. William Reed, 
President, in the Chair. The Report was read by the Secretary, 
Rev. James L. Kimball. Rev. Z. S. Baratow, of Keene, New-Hamp- 
shire, addressed the meeting in favor of the Monthly Distribution ; 
Rev. R. S. Storrs, for the Supply of Home Missionaries ; Rev. H. 
Bardwell, and Rev. O. Eastman, Secretary of the Amerfcao Tract 



0S[ TRACT SOCTETV, ftOSTOIf. {}^Wf 

Society^ New-Todt, in belialf of Foretgpa and Pagan lands. A sub- 
icriptioD, with special reference to the latter object, was commenced^ 
which, with the coUecUon, amounted to 9^19^. 

ABSTRACT OP THE REPORT. 

Issued from the Depository 14,600,740 pages, inchidiog 663^200^ 
distributed gratuitously to the destitute. 

Receipts for publications sold, ^8,952 70. 
Tottfl receipts, $ 12,606 49. 

Expenditures^ 012,237 84. Balance in the Treasury, $368 66. 

The distribution exceeds that of the preceding year by 2,000,000 
pages ; the receipts exceed by nearly $3,000. 

Agenciet and AuxiHarief, 

Agentff have visited 193 towns. One new Depository has been 
esti^lished; and 31 new Auxiliaries have been aclcnowledged in: 
places from which none have ever before been reported. I'resenC 
number of Auxiliaries 703; of which 140 are in Maine} 164 in Nevl^- 
Hampshire ; 96^ in Vermont ; and 294 in Massachusetts. 

Monthly Distribution. 

The Monthly Distribution has generally been adopted by tliose 
Auxiliaries and churches that do any thing by the circulation of re- 
ligious TractSr 3o far as reports- have been received, the universal 
testimony is in favor of continuiog this mode of operating on the pub- 
lic mind. System, character, and energy, are thus given to a mighty 
engine, and it is made to bear on the consciences and hearts of our 
population. The Committee rejoice in the testimony in ftivor of this 
system in preparing the way for the great revivals of religion which 
have blessed our country, and promoting those revivals when in pro- 
gress. In numerous instances clergymen and others have said that the 
good accomplished through the instrumentality of the Tract Distribu-- 
tion has been inctilculable. 

In some few cases the plan has been relinquished after a few months 
trial. But when this* has occurred it has uniformly proved to be the 
case that the labor h^ not been performed as a Christian duty. The 
Tracts have been distributed with the same feeling with which a news- 
paper would be left at the doors of subscribers, without calling the 
church to any of that missionary labor which every distributer must 
perform with a consciousness of the duties and obligations resting 
upon him. When the distributers have felt that they were laboring 
for the salvation of souls, and rejoieed in the privilege thus to labor, 
a spirit of energy has been awakened in the churches, and a corres-^ 
ponding impression made on the hearts of sinners. A greater willing- 
ness to attend public worship has beeii produced ; access has been 
gained with greater freeness to converse upon religious subjects ; and 
a new tone of feeling has been given to that class of our community 
who shut themselves from religious insteaction. 

Usefulness of Tracts, 

Cheering instances are given of the usefulness of Tracts in the 
conversion of s""'" 



1832.] 



RECEIPTS. 
Demand for Foreign OperaiWM. 



93 



God in his providence is preparing the way for the extensive ap- 
plication of divine truth through the instrumentality of Tract Soci- 
eties, where it is impossible yet to apply the other instituted means 
of grace. In view of these calls, the Committee propose a prospec- 
tive appropriation for the year to comev of at least $5,000. They 
dare not ask less, nor can the Churches of New-England allow a less 
sum to be appropriated to these objects. The question is not whether 
we shall supply this or some other means of grace to the perishing 
destitute; but whether we shall supply this or none. The churches 
possess facilities for immediate and extensive application of divine 
truth through Tract Societies, where it can be done in no other way ; 
and the question is, whether these facilities shall be used, or whether 
the perishing shall be suffered to perish, with their faces turned to 
New-England, and crying in vain for help. 



A notice of the recent Anniversaries and Reports of the Branch 
Societies at Cincinnati and St. Lotrts, is unavoidably postponed till 
our number for August. * 



A striking notice of the premium, of $250, and ethefs, will be found 
on the cover. 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OF THE AAIERICAN TRACT SOQIETY, 



During tike month ending' Jtme 15, 1832. 

FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 

VER.—Hine8burgh, William Hurlbut, Ag 

Pittsford, Abeii Penfield, Tr 

West Rutland, Rev. L. L. Tilden. Ag 

MASS.— Boston, Evangelical Tr. Soc, Nathaniel R. Cobb, Tr. 

Springfield, Henry Kirkham, Tr 

CONN^Bozrah, Erio GifTord, Sec 

Bridgeport, George Sterling, Agent, 

Brooklyn, (Windham Co. Auz.) Edwin Newbury, Ag., 

Chester, Fem., Rev. William Case, Ag 

Greenwich, (Stanwich Soc.) William Smith, Tr. 
Hartford, Conn. Branch, Charles Hosmer, Sec. . 

Jewett City, Mrs. J. F. Bliss, Sec 

Middletown, Luke C. Lyman, Sec 

Do. by their Aux., Chatham, 

Milford, Rev. Asa M. Train, Sec 

New-Haven, J. L. Cross, Agent, 

North Woodbury, Catharine A. Sherman, Tr. . . . ^ 

Norwich, Fern., Miss Sarah Backus, Sec 

Sharon, D. Gould, Tr. ..•''. . . , . , 

Washington, Charles A. Judson, Sec 

West Greenwich, Solomon Mead, See. , , . . . 
N. YORK.— Albany, N. York Central Branch, D. McKercher, Sec 

Amsterdam, Fem. 

Angelica, (Allegany Co. Anz.) Asa S. Allen, Tr. 

Berkshire and Newark, Elijah B«kJier| Tr. .... 



For TV. 
13 00 
16 57 

5 00 
13 60 

9 00 



53 

60 



2 
1 

10 00 
5 61 
3 33 
250 00 
220 
807 

7 92 
27 00 



1 

7 



62 
80 
2 66 
9 00 
92 
00 



1 
5 



6 95 
50 82 
21 00 



Don, 



2 01 



885 



900 



94 



lUBCfilFTB. 



[July 



Cairo, Greene Co., D. Johnston, Tr. 

Canaodaigua, Fem., Mrs. Eliza M. Hubbell, Sec. 

<%miaBgo Forks, Fem., Mrs. Stephens, Tr. 

Clore ia Rochester, Ulster Co., Rev. B. B. WeetlUl, Fres. 

Cooperstown, Fem., Mrs. Bfartiia Bowers, Tr. 

Delhi, Fem., Amelia Kuapp, Sec 

Goshen, Dr. J. S. Crane, Tr 

HarperafieM, Lewis R. Lockwood, See. 

Hebron, Joel Hopkins, Tr 

Hempstead, Rockland Co., Fem., Mrs. Elizabeth Coe, Tr. 
Hoosick Falls, John Blass, Tr. ... 
Hunter, Greene Co., William W. Edwards, Pres. 

Livingstonville, 

Lockport, W. L. Parsons, Tr 

Lodi, Joseph Plumb, Tr. 

New-Prospect, Ulster Co. Fem 

New-Rochelle, Fem., Miss Sophia Brewster, Sec. 
New-York City Tract Soc, Alfred Edwards, Tr. 

Do. by the Female Branch, Mrs. E. B. Lethbridge, Tr. 
Do. St. George's Church, Fem., Miss. Ann Dominick, Tr, 
Owego, (Tioga Co. Aux.) E. Jury Dist. Col., C. B. Pixley, Tr 
Portland, Chautauque Co., Elijah Fay, Tr. 
Rhinebeck, Fem., Mrs., C. Davidson, Sec. . 
Rochester, Monroe Co., Jjt^ A. Waili, Tr. . 
Schoharie, Schobari«,Co., John Ingold, Tr. 
Shelter Island, Jonathan Buntting, Ts. 
Southport, Dr. Townsend Seely, Sec * 
South Salem, Rev. Stephen Sannders, Sec 
Tompkins ville, fltat.Isl., Fem., Mrs. Miller, Tr. 
Troy, Charles Lyman, Tr. . . • * 
Utica, Edward Vernon, Sec . • . . 

N. JEB.— Elizabetbtown, 9d Preab. Church, . 
Lamington Congregation, Fem., Mary Ocdea, Sec. 
Morristown, Fem., Mrs. Sarah A. Mills, Tr. . 
Newark, Archibald Woodruflf, Tr. 
Pomptoo Plftins, Fem. Miss Margaret Berry, Sec. . 
PrincetoB, #bm.. Miss F. W. Morford, Tr. 
Readingtown, (North Branch,) Martin Wyek<^ Sec. 
Six Mile Run, J. G. Voorhees, Sec. ... 

Springfield, Abijah L. Dunnell^ Tr 

Trenton, Fem., Esther Mclfvaine, Tr. 

Washington, Morris Co., Fem., Mrs. Phebe S. Miller, Tr 

Woodbridse, Fem., Mrs. H. B. Barton, Sec. 

PENN. — Montrose, J. Lyons, Sec 

Philadelphia Branch, Rev. X. T. Benedict, X?en. Ag. . 
MD.^Baltimore Branch, Carter A. Hall, Tr. . 
VIR.-.FrederickBburg, WiUiam H. White, Ag. 
S. CAR.-^Charleston, S. C. Branch, J. A. Mitchell, Sec 
GEO.— Darien, Bayard E. Hand, Esq. Ag. 
Savannah, George W. Coej Tr. 
KEN— Louisville, William S. Venion, Sec . 
OHIO — Chester, A. Turner, Tr. 
Mount Pleasant, H. W. Stone, Tr. . . . 
Wakeman, Huron Co. Rev. X. Betts, Ag. 
Warren, (Trumbull Co. Aux.) Rev. Chester Birge, Sec. 
Wooeter, Fem., Mrs. Maria S. Cunningham, Tr. 
IND. — Madison, Indiana Branch, Moses H. Wilder, 
SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 
VER.-~BakerBfield, S. G. Tenney, . 

CONN.— West HarUond, 

N. YORK.— De Kalb, St. Lawrence Co. 
New-Utrecht, Fem. Bib., Miss, and Tract Soc, Mrs. C. Knapp, 
Tracts sold at the Depository to Individuals, including $&i, 
lh>m Traveling Agents, . . ^ . . . . 



Cor 



Sec. 



Tr. 

78, 



ForTr. 

80 

30 00 

6 00 

273 

900 

3 00 

553 

10 00 

3 48 
6 00 

10 00 
84 59 

5 00 

6 00 
5 88 

IS 00 

1 40 

22 00 

73 30 

1 44 

13 00 

50 

5 00 

100 00 

11 00 

5 04 
20 54 

4 56 

6 94 
75 00 

100 00 

4 66 
52 

1 33 
37 90 

5 50 
50 
50 
88 
00 
50 
20 
80 
50 



4 

4 

7 

3 

7 

1 

3 

25 00 
30 00 

3 53 
30 00 
56 28 
17 15 
43 43 

2 15 
2 87 

4 80 
16 00 

16 35 

17 00 



1 16 
1 32 

372 62 



Don. 



4 00 



300 



11 14 



1 oa 



43 72 



50O 
17 U 



1832.] 



RfiCRPTSU 



OS 



Direetert for Life, 

CONN.^Bethlehem, Rer. Paul 
Coach, by Ch. and Cong., QnfuU 
of$50,) 30 

N. YORK.— Troy, T. B. Kgelow, 60 
** Jeremiah Chichester, . . 60 
" John P. Caahman, ... 50 
" Jacob D. Lansing, « . . 50 
" Sylrester Norton, ... 50 
" Chauncey Pierce, ... 50 
« Jedediah Tracy, .... 50 
" Ebenezer WisiraU, ... 50 

N. JER.— BloomfieAd, Rev. Cyrus 
Gildersleeve, 50 

Morristown, Rev. Alfred Chester, 

(in part of $50,) 10 

" Peter A. Johnson, Esq. (for 
Burmah,) 50 

Oranffe, Rev. Asa Hiilyer, D.D.by 
Ladies of Ch. and Cong., (in fuU 
of$50,) 20 

DIS. COL.— Washington City, 
Walter Lawrie, Esq. (for Dis.) 100 

VIR.— Bethel, Cong., Augusta Co., 
Rev. Francis McParland, by Ch. 
and Cong., (for Dis.) ... 53 

St. Andrew's Parish, Zion Church, 
Jefferson Co., Rev. Alexander 
Jones, by Ladies, 50 

Waynosburgh, Rev. James C. Wil- 
son, by Congs. of Waynesburgh 
and Tinkling Spring, ... 53 

Members for Life. 

R. ISL. — Providence, John C. 

Cass, 20 

** Josiah Chapin, (for Dis.) . 20 
CONN.— Bethel, Rev. Erastus 

Cole, by Ladies, (in full of |20,) 8 
Danbury, Eli T. Hoyt, .... 20 
New-London, Mrs. Frances C. 

Robbins, by Miss Lucy M. 

Woodbridge, 20 

Westbrook, Mrs. Nancy Lay, . 20 
N. YORK.— Bridgewater, Oneida 

Co., Milton Bemiam, (in part of 

•20.) 10 

Clinton, Mrs. Sophia Strong, . 90 
Courtland Village, Rev. Nathaniel 

Emmons Johnsoo, by Ladies, 20 
Hunter, Miss Ann Maria Edwards, 

by her flither, 20 

'* Jonas Mann Edwards, by his 
father, Wm. W. Edwards, 20 
Kingsborough, Philo Mills, . . 20 
New-York City, Lockwood De Fo- 
rest, 25 

South Salem, Miss Mary Gilbert, 20 
Troy, J. H. Bayeaoy, .... 35 

'* Lucius Field, 20 

" H. R. Hubbell, .... 25 
« William A. Morgan, . . 25 
*< Gilbert A. ReUay, ... 25 
** Dr. Amitus Robbins, . . 30 
*' J. D. E. Vanderheyden, . 45 
« Sally G. Yanderheyden, . 20 



00 
00 
00 
00 
00 
00 
00 
00 
00 

00 

00 

00 



00 
00 



25 



00 



00 



00 
00 

62 
00 



00 
00 



Wall Kill, Orang6 Co., John 
HcWimaBM, (in full of $20,) . 7 09 

Watervliet, Rev. Robert Bronk, 20 ¥$ 

N. JER. — Hamburg, Sussex Co., 
Rev. Elias R. Faircbild, by Y. 
Men of Cong. .«..>.. 20 #0 

Morristown, Mrs. Louisa McCul« 
loeh, by Morris Fragment Soe., 20 00 

Newark, William Camp, ... 20 00 

Orange, R«v. Edwin Hatfield, by 
Ladies^>f 1st ncisb. Ch. . . 20 00 

VIR.— LcwngtoB, Rev. James 
Kerr, by Congs. of Lebanon and 
Rocky Spriflg, 90 OO 

Staunton, Rev. William Calhooo, 
by his Ch. and Cong. ... 30 09 
" Rev. TylePThateher, by In- 
dividuals, 90 75 

Wythe Co., Rev. George Painter, 20 00 

TENN.— Farmington, Bedford 
Co. Allen Leeper, Esq. for Bur- 
mah, 20 00 

" Mrs. Elizabeth E. Smith for 

do. 90 00 

Francis H. Woods, Esq* for 

do 20 00 

Mrs. Polley Massey, (in part 
of $20,) for do 5 00 

KEN .— Hopkini ville, Chrietian Co., 
Rev. WiUiam If. Brtulley, by 
himself, 20 00 

OHIO.— Stcubenvillet Hon. Jere- 
miah U . Hallock, .... 20 00 

ASIA. — Simmy^ev. David Abeel, 
Missionary, by a friend, (for 
Dis.) 9000 

AnnyMl Members^ ^l^ tach, 

CONN.^irorwich, Miss Nancy 

Fanning, 9 00 

Westbrook, Miss Nancy Lay, . 9 00 
NEW-YORK.— New-York City, 

James Davidson, 9 OO 

... 2 00 



u 



M 



tl 



John D. Kirek, 

Other Donations, 
VERMONT. — Jericho, First 
00 Congregatioaal Church, . 
00 Pittsford, Sabbath School, 

J Whidsof, a Friend, 
GOi VASS.-HphesterfieU/Miss L.Da- 

V18, • ... 

00 R. ISL^^ft. — Newport, Rev. 

Charles A. Van Vleck, 

00 CONN.~^thlehem, church and 
00 congregation, 

Coventry, J. H 

00 Deep River, Baptist Society, . 

00 Essex, Baptist Society, 

00 Griswold, avails of a gold chain, 

00 Killingworth, individuals, 

00 New-Fairfield, church and congre- 

00 tion, 

00 New-Milford, sundry individuals, 

00 North Killingworth, do. do. 

00 Saybrook, Eliaha Hart, . 

00 South Brookiiel£, Individuals, 



609 
300 
500 

75 

1 00 

1 13 
95 
9 19 
15 73 
9 IT 
309 

859 

46 88 

45 00 

900 

495 



M 



fiBCBIPVB* 



48 



30 



as 

50 
20 
00 
00 



South FaruSf do. . 44 

8o«th Woodbury, ladividualB, 
Waterlown, church and congre- 

gatioD 

NEW- YORK.— Albany, William 

H.Talcott, .... 

Augusta, Sundry individuals, by 
Mr. S. Moss, .... 

Bridgewater, Oneida Co. G. Tur- 
ner, $5; Marsh &SukBley,t8j 
6. Brownell, $2; A. Stanley, Stt 
cts.; X Marsh, $1} E.Hatl,$l; 
Cash, 28 CIS. : M. KirlUnd, 50 
cts. E. Kirtland, 50 cts. ; N. An- 
drews, 25 cts. I C. Ducber, |2 ; 
M. C. Benbam, 50 ats. f, A. Ben- 
ham, 50 cts.; T. Benham, 1*2} 
H. S. Marsh, 13 cts. ; M. Marsh, 
SScts.; Mrs. H. Harsh, 50cto$ 
R. Dickson, 25 cts. ; Thomas 

* Converse, |1 ; C. Brewer, 13 
cts. ; E. Fitch, $1 ; Dr. J. Flack- 
ley, $1 50 ; J. Marsh, 50 cts. ; H. 
Moon, $1; Mrs. Blair, 28cto.; 
S. Allen, 25 cts. ; Dea. A. Hunt, 
$3 ; Miss M. Hunt, 25 cU. R. 
Waldo, 25 cts. ; A. D. Brown, 
$1; A. Oakea, ft; Miss L. 
Oakes, $1 ; Miss H. Oakes, 25 
cts. ; Miss J. S. Ccmpbell, 50 
cts. ; Miss H- Barnum, 50 cts. ; 
L. E. Marsh, 50 cts,? S. E. Ho- 
vey, 50ct8 ; S. Smith, 50 cts. 35 13 

Brooklyn, L. I-, Miss SliBabeth 
Nitcbie, 5 



00 
50 
25 



Clinton, a contribution, . . 5 
Delhi, Presbyterian Church, . 4 
Hunter,Wm.Stlm8on,$l ; S.Case, 
$1; E. J. Stmson, $2; C. O. 
Fanning, $3 ; Wm. Tappan, »1 ; 
Rev. C. Durfy, $5; S. Chiches- 
ter. $1 14 00 

Jamaica, L. I., Henry Punnett, . 10 00 
Kingsborough, A. A. Johnson, 5 0€ 
Lewis, Rev. Moses Ingalls, . . 1 00 
Marshall, Church and Congrega- 
tion, 10 31 

New-York City, Miss Catharine G. 
Fish, $15, Mrs Robert Juffray, 
$12, Franklin Knight, $1, Mrs. 
Anna McTargett, $10, a friood, 
$8, Do. $5, two friends, 6;ic. $1 §2 
Two Members of South Dutc% 
Church, by J. Nitchie, Esq. for 
Burmah, 50 00 



Perry Centre, T. Howard, . . 1 00 

Sangerfield, Church and Congre- 
gation 4 9t 

Troy, Sundry Individuals of Rev. 

Dr. Beeman's Ch. and Cong. . 155 00 
Watervliet, Andrew Meneely, $8; 
Wm. G. Growbeeck,$5; H. Hal- 
kiraer, $1 ; J. Bates, $2 ; Wm. 
Burnet, $1 ; James Meneely, $1 ; 
D. Siewart, 50c. ; Z. Crower, $1 ; 
Wm. McKinney, 50c. { M. R. 
Peak, $1 ; M.P. Haselton, $1 ; T. 
Shrimpton, 50 c, • .... 22 50 

A Contribution, 8 37 

N. JER. — Morristownt J.A.Allen, 
$10; a Lady, $10; Dr. J. B. 
Johnes, $5 ; J. F. Voorhees, $5 ; 
J. Mills, $5 ; S. Johnson, $5; Wm. 
Sayre, $5 ; L. Mooro, $3 ; N. R. 
Day, $2; Cash, $2; L. B. Em- 
meli, $ 1 ; D. Mills, $1 ; Cash, $3 ; 
" R. W. S.," $3 ; S. Prudens, $2 ; 
Mr. Thompson, $2 ; D. O. Pru- 
dens, $1 ; T. A. Prudens, $1 ; 
Cash, 25c.; Phebe Tunis, 50c.; 
J. Lindsley, $1 ; David Lindsley, 
$2; L. Armstrong, 73c.; J. S. 
Oliver, $1 ; Cash, $2, .... 73 50 

Ladies, • . 18 25 

Other Individuals, 39 00 

Juvenile Society in Miss Mann's 

School, 12 00 

Newark, II. H. Penmman, ... 1 00 

^" W 50 00 

DEL. — St. George's Congregation, 
afemale, (for l)is.) .... 2 00 

MD.— Baltimore, C. J 90 00 

VIR— Bethel, Augusta Co., a Wi- 
dow's thank-oifering, (for Dis.) 10 00 

** Individuals, SO 

Lexington, Miss Margaret Paine, 
25c.; Mrs. Matilda W. Paine, 

50c 75 

\ew-Providonce, Soc. of Rev. Mr. 

Morrison, (for Dis.) .... 24 45 
Staunton, Congregation of Rev. 

Conrad Speece, D. D. (for Dis.) 23 43 
Warrenton, Rev. George Lemmon, 5 00 
N. CAR.-.DuplinCo.,1)r. Crosby, 

. *(for Burmah,) 5 00 

1HSS.— Pine Ridge Church, . . 5 00 
KEN.— Shelby County, Mrs. Mary 

Newton, (for Dis.) .... 5 00 
CANADA.— A Friend, for Bur- 
mah and China, i eaekt ... 40 00 



The above list contains donations — 

For Foreign Distribution, (including $190, for Barmah, and 
$20, for China, . $468 12 

>IMio1e amount of donations, $2,754 64 

Received for Tracts sold 1,785 44 



Total, 



$4,540 08 



THE AMERICAN 



LONDON RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY. 

Tba 38d ADDirinar; wu cclcbralad May 3d, at WtUu'i-nionu, 
KlD^-itreet, SL Jinin'), ■( IB o'clock, the Habuijii of Cholkov^ 
DtLiT ID the chair; and at the Cilj of Laodon TaTerD, on Tueadey 
mominj, May 8, at 6 o'clock, Wi B. Gdknev, Eiq. ia the chair. 
Each uealiag wu opeped by prayer, and a brief addrtii from tha 
pTtiiding officer. At (he Grtt^meolioned ineeling. 

The Sbcbitibt read eitracli from the Report, and urged the im- 
portaaee of the Society, in view of the eiteniire irreitgioui iafluence , 
exerted by the political proi. The Society prorlded liiile booki Au- 
little niadi, paUicalioni for yonlhi, for adnlti, Ibr nechaBici, tbr 

Tot. VIL 8 Wnoti Mo. 71. 



PB LONDON TRACT SOCIETY. f Aug"- 

farmers, for every class, for every tige, and for both sexes— indadini^ 
many volames of serions and weii^Aty character. A separate Circa- 
lating Library Fund had also been created, and where local subscrip- 
tions amounjted to half the sum required for a moderate library, the 
Society sapplied the other half. There was scarcely a distriet of the 
habitable globe where their Tracts had not penetrated. 

BRIEF AflGRTRACT OF "aBDRESSES. 

The Rev. Edward BfcKKRSTXTH ezfllressed his joy jn the aid glxen 
,|»y the Society to ministers and to misqionAriea in every part, of the 
|rlobe. The daily public journals* circulated 32,500,000 copies an- 
liually, and 89,000 daily. The Solicitor General for Ireland had 
jitated, that no less a sum than £15,000,000 annually was expended 
ik the purchase of British and foreign, spirits. In tobacco and snuff' 
^nearly £6,000,000 was expended annually, and yet not above £619,000 
-was contributed in the course of a year to Benevolent Societies. 

The Rev. Dr. Morrison dwelt on the adaptation of the Socie^ to 
'*the present wants of the united kingdom, and the harmony and effi- 
-ciency with which Christians of different persuasions have united in 
it, for thirty-three years, without any one instance of painful coUiton. 

^he Rev. S. Robinson urged the claims devolved upon the Society 
'by the progress of education. 

The Rev. James Stratton said he was not in the habit of giving^ 
Away any of the Society's publications before he had read them ; and 
•expressed his obligations to the Society for the spiritual benefits re- 
^ceived by himself personally, and by his family. 

The Rev. Mr. Polk of Virginia, United States, related the inte- 
xesting facts of the influence exerted by Tracts at the Military Aca- 
•demy at West*Point, when of 250 young men there assembled there 
'was not one professed Christian — their instrumentality . in leadini^ 
liimself to Christ — and the revolution which followed in the religioua 
sentiments and character, not only of a large number of the youn^ 
men, but of several of their officers. Tracts were a tremendous engine 
for converting souls to Chnst. It was a most mischievous ani mis* 
taken idea, that they are adapted only to the ignorant and poor. 
Was there one system of religion — one Bible— one Savior— for the 
poor, and another for the rich ? 

Addresses were also delivered by Mr. Ackworth, Rev. Dr. Cox, 
Rev. John Campbbll, Rev. T. S. Grihs&awe, and the Hon. and R«v. 
Baptist Noel. 

At the Meeting at the CUy of London Tavern^ Rev. W. Robirion al- 
laded to the usefulness of the Society, and said he was aware, to use 
the laoguage of the venerable Herbert, that 



1B32.] LONDON TRACT SOCIETT. 99 

'* ji Tract may catch him toko a Sermon Jtut" 
A religious Handbill wats given on a Sabbath morning to a Baptist 
woman, then going to her place of worship, although hor husband 
often deprived her of her dinner for so doing. Seeing this paper ia 
her hand as she returned home^ he inquired what it was — took it, and 
perused it %eilh ttart. ** My Dear," said he, ** you shall have your 
dinner .'*' He claimed thepKivilege of accompanying her to her place 
of worship ; .on Tuesday evening attended a prayer meeting with her, 
and from (hat (ime joined himself to the Lord's people. 

The cmtdentwuM Tobacco Chewer. 

The Rev. Jambs Flood, Baptist Missionary from Jamaica, said, a 
poor man, who had a family of chHdren to support, had read of the 
great sacrifices which -some of the henthen made to their gods, and 
thought lie ought (o malie some sacrifice: he had been in the habit 
of expending weekly the sum of threepence br fourpence in an article 
which was to him a matter of luxury, namely. Tobacco. In order to 
raise a sum for the Society, he left ofi* tobacco, placed the money in a 
box weekly, and when it amounted to a pound, obtained a Bank note, 
which he transmitted by letter to the Secretary. 

A Congregation trebled by meant of Traclt, 
James Tysoy, Esq. of Thetford, said he had been in the habit, for 
some years, of distributing Tracts, and not very long ago, was grati- 
fied by a clergyman of a parish at no great distance from Thetford, 
calling upon him to state, that in consequence of these Tracts his con. 
gregation had trebled in number, and tte poor of the village had 
forsaken many vicious habits. 

The meeting was also addressed by Rev. J. Burnett, Rev. Mr. 
Jones, missionary from Madagascar, Rev. Mr. Adie, Rev. Dr. Stein- 
kopfT, and Rev. Joseph Hughes, Secretary of the Society from the 
time of its forhiation. 

ABSTRACT Of THE THIRTY-THIRD REPORT. 
V/e rejoice to present the following brief sketch of what our de 
voted brethren of this Institution are doing for evangelizing tho na< 
lions of the earth by TracU. 

China. — Dr. Morrison, in acknowledging the grant made to Leang. 
a fa, a native Chinese convert, for printing Tracts written by himself, 
states, " Your letter came to hand when Leang-afa happened to be 
at my house. I immediately communicated to him the contents 
thereof. He was' greatly encouraged by your kind assistance, gave 
thanks to God our Savior, and resolved, by the Lord's help, to be 
still more assiduous in the fulfilment of that portion of the Savior's 
work which devolves on him." The Doctor, referring to the journey 
of Leang-afa, a1>out 260 miles in the interior of China, for the distri- 
bution of Tracts among his countrymen, remarks, ** He is dead to' 
this world, and is occupied in studying the Scriptures, writing and 
printing Tracts, and visiting from housr to house, testifying to his 
countrymen the Gospel of Salvation.'* Mr. Tomlin, in a letter from 
the capital of Siam, remarks, " We came here in full hope of meet- 
»»«: with Mr. Gutclafi*, but be had left only a few days before our ar ; 



100 LONDON TRACT SOCIETY. [Aug. 

rival) to profecate his ardaoos but darling enterprise, of proclaimings 
the glad tidings of the Gospel in the heart of China." 

3iam.-- Mr. Tomlin mentions, that ** The Siamese Tract printed a^ 
the request of one of the native princes, had been received in the 
country. No sooner had two or three copies gone forth, than crowds 
of people, of all ranks, immedistely came to solicit them. Many of 
the priests inquire aher the Ti^act, and take it gratefully nt onr 
hands. There are no less than 10,000 priests in Bankok.*' Chinese, 
Burmans, and Malays, were also anxious for Tracts in their own 
languages. • 

Malaeea. — 10,000 copies of 8 Tracts have been published in Chi- 
nese, one of them written by Ijeang-afa. ^ 

^'ni^apore.-^Three new Tracts have been written, two in Malay, 
and one in Bngguese ; 9,000 copies of which have been distributed, 
and 10,000 Handbills.^ Rev. G. Bruckner has written six new Ja 
vanese Tracts, containing S^ pages. About 17,600 have been printed* 
' Burmah. — ^Di'. Judson remarks--^" The Burmans are a reading 
people beyond almost any other eastern-nation. Probably nine-tenth' 
of the ma/6 population throughout the country can read. They.ar^ 
also a careful, deliberate people, who turn a thing over many times be- 
fore they take it. They are not disposed to give much credit to the 
words of a missionary ; but when a Tract is put into their hands, they 
wrap it up carefully, deposit it in a fold of the waistcloth or turban, 
carry it home to their village, however distant, and when a leisure 
evening occurs, the family lamp is produced, the. man, his wife, and 
relations, gather round, and the contents of the new, writing receive 
a full discussion. I need not add, that such a people present the 
stroneest claims upon Tract Societies. Our Tracts are pervading 
tbe voiole country, from the frontiers of China to the banks of the 
Ganges, and from the borders of Cassay to the southernmost village 
of British Pegu.'' " If there should be no government prohibition, and 
we could be furnished with the means of throwing in an incessant 
flood of Tracts for three years, I should hope, from what Iknow of 
the habits of the people, that Boodhism would be shaken to its base/' 

CtHtulla.'^The Calcutta Tract and Book Society printed in the 
year 15 new Tracts in the Bengalee and Hindoostanee languages. 
About 72,500 Tracts vvere printed, and 83,204 distributed. The Re- 
port says, " The good work, (begun at Khalee, from which place five 
persons have been publicly baptised, and upward of 100 have lately 
renounced caste and become professors of Christianity,) owes almost 
i^ commencement, under the blessing of 'God, to the perusal of a 
Tract, presented by a native preacher to his relations in that village." 
In one instance, the Hindoos followed the Missionary's boat as far as 
they could safely ^o so, entreating for a single copy of a Tract, "and 
having got one, held it up witb4he led haitd above water, and swam 
across the river again with the right." 

At Seramporej 18,000 copies of eleven new Tracts have been print* 
ed : the circulation amounted to 33,060 in various languages. -. 

Madras Tract Sociefy.— During the year, 92,000 native Tracts were 
printed, including twelve new Works ; and 99,805 Tracts, in various 
lani^uages, were circulated. 



1832.] LONDON TRACT SOCIBTV. lOl 

Saagalore.'—Iiev* William Campbell has completed his Series of 
Tracts on the Divine Attributes, and printed ISiOOO copies. 

Migercoil tind PaUmeoitah JfcUive Tract Socieiy, — Eleven new 
Tracts have been printed, and 46»000 circulated. The Report says, . 
'< Many from among the Heathen and Roman Catholics have been 
induced to attend our places of worship, whose attention was first di- 
rected to religion by our publications.'' 

Sural. — Mr. W. Fy vie has prepared tweJve new Tracts in the Goo* 
juratte language, and thirty Short Discourses on the 6th, 6th, and 7th 
chapters of St. Matthew ; and has distributed nearly 40,000 Works 
during the year. 

Oohanbo Trad Soetefy.— Several new Tracts have been printed. 
A Tract against Buddhism has created a great sensation .among the 
priests. Several meetings have taken place to deviso the best mode 
of answering the Tract ; at length the last assembly broke, up, re- 
solving, ** that as the book was unanswerable, it was best to let it 
alone.'' 

Straiburgh. Ahacian Society, -^100,000 Tracts have been printed. 

The Netherlands Draet Society has sent the Committee 60 copies of 
each of its 67 Tracts. It continues its active operations for Holland 
and its Colonies, and has under consideration the publication of 
Children's Books. 

Sufitxerland, — A new Society has been established at Berne. The 
other Institutions at Basle, Geneva, Lausanne, Neufchatel, are in ope- 
ration. 

Hamburg Tract Society. — Seven new Tracts have been issued. 
Printed in the year 236,000. 

The tales amounted during the year to $119,776, affording the 
most satisfactory proof of a demand to that amount. Total receipts 
$139,460. New publications during the year 186. Circulated, 
11,714,966 publications, exclusive of Tracts published in foreign 
countries at the Society's expense. Total circulated since the So- 
ciety's formation at home and abroad, nearly 166,000,000 publications 
in about 70 different languages. 



RUSSIA. 

The Rev. Richard Knill, of St. Petersburgh, in a letter to the Ame- 
rican Tract Society, Boston, says, nearly 1 ,600,000 pages of Tracts 
have been printed this year, and a great number circulated in Russ, 
German, Finnish, Swedish, French, and English. Some new Tracts 
are in preparatibn. 



MISSOURI AMD ILLINOIS BRANCH. 
Fifth Anniversary held at St. Louis, March 29. Rev. William S. 
Potts, President, in the chair. The Report was read by Rev. Cyrus 
W. Allen, and addresses were delivered by him. Dr. G. W. Call, Hon. 
James Hall, Dr. John Ingraham, and Messrs. Pf. Ranney ,and J. 
Tucker. 

8* 



KXl M1880URI AND ILUNOIS BRANCH* [Aug«' 

Receipts |p438 60. Circulated 1,041,696 pages, and 2,622 copies 
of Christian Almanac. Delivered from the Depository for gratuitous 
dbtribution, at the expense of the Branch and the Parent Society,, 
488,000 pages. Stock on band 1,277,898 pagesi Due the Parent So- 
ciety $sl(S9 86. Number of Anxiliaries 70. 

The Branch embraces in its field of operation 112,000 square miles, 
and more than 300,000 inhabitants, which are multiplying in a ratio 
that can scarcely find its parallel in the annals of .the world. The 
moral character of every settlement begins to form as soon as it be- 
gins to exist; and oAen beTore other moral means can be brought to 
bear, habits of depravity acquire an amaaing strength. Something is 
needed to strike and fix the attention, and while the perusal of a vo- 
lume would be regarded as too tedious to be attempted, a Tract often 
arrests the roving mind, and gives it a character that will endure for 
eyer. The publications of the American Tract Society are also spe- 
cially adapted to a community in whjch so great a dwernty qfreli^ 
giottff opinion prevails. Many of the Society's Auxiliaries are vigor- 
ously prosecuting their labors,, and have a very deep and steadfast 
conviction of their usefulness ; and opposition is fast retiring from^ 
the field. 

STRIKING EVIDENCES OF THE DIVINE BLESSING. 

The tifstematie distiihttim has been sustained, by gift or loan, in 
fifteen towns, in all of which it has been manifestly blessed, and in 
i/Meen of these towns some individuals have hopefully become sub- 
jects of God's special grace, and nbere has been to a greater or less 
degree a revival of religion. 

In St. Louis, a female, first induced by a distributer to attend on 
public worship, was evidently brought to embrace Christ.— A father 
in Illinois, on reading Dickinton^s Appeal on Ttmperance, resolved to 
drink no more, and has steadfastly kept his resolution.— A gay young, 
man, who drank to excess, was induced by the same Tract to dash 
the cup from his lips, and is now active in the cause of Temperance 
and of Christ.— A gray-headed old man in Illinois, whose intemperate 
habits were debasing a numerous family, was faithfully addressed by a 
Female Tract Distributer, and the next month she found him bending 
over his Bible, while the Tract lay on it, with tears of penitence flow- 
ing down his cheeks, and prayer and praise ascending from his lips. 

In the miscellaneous distributions, a profane man, who, as he com- 
menced reading a Tract, scoffed at its truths, had his attention ar- 
rested — was led to the house of God, and hvmdft ^ ^f^t ^^ ^<^^ 
IfOWig men residing mth him, aU became hopeful subjects of conversion. 
He is now a devoted man in the service of Christ. — In a settlement, 
where a number united with the church, four ascribed tbeir deep re- 
ligious impressions to the perusal of Tracts. 

Tracts unaccompanied bypreaehingt the means of a revival of religion. 

A family of emigrants to an extreme part of Missouri, received a 
parcel of Tracts, and in their destitution of preaching and other reli- 
gious privileges, a few immediate neighbors came together on the 
Sabbath, and with prayer and singing, the Tracts were read in place 
of sermons : the Spirit of grace came down, and between twenty and 



1832. J BRANCH AT ST. LOUIS. 103 

thirfy were added to the Lard, They are now partly supplied with 
preaching, which was procured by repeated solicitation and much 
effort. 

A Tract carried thirty miles to a DiililUr. 

A gentleman in Missouri, whose zeal in the' cause of Tracts will se- 
cure him, we trust, in eternity, some pledges of faithfulness on earth, 
gave the Tract, " Alarm to Distillers and their Allies,'' to a Mr. H., 
who rode thirty lAiUs for the express purpose of giving it to a relative 
who was just about completing a distillery. He received the Tract 
and read it — he looked at the still-house, and read again. He en- 
deavored to evade the aTguments— but he could not. His money 
had been spent in erecting the establishment, and he hoped by a 
stream of poison, as he now felt it to be, to liquidate the debt: but the 
Tract did its work. The distillery never was completed, and we feel 
ourselves safe in saying, that it never will send forth the first drop to 
curse the land. 

The Tract having, with the blessing of God, performed its office 
here, went forth again to another individual who had been a distiller 
for several years, and addressed him in its alarming tones. The 
Tract did its work here, to6 : it put out the fires, and the still has nevet 
been heated sihce, and there is sufficient reason to believe that it will 
no more blast the land with its work of death. 



CINCINNATI BRANCH. 

Fourth Anniversary, April 24. After prayer by Rev. Thomas 
Brainerd, the President, Rev. Elijah Slack delivered an appropriate 
Address, and the report was read by Mr. Silas Woodbury. Corres- 
ponding Secretary. The meeting was addressed by Rev. S. W. Lynd, 
and Rev. Dr. Beecher, in favor of the Monthly Distribution and the 
Tract cause generally. Collection and subscription $314 60. 

In two years, since the previous report was presented, the receipts 
have been $2,581 67. Circulated 2,257,245 pages, including 8,972 
gratuitously distributed, and 382,538 for Monthly Distribution in 
Cincinnati. Stock in Depository 2,444,536 pages. Auxiliaries re- 
ported 97, a number of which are probably now connected with the 
Tract Societies at Diiy ton and Madison, or have become Inactive. 

The report presents a very moving appeal for increased contribu- 
tions and efforts, stating among other things, the facts, that there are 
In that important state 10 adjoining counties in which there is com- 
paratively little Evangelical preaching from any denomination— that 
there are neighborhoods within 20 miles of Cincinnati, where the ma- 
jority of the people can hear a Gospel sermon only once in four weeks, 
if more than once a quarter — and there are from 10,000 to 15,000 souls 
in that city, upon whom the preached Gospel exerts little or no influ- 
ence, except as reflected in the life of the ChHsHan, 

EVIDENCES OF THE DIVINE BLESSING. 

One Month^. Dietributer met a yonng man, who had not been inside 
a church for 6 years.— >A number of Germans loept, lest the Distribu- 
ter should go away without leaving them a Tract.— An aged lady was 



104 CINCINNATI BRANCH. t^Ug. 

influenced by a Tract to feel that she wag a great tinner. — Another 
lady, who at first refused the Tract, is now a consistent member of 
the Church. — ^Two youn; female Distributers calling at a store, the 
merchant, though siyrounded with customers, called them aside and 
gave ihemteti doUart, saying, '*^ou are better employed than in go- 
ing to parties and dancing, take this to encourage and help you in 
your good work." In December, in the 4th Division, about 50 chil- 
dren were reported ready to enter a Sabbath school.— In March a 
Distributer brought 20 children into one school, 

A few Tracts were sent to an avowed Infidel through his children. 
About a year after he was heard expressing his gratitude for them, 
and it is believed he has sincerely embraced the offers of the Gospel. 

A young man in a large irreligious boarding-house, one morning 
found in the hall the Tract Sixteen Shori Sermoiuf. He read it, saw 
his condition as 9, sinner, found peace, and is now a consistent 
Christian. 

Nearly 100 active, warm-hearted Distributers are engaged in sup- 
plying 6,000 families in Cincinnati; more than 100 families have been 
found destitute of the Bible; 153 children brought into Sabbath 
schools; and many affecting cases of temporal suffering reliev^. 



JUST ISSUED, ' 



The Daily Expositor; containing a Text of Scripture for every 
day in the year, with explanatory note^t amd rrfieetion** pp> 286, 32mo. 
Price 20 cents. The illustrations of the texts in this work are selected 
from the ablest commentators, and almost all of them embody infor- 
mation at once new to the common reader, entertainingr, and in- 
itructive. 



NEW OCCASIONAL TRACTS. 

National [Temperance] Circular, addressed to the head of 
each family in the United States, 12 pp. octapo mlhout covered-price 
1 cent. This document was prepared by the American Temperance 
Society, and is probably better adapted for circulation at the pre- 
sent time in every family, than any other Temperance Tract. 

Occasional 4. Appeal on the Subject of CHOLBRA.-^pp. 8 with- 
out covers. A forcible appeal, addres^sed to the unprepared, and the 
prepared — calculated to render the judgment of God by which our na- 
tion is now visited, a spiritual blessing to all. Specially adapted for 
Monthly Distribution at the present time. 



PREJniUM OFFERED. 

The undersisned is authorised by a Clergyman of the Baptist Church, to offer 
a premium of fifty dollars for the best Tract of not less than 8 nor more than 90 
pages, with this title, ** The blood o/Jeous OhrUt eUmuetkfiom aUsin." At the 
request of the donor, the Committee of the American Tract Society have nomi- 
nated Rev. Gregory T. Bedell, D. D. Rev. William S. Brantly, and Kev.tvlIbertR. 
Livingston, D. D. of Philadelphia, as the Ezaminiag Committee. 

The donor, having inserted in the Christian Index for June S3, 1833, a narrative 
of his joyfol deliferance from a state of extrene religious depression, by God's bless- 



1832. 1 



RECEIPTS. 



105 



ing on the above motto, seen by him in a Tract, desire* that the premium Tract may 
eoArace that narrative, in whole or in part; that it may set forth clearly the truth 
of the mottO) and may have prefixed to it, as a device, a man walking a road, with 
a Tract in his hand. 

The manvBcripts are to be presented on or before November 3, 1833, and may b6 
addreiised (poet paid) to Rev. William T^ Brantly,' Editor of the Christian Indek, 
Philadelphia, or to 

WILLIAM A. HALLOCK, 
Cor. Sec. Amer. Tract Soc. 150 Nassau-street, New-YorK. 



See. sketches of Monthly Distribution and Interesting Donations on the cover. 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 



During the month ending July 1 5, 1832. 

FROM AUXIUARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 

VERMONT.'Westford, 

AIASSACBUSETTS.— Boston American Tract Society, J. Tap- 
pan, Esq. Treasurer, 

Pittslleld, Female, Hiss AmeHa Danforth, Secretary, 
WillianMtown, (North Society,) Seymour Whitman, Agent, . 
RHODE-ISLAND.--Newport, B. B. Cahoone, Secretary, 

. Do. Female, K. E. Beecher, Agent, 

Providence, Isaac Wilcox, Depositary, 

CONNECTICUT.— East-Haven, 

Guilford, Henry E. Hodges, Agent, 

XewHaVen, J. L. Cross, Agent, 

North Killincworth, Female, Eunice King,- Agent, 
Norwich Falls, Female, Mrs. Isaac Francis, Secretary, 
Stanwich, William Smith, Treasurer, . ' • 

Watarbaiy, Solomon B. Minor, Treasurer, .... 
West Grreenwich, Solomon Mead, Secretary, 

West Haven, William Stebbins, Secretary 

NEW-YORK.— Albany, New-York Central Branch, D. M*Kercher, 

Secretary, . . 

Andes, Delaware county. Female, R. Webster, Secretary, 

Auburn, Clnrk B. Hotchklss, Agent, 

Bridgehampton, Long Island, Rev. Amsi Frkucis, President, 
Brooklyn, Long bland, JosMrfi Howard, Treasurer, 
FUtbusb, Femue, Mrs. L. Johnson, Treasurer, . 
Gilbertsville, Mrs. Catherine W. Gilbert, Treasurer, 
New Prospect, Femmie, Miss A. Tansen, Secretary, . 
New Roehelle, do. Miss Sophia Brewster, Secretary. 
New-York City Tract Society, Alfred Edwards, Treasurer, 
Oxlbrd, Female, Miss Caroline Mygatt, Treasurer, 
Shawanrank, Ulster eounty, Moses J. Decker, Secretary, . 
Sonihold, Long Island, Rev. William Fuller, Secretary, 

Utica, Edward Vernon, Secretary, 

Wahon, Delaware county. Female, Hannah N. Seymour, Trees. 
NEW-JERSEY^Amwell, Female, Mrs. H. SkiUman, Treasurer, 
Eloaufield, JuvenOe, Robert R. Kellogg, Secretary, 

BoyntoD, Mr. Woodbull, Agent, 

Mendbam, Female,- Mrs. Johnson, Se^cretary, 
MilUtone, do. Mrs. Peter Staata, Treasurer, 
Morristown, do. Caroline C. AUea^ Treasurer, . 
OxflMrd, do. Mrs. 8. Sherrerd, Treasurer, 



ForTr. 


118 50 


500 


203 


10 00 


S3 00 


63 99 


S40 


50 00 


703 


see 


14 00 


90 

t * 


56 40 


8 64 


79 35 


7 06 


100 00 


ST IS 


3 07 


306 81 


900 


S5 00 


385 


SOOTS 


1 50 


300 


85 40 


364 


1 50 


680 


15 60 


6 46 



Don. 
10 00 



18 00 



3! 59 



13 60 
16 04 



7 80 



3 00 
5 00 



5 00 



106 



RECEIPTS. 



[Aug, 



Plainfieklt FevaU, Catherine Bo&d, Secretary, 
PriBceton, Theolofical Seminary, R. Webster, Secretary, 
Shrewatary, Female, Ana W. LitUe, Treasurer, . 
Somerville, do. Aao M. Griffith, Treasurer, 
Westfield, do. Miss Mary Pierson, Secretary, 

VIRGlNU^Pethleheni, Female, 

Charlottesville, (Albemarle co. Auxiliary) Bev. F. Bowman, Tr. 
Petersburg, Charles P. James, Secretary, .... 
Prince Edward county, Union Theological Seminary, Benjamin M. 

Smith, Treai>urer, 

Do. By their Female Auxiliary, Buffalo, (For. 

Distribution,) 

Richmond, N. Talley, Treasurer, 

Winchester, Daniel Gold, Treasurer, . . . 
FLORIDA. — St. Augustine, Female, Mrs. Anderson, Treasurer, 
GEORGIA^— A uffusta, Benjamin Halt, Treasurer, 
If aeon, David B. Bdtler, Treasurer^ - . . 
TENNESSEE.— Knoxville, James Park, Esq., Treasurer, 

OHIO^-Brownhelme, 

Brunswick, Charles T. Miles, Secretary, 

Vhillicothe, Rev. J. P. Bausman, Treaaarer, .... 
Claridon, Stephen Pitkin, Jun. Treasurer, . 

Dayton, Dr. Job Haines, Secretary, 

Elyria, (Lorain county Auxiliary) Rev. Daniel W. Lathrop, Sec. 

Florence, 

Granville, Licking county, Rev. Jacob Little, President, 
Haraersfield, (Ashubula county Auxiliary) Rev* Perry PraU, Sec 

Le Roy, 

Hartinaburgh, J. D. Johnston, Agent, ... 

Medina, Timothy Hudson, Treasurer, 

HcmtviUe, «... 

Nelson, Portage county, 

Putnam, (Muskingum county Auxiliary) Edwin Putnam, Agent, 

Ruggles, 

fikrongsville, Warren Strong, Agent, 

Thompeon, 

Twinsburgh, Rev. Samuel Russell, Agent, 

Welchfield ^ . . . . 

MISSOURL—St. Lonis Missouri and lUfoois Branch, Dr. John 

Ingraham, Agent, 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXILURY. 

MASSACHUSETTS.— Fall River, 

CONNECTICUT— North Orange, 

INDIANA.— Fort Wayne, Rev. J. Chute, Agent. . 

Tracu sold at the Dmpoeitory to Individuals, (Including $42 50 
from Rev. Warren Day. Agent in New- York, and $11 44 from 
L. C. Rouse, Agent in Ohio,) 



For TV. 

300 
!.'( 00 

500 
14 00 



4 
4 
5 



63 

47 
00 



10 00 

17 dl 

11 19 

38 40 
63 00 
10 46 

175 00 

40 00 

794 

7 70 

6 00 
10 00 

18 83 
90 00 

4 50 

9S5 

SO 00 

33 75 

S75 

13 14 

300 

3 00 

39 37 
50 67 

7 31 
1 35 

16 87 
9 10 
I 63 

71 00 



14 42 



355 66 



Dan. 



1 33 



10 00 



4 00 
20 00 



JHreetoTt for Life. 

MASS.— Amherst, (West Parish) 
Rev. R.Washbttme,foy Ladies, 
(in part or$50,) 10 00 

Pittsfield, Rev. John W. Yeo- 
mans, by Young Ladies and Gen- 
Uemen, (infuUoftSO,) . . . 30 00 

GONN.— New Preston, (Rav^ Ro- 
bert & Campfield, by Ch. and 
Cong.,(inAillof850,) ... 30 00 

NEW-YORK.— Brooklyn, L. I. 
Fisher Howe, (for For.) . . 50 00 

Geneva, Rev. Henry Dwight, . 135 00 

Mev-York dty, Joseph Otis, (for 
Dis.) . 50 00 

Whitesboro' Oneida Institute, Pe- 
iatiabRawww/bySCttdenta, . 50 00 



Do. Theodore Weld, by do. . 50 00 

N. JER — Chester, Rev. Abra- 
ham WiUiams<yi, by Ch. and 
Cong, (in full of $50,) . . . 30 OU 

German Valley, Rev. M. S. Hut- 
Um, by his Society, (in part of 
$50,) 30 50 

Hanover, Rev. William Tobey, 
by his Ch. and Cong, (in fijdl 
of $50,) 30 00 

Hillsborough, Rev. John L. Za- 
briskie, by Ch. and Cong, (in 
fhll of $50,) 30 00 

Mendham, Rev. D. H. jQhnscm,by 
his Society, (in full of $50,) 30 00 

Mot ristown. Rev. Charles Hoover, 
by Ladies, (in f uU of $50,) . 30 00 



1832.1 



RECEIPTS. 



107 



PomptoD, Rev. J. S. Demund, by 
Ladies aad Gradeuenof his 
aociety, 50 00 

Menibera for Life. 

MASS.~Spriogfield, Mrs. I. E. 
Trask, 20 00 

CONN.— Guilford, Col. William 

Hart, SO 00 

** Henry £. Hodges, ... 20 00 

Norwich, Wm. C. Gilman, Esq. . 25 00 
" Mrs. Eliza Gilman, by W. 
C. Gilman, Esq. , . . . 20 00 

Sherman, Fairfield county. Rev. 
Maltby Gelston, by his Ch. and 
Cong., 20 00 

Somers, Rev. Rodney G. Dennis, 
by Bible Class, . . . . . . 20 00 

Stafford, Rev. Moses B. Church, 
by his Ch. and Cong, (in part of 
$20,) 10 57 

Tolland, Jonathan R. Flint, . . 20 00 
*' Rev. Abram Marsh, by his 
Ch. and Cong 20 00 

Woodbridge, Rev. M. Hawes, by 
Ladies, 20 00 

N.YORK.— Brooklyn, L. I. John 
B. Graham, (For. Dis.) . . . 20 00 
** David Leavttt, do. . . . 20 00 
" " David Wesson, do. . . 20 00 

N. York city, Charles H. Beothe, 20 00 
<* J. W. Kimball, (For. Dis.) 20 00 
'' Mrs. Ann H. Otis, by Mr. 

Jos. Otis, 20 00 

** Miss E. H. Otis, by do. . 20 00 
" 8. V. 8, Wilder, President, 

(For. Dis.) 30 00 

" William Winterton . . 20 OO 

Savquoit, Rev. Tertius D. South- 
worth, by Ladies, 20 00 

Shawangttuk, Rev. John H. Be- 
vier, by A. T. 8. (in part of $20,) 10 00 

N. JER.— Bottle Hill, Charles 
garter, by Ladies, .... 20 00 

Cmitham, Rev. Jos. M. Ogden, by 
Ladies, 20 00 

Chester, Joshua G. Corwin, . . 20 00 

" Jared Haines, SO 00 

" Rev. Abner Morse, by his 

Church (in part of f^,) . 18 35 
" Mrs. Abr. Williamson, by 
Ladies, 20 00 

Mendham, Rev. Elias Riggs, by 
himself and Students of Hill- 
Top School. ...... 20 00 

Mornstown, James Cook, Esq. . S5 00 
" Miss Mary Hedgi'S, . . 20 00 

Mount Freedom, Rev. Jacob Bry- 
ant, by Ch. and Cong. ... SO 00 

NeWfouudland, Rev. John G. Ka- 
nouse, by Ch. and Cong., (in 
part of |20,) 2 48 

Pompton Plains, Rev. A. Meaner, 

by his Ch. and Cong. ... 20 00 

Succasunna Plains,* Rev. Mr. Os- 
borne, by his Ch. and Ccwg. SO 00 



PENN. — Philadelphia, Rev. J. 

Breckinridge, (For. Dis.) . . 25 00 
VIR.— Winchealer, Mrs. Naiiey 
Hill, by Ladies of Rev. Dr. Hill's 

Cong 20 00 

-** Mrs. Harriet Jaekson, by 

Ladies of Episcopal Church, 20 SO 
" Mrs. Elizabeth Riddle, by 

Rev. Mr. Riddle's Cong. . SO 00 
** Miss Betsy Ann HoUiday, 
by Mr. Geo. Banibart, (in full 

of 120,) 5 00 

OHIO.— Hudson, David Hudson, 

Esq 90 00 

Putnam, Rev. J. Hunt, (in full of 

$20,) 12 00 

MICH. TER.— Sault De Ste. Ma- 
rie, Rev. Jeremiah Porter, by 
Presb. Church, 20 00 

Annual Members. 

N. YORK.— New. York city, Ar- 
chibald C. Brady, .... 2 00 

N. JER.— Orange, B. N. Powles, 
for 1831 and 1832, ..... 4 00 

Otfier DonaHons. 

VER — Stafford, Rev. H. F. Lea- 

vitt, 50 

MASS, — Northampton, Ladies of 

1st Cong. Church, for Burmah, 30 13 
Salem, Jdin Bulkley Lawrence, 

A Legacy, 158 65 

CONN.— Bethlehem, sundry Indi- 
viduals, . 50 

East Goshen, Soc. of Rev. G. Car- 

rington, 10 00 

Ellington, Church and Congrega- 
tion, 13 45 

Ellsworth, Individuals, ... 15 00 
Goshen, Rev. Grant Powers's Soc. 56 25 
Greenwich, Second Society, . 5 50 
Guilford, Rev. Mr. Dutton, $1;~ 

Henry E. Hod|e8, $3 25, . . 4 5K5 
Harwinton, Rev. Mr. Pierce's Soc. 65 00 
Litchfield, 1st Society, , . . . S8 43 
Madison, a friend, $1 ; 2 friends, 

$5 6 00 

New Milford, Individuals, . . 50 

New Preston, do 18 S8 

Northfield, Rev. Mr. Camp's Soc. 16 19 
Pettipaug in Saybrook, Congre- 
gational Soc 45 31 

Sharon- Sundry Individuals, . . 61 00 
Sherman, Ch. and Cong, of Rev. 

Mr. Gelston, 9 05 

Somers, Sunday School C<mcert, 1 SS 
** Church and Congregation, 15 75 
Sterling, Fem. Bible Class in Rev. 

Mr. Lane's Soc. for Val. Miss. 3 00 
Torrington, Individuals, by A. 

Hodges, Esq SO 60 

Vernon, Collection. 21 90 

Warren, Sandry ladividuals, . 30 64 



106 



RECEIPTS. 



[Aug. 



Wadiiagton, E«r. Mr. Hay*' 8oc. 
N. YORK.-Aibaoy, Sd Prwby- 

terian C9iurcb» 

" AFriend,. . . - . . 
AngelieajRev.Mr. Hnater'sCon^. 
Brooklyn, L. I. Saodry lodm- 

duals, of Rov. BIr. CaroU** Ch. 

(For. Dis.) 

" Youof Ladies, by Miaa Ca- 

therims AuaUn, for Mo.,Dit. 

Adams 00. Illinoia, .... 
Greenville, Mrs. F. Knowles, 

avails of gold beads, (For. Dis.) 
Holland Patent, a Friend, . . 

«< Individuals, For. Dis. |i 43 ; 

Presb. CoBf. |17, $10 of which 

fivr Val. Mis. ...... 

Marshall, Individuals, . . . . 

New Rochelle, two deceased chil- 
dren, a Legacy, 

New-York city, a Friend, $3, do. 

50c.; do. fi5c.; Presb. Friendfor 

Burmah, $5. ; a Female, 5Ue. ; 

C. H. L., avaib of Jewelry, 

$10 80 for Ceylon ; Wm. A. 

Booth, $10 ; 9ona. Leavitt, $10; 

W. Chauncey, $5t Miss Sarah 

Adams, $2 ; Wm. £. Lee, $5, 
Paris, Dr. E. Judd, $2; Mrs. B. 

Judd, 50c £. 6. Judd, 50c. i W. 

P. Judd, 50c. ; Susan Judd, 50c. ; 

H. Judd, 50c. ; H. B. Judd^ 50. ; 

P. Campbell, 50c. ; P. S. Bull, 

S5c.; Anna Brown, S5c.; H. 

M'Neil, Esq. $3 ; N. Tompkins, 

$3 ; Mrs. N. Tompkins, $1: Dr. 

G.W.Smith; 50c.; Dr« E. G. 

Myratt, 35c. ; Mrs. Myvatt, 50c.; 

E. Miner, 50c. ; F. Smith, SiSc. 
Sauquoit, J. Willard, 50c.; D. 

Willard, 50e. ; R. Chapman, 

25c ; H. Cooper, $1; J. Wing, 

SOc; A. Rowell, SOc. ; M. Hoad- 

ley.lBe. ; Deac. J. Howard, $1 ; 

A. Porter, $2 ; J. Liscomb, 50e. ; 

J. M. Sc A. Gray, 50c.; S. 

Holmes, 63c. ; C. Cooledge, $1 ; 

A. Bacon, $3 ; D. Curtis, S8c. ; 



549 

75 00 

SO 00 

41 



40 00 



35 37 

600 
80 00 



18 42 
3 13 

60 



51 05 



12 75 



D. Hubbard^ SOe. ; W. J. Eager, 
50e.; Dr. L. Bishop, 25e. . . 13 66 
Vernon Cnntre, Rev. E. M. Ni- 
chols' Soc 16 00 

Verona, 1st Congregational Ch. A 
** 2d do. do. 1513 

Walton, Del. Co. an aged Widow, 
avails of Jewelry, for Burman 

Miss 3 50 

Whitesboro' Presb. Society, . S8 H 
N. J ER.— Berkshire Valley, sun- 
dry Individuals, . .' . . . 8 71 
Boonton Palls, do. do. (For. Dis.) 50 00 
Bottle Hill do. do. . . . . 37 32 
Chatham, Wnw C. Wallace, $5; 

Individuals, $3, 8 00 

Chester, sundry. Individnals, . . 10 00 
Freehold, Dr. James English, . 8 00 
Hanover, a young lady, avails of 
Jeweby, $1 SO; do. do. 61c. 8 11 

" Individuals, 11 50 

MendhamrSUttdiT^ Donations, . 16 50 
Morristown, Individuals, . . . 8 85 
Pleasant Grove, Donations, . • 6 19 

Pompton, Individuals 8 75 

Suecasnnna Plains, a balance, . . 9 
MAR.-'-Hagerstown, D. Sprigg, 

Esq. (For. Dis.) 10 00 

*' Samuel Steele, do. . . 10 00 
VIR.— Brucetown, P. O. Frede- 
rick eo. Mrs. Frances Jollief 1 00 
*^ Wm. Thompson, SO cts. ; Or 
F. Washington, $1 50., . . 8 00 
Prospect Hin, Ladies, ... 5 00 
TENN.— Maury co. Rot. Benja- 
min Labaree, 5 00 

2 50 
00 
00 
00 



OHIO.— Miss P. Curtis, 



tt 



Mrs. Shailer, 1 



5 
8 



54 00 
16 91 



Austinsburgfa, Joab Austin, 
Hudson, Rev. Ansel R. Clark, . 

** Congregational Society, . 

" Western Reserve College, 
Officers and Students, . . 
KingvYillOf Bap.and Pre8b.Conga. 

of which $16 for Burmah, and 

$3 Vid. Mira 81 75 

MEXICO.— Wm. W. Wamsley, 

a Legacy, 800 00 



The above list contains donations — 

For Valley of the Mississippi, (including $35 37 for 

Adams county, Illinois,) 

For Foreign Distribution, (including $54 63 for 



$4137 



Burmah, and $10 fur Ceylun,) 



Whole amount of donations 
Received for Tracts sold. 



$454 94 

$3,156 03 
. 2,337 17 

Total $5,393 191. 



' JhU. The $13 43, acknowledged in Magazines for April and May,* as from 
Rev.T. B. Hurlbut, Agent, in Virginia, ahonU have been as follows: Mrs. Ban- 
well and family, Carter Hall, Milwood P. O. $3 42; R. M*Candless, Brucetown 
PkO. Frederick county, $3; Mr*. Stephenson^ Ho. fS; JohnMelvin, Shephenft- 
town P. O. Jefferson county, $2 50; B. Melvin, do. $2 50; Mbs Mary Pofk, Jef- 
ferson county, $1. 



THE AMERICAN 



TRACTS IN COLLEGE. 

■' Quelle* not the Spirit." 

During apowerial rev iral of religion in Ifaii InglitutiDQ in theiptiog 
of 1831, (wrim a. memb«r ofoDe of our largeit and mait regpectnble 
ooliegea,) 1 went to the room of a claaimate, who had racenlly ob- 
tained bope in Chriit. I found him lining bj hii fire-tide with his 
Toom-mate, who wu a hard-hearted sinner. He ipoke, at maj ht 
luppoiad, with great lenderneit of the wonderful work of grace 
which WBi going on among ug. J aiienled, but in view of Ibe coodi- 
tion of his room-male, replied, lh(t not oil hi Ian ding all Ihtt, tome 
were apparently determined lo crevd their way down to the realmi 
of WD, in ipile of all that God had done for their salvation. I had 

kept TBy eye failened upon K , who betrajed, at I thought, the 

Mcret working! ofan enlightened conscience aj-aintt the inclmalioni 
of the natural heart. But at the ullecance of the la);t senlence he 
showed en unusual agitation. Thit, tbaughl I, maji be the time when 
hit eternal deslinj it to be decided, I immediately rose, and, at I 
puiedouloflbe room, dropt upon hit desk Ihe little Trad " tiuenih 

VoL.nL 9 WHOLkNo.78. 



\ 



110 TRACTS IN COLLKOE. [Sept. 

not the Spirit,** secretly praying that its solemn truths might reach 
his heart and free his soul from the slavery of sin. Not long after, I 
met K at the close of a religious meeting, and otwerving 

something unusual in his appearance, asked him if he would go to my 
room. Yes, said he, and exclaimed, *' that Tract, that Tract ! I 
could not conceive why you should leave that Tract in my room. I 
was angry at you for doing it. But now I see the reason. Wont you 
pray with me?" The interest of suth a scene is better felt than de- 
scribed. O what joy was felt in heaven ! for K , there is reason 
to believe, was born again ! He thought I must have been informed 
respecting his early history, because the Tract so accurately repre- 
sented his case. 

" L&XU't method with Deists." 

I cannot refrain from mentioning another instance, which has not 
only caused a jubilee of joy in heaven, but, if we may judre from pre- 
sent circumstances, will hereafter cause the " new song" to be sung 

by many who now dwell in the " dark places of the earth." L 

is a classmate of mine, a young man of great decision of character, 
and on this account, and because he had the means in abundance to 
carry on an^ project, he was the more influential. Indeed he was 
the ringleader of the enemy's forces against religion, temperance, and 
truth. By his winning manners and flattering seductions he seldom 
failed to miiiate amiable unsuspecting young men who were unpro- 
tected by firm moral principles, into all the enchanting mysteries of 
" high life" (as he would call it) within a very few weeks after their 
entrance upon college exercises. Intoxication was the first degree, 
and all ihe other vices followed in its train. Such being bis charac- 
ter it may well be supposed he would be among the last to yield his 
heart to God. And so it was ; for during a powerful outpouring of 
the Holy Spirit he stood out long and firmly against the entreaties 
of his converted friends, and against all the appeals of the Gospel. 
Sermons were by him unheeded, and the entreaties of Christians dis- 
regarded. So greiit had been the work gf grace among us, that 
now L— — stood alone, like the heath in the desert, forsaken by every 
one of his former associates. But when conscience raised its voice 
in favor of the religion of Jesus, he would stifle it by endeavoring to 
be an Infidel. 

At this time one of his former companions handed him *' Leslie's 
method toith Deists" He took it,' and repaired to his room, with the 
determination to overthrow every argument that might be advanced 
in support of the Bible. He read and re-read, but to use bis own ex- 
pression " he could not find a flaw in it." Conviction flashed upon his 
mind. It must be so. He must either be a fool or a Christian ; for he 
had often said, that if he believed t^e Bible to be true he should be a 
fool not to follow its directions. In about twenty-four hours from this 
time, after a most violent struggle against the adversary of his soul, 
he opened his lips in prayer to Him whose name he had scarcely 
mentioned but with an oath for the space of twelve years. He was 
the last convert in that memorable revival. And now he looks out 
upon a world lying in wickedness, and then casting his eye upward to 
the throne of God, cries, " Here am I— send me." 



1832.] CSfiVQUNISSS OF TRACTS. Ill 

HOW TO FILL A CHURCH. 

TFTe Report of the Cincinnati Branch Tract Society gays, the Rer. 
Mr. W.} ofthe Baptist church, was laboring as a missionai;y in a small 
town, and made an appointment to preach at a certain bouse on a 
given day — considerable pains was taken to extend the notice, but 
when the time arrived no person came to hear* Unwilling to leave the 
field Without a hearing, he thought of 70 or 80 Tracts in his trunk 
which a pious lady had given him to distribute. He resolved to 
make another trial, fixed upon the time of meeting, took his Tracts 
in his hand, went into every house, and called the children around 
him, distributing in every family, until his little stock was exhausted. 
At the time appointed to preach, he found the room literally full. He 
then gave notice of another meeting, and when tht time came, more 
assembled than could be seated ; he preached a few times, and then 
circulated a subscription paper to build a honse for public worship. 
In a few months a church was erected large enough to accommodate 
the whole township, which has since enjoyed the stated means of 
grace ; and several, < in the judgment of charity, .have been made 
savingly acquainted with the plan of salvation. 



GENERAL INFLUENCE OF TRACTS. 

It is acknowledged, says Rev. Mr. Hurlbut, the Society's Agent in 
Virginia, by all candid judicious observers, that Tracts, where cir- 
culated, are exerting in this country a silent but salutary and exten* 
sive influence, particularly in favor of the Temperance cause. I re- 
joice at the numerous signal instances of the Divine blessing upon 
Tracts in the immediate conversion of souls to Christ; yet 1 am satis- 
fired that this is by no means the only influence they are exerting. 
They are silently undermining the foundations of Satan's kingdom by 
throwing light in unort the understandings of men. They are gradual- 
ly removing the strong pvejudices against the Temperance reforma- 
tion — the strict observance of the Holy Sabbath — the Bible cause — 
and the missionary enterprise. They are instilling sentiments into 
many young minds, which I trust will hereafter be acted out to the 
great advantage of morality and pure religion. 



TRACTS IN THE STATE PRISON, WETHERSFIELD, CONN. 

It is now about three months, saya the Chaplain, since I commenced 
giving Tracts to the convicts, and I think I can see that good has 
already been the result. . A man, who has just left the prison, called 
at my study as soon as he was discharged. Formerly, as he told me, 
he had been, a thorough-going Universalist, sealoualy defended the 
doctrine, and took Universalist papers from Hartibrd, Philadeipbia, 
&c. I had lent him the Tract called ** A Strange Thing;'* and it had 
been the means, under Grod, of opening bis eyes.< Such were bis feelr 
ings that, on talung his leave of me, he remarked, '* I shall get hooHt 
this evening about 8 o'eiock, and it is my determination to propose to 
■ay wife that we b«Te prayers in the family before we go to bed.*' 



112 sjlmdwich isulnds. [Sept. 

The moHve for writing Tractt. 

" They must be very good folks/' said another cooTict to me the 

other day, as he handed through the grating a Tract which I had lent 

him to read — ** they must be very g^od folks who write auch books 

as these, and have them printed and done up so neatly to be given 

away for others to read." Would not you, I asked, if you were able, 

be willing to write good books and have them given away, if you 

thought they would make wicked men good ? ** No sir," he replied, 

I after a moment's pause — " if 1 was .ever so able, with my present foel- 

I Ings, I never should write such books as these ; if I wrote any thing, I 

; am sure it would be what would make bad men worse." 

" Ledie^s short iHtthod with the Deists has been quite serviceable to 
[ me. — A careless young man was rendered deeply serious the other 

f day by reading the Tract Day of Judgment.** 



TRACTS IN A CLERGYMAN'S LIBRARY. 

1 am surprised, writes Rev. Mr. L , of Tennessee, that every 

clergyman does not make your Tracts a part of his library. I am 
well persuaded that there cannot be found within the same comrpass 
in any human production, so much sound theology, such clear exiiibi- 
tions of Christian duty, so much practical piety, and such pungent 
appeals to the heart and conscience. 



dgii^ the grant from the American Tract Society of 65,000 
rinted at tne Society's House, in Hawaiian, says. 



CALL FOR TRACTS AT THE SANDWICH ISLANDS. 

A letter from the Mission at these Islands, under date of Oct. 1830, 
acknowledgi 
Tracts, printe^d 

You will be pleased to know that nearly all the Tracts granted are 
already in the hands of the people; and so anxious have they been 
to obtain them, that they have been ready to give us, in return, what- 
ever of this world's ^oods they have had to spare; such as firewood, 
fowls, eggs, all the various kinds of vegetables and fruits, sticks for 
fences, small jobs of labor, &.c. &c. Could we throw such kind of 
articles into some markets of the world, and receive their value in 
money, we might dispove of ten thousand dollars tcorlh of books every 
year. But there is no such market, and the people have little money^ 
so that the real value to us of what they can pay is trifling. 

The question then is, <' ShoXt the people go without books, while they 
are so eager to obtain them thai they are ready to pay the staple comnuh 
dities of the land for them, or shall they be supplied gratuitotuly ?" 

We have ourselves printed 360 pages of Old Testament History, 
together with a Scripture Catechism of 200 pages. We print 10,000 
copies of each, making an aggregate of 5,600,000 pages. Our Scrip- 
ture Tracts we expect to continue until the Old Testament history is 
complete. We do not by any means consMer 10,000 copies a full sup- 
ply of any work, but it is as many as we are able in our present cir- 
cumstances to print. All these Tracts I suppose are within the sphere 



*} 



1832.] «AVLT DE ST. MARIS. 113 

of your printing. Now tee teith to inquire disttneily vohoi mortyovL con 
do for w? 

You would also be pleased to know something of the use to whieh 
we put your English Tracts. At the two stations frequented by ships, 
▼iz. Honolulu and Lahaina, there is considerable call for Tracts. The 
more serious class of the sailors generally know that we have them, 
and call and inquire for them ; and we have exhausted our store. We 
baye now very few Tracts on hand. The next season for ships will 
exhaust them alt. 



ARGUMENT FOB TRACTS FOR THE HEATHEN. 

Expecting one day fo stand on heathen ground, says an estimable 
young dergjrmaii, I feel that Tracts will be one of the most efficient 
means of aiding me in my great woric. Indeed I believe that Traeti 
are the only proieticable means of tending the Gospel to the freoemt 
generation of the pagan world, unlew God sho|ild open the windows 
of heaven and rain down miegionarus and Bibles. Is not the present 
impracticability of sending the Gospel to all by these lait mentioned 
means, taken in connection with the fact that God is wonderfully 
blessing Tracts to the conversion of heathen souls, conclusive evi- 
dence, that be is designing that multitudes of the prsjtnt fg^mnration 
of the heathen world, at least, should have the Gospel sent tolhem 
by means of Tracts 7 



TRACTS AT SAULT DE ST. MARIE. 

The Rev. A. Bingham, Baptist missionary at this station, gives a 
very gratifying account of the usefulness of Tracts granted by the 
American Tract Society, especially among the soldiers at the fort. 
At first they seemed impressed with the idea, that men could not be 
soldiers and Christians at the same time, and many rejected the 
Tracts ; but an increasini^ readiness to receive them was soon mani- 
fested, which at length ripened with many into an anxious desire. 
One soldier at length pro&ssed religion, and soon after, three others, 
and also Rev. Mr. B's interpreter, and a native woman. A Bible dass 
was established by Rev. Mr. Porter ; and on the second week in Janu- 
ary a revival began te appear openly. The result has been that &ve 
of the six officers at the fort, and between 90 and 40 of the men have 
obtained hope in Christ. About 60 individuals in all have united with 
the church. The Temperance Society, formed two years ago, seemed 
to lay the foundation for all these blessings. In three instances Tracts, 
one of them Q^eneh not the Spirit, and another Serious Thoughts on 
Eternity, have been the principal means of awakening the attention, 
and all the converts have been much edified by reading them. Up- 
wards of $200-have been subscribed at the settlement for printing the 
New Testament in Chippeway, as translated by Dr. James. 



AUTHENTICITY OF THE TRACTS OF THE EVANGELICAL 

&AMBLE& 

Much care has been exerdsed b^ the Publishing Committee of the 
American Tract Society to ascertain the authentidty of the Sodety's 

9* 



114 Vbbitt of tracts. [Sept. 

Pf arrative Tracts. Three of them, tis. the Wid&w^t Son, ViUage Fu- 
neralf and Warning to Sabbath Breakert, were selected from the above 
named work, of which Bev. Timothy East, of Birmingham, EnglaDd, 
is the author. The question of their authenticity having been pro- 
posed to him, he thus replied — '* All the narratives in the Evangelical 
Rambler are narrative of facts — though in the order of their arrange- 
ment I have not'* always " followed the order of their occurrencOi 
but transposed them and fitted them to constitute something like a 
continuous history of persons and events." 



VERITY OF CATHERINE YEATES, TRACT No. S6I. 

The Rev. Basil Woodd, in a sketch of Miss Lucy Jane Benn, in the 
Christian Observer, (vol. 13,) says she was cousin of Miss Catherine 
Yeates, whose memoir is inserted in the number of that Work for 
June, 1804, and is the same as the above named Tract. 



.4^ 



CONFIRBfATION OF *< LITTLE HENRT AND RIS BEARER.** 

Letter from kev. Professor Goodrifihf of New-Haven, 

Mr. Money, the English Consul at Venice, stated to me the fol- 
lowing facts : 

One of his children, a daughter about five years old, bad a native 
servant as an attendant, during his residence in India. This child 
observed her attendant in their walks in the neighborhood of Bombay, 
go frequently into the pagan temples and prostrate himself on the 
ground. The child asked him what he meant by this attitude. He 
replied, thst he was w6rshiping his God. She replied, with great 
earnestness, that it was no God ; and with much simplicity and per- 
severance insisted on reading to him the New Testament. This went 
on, without Mr. Money's knowing any thing of the matter, for more 
than a year ; when, one evening at family prayers, to his great sur- 
prise, he saw this servant appear among the English domestics, and 
taking ofi* his turban with deep solemnity, kneeling down in prayer. 
By that act he renounced caste, and proclaimed himself a Christian. 
This led Mr. Money to inquire into the origin of his change of feeling, 
when the facts detailed above were made known to him for the first 
time. They bear in some respect a striking resemblance to those re- 
corded in the story of Henry and his Bearer, 



NEW TRACTS WANTED. 

An Agent at the West suggests that a Tract is greatly wanted 
which shall give a sketch of the character, operations^ and objects of 
our Benevolent Societies, to obviate objections in the minds of the pre- 
judiced. 

Also, that a variety of Tracts in the simplest style, especially Nar- 
ratives, with attractive titles, and more particularly adapted to the 
minds of plain unlettered readers, would be a Yery valuable accession 
to the Tracts already published. 



1832.] AUXILIARIES. 115 

LIBERALITY OF A YOUNO CLERGYMAN OF THB CUMBERLAND 

PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH. 

'< Silver and gold/' says this gentleman, who has labored some 
time for the Tract cause without charge, **1 have none" — but I have 
100 acres of tolerably good land, worth, I suppose, from $1 to $1 60 
per acre. This I will now offer for sale, and whatever may be the 
proceeds, I wish to appropriate the same as compensation to an 
Agent of the American Tract Society to labor among us. And more- 
over, I will use my best efforts to obtain from the friends of the Tract 
cause in this field, an amount, which, with the above, may be suffi- 
cient amply to compensate an Agent for twelve months services. 



MONTHLY DISTRIBUTION IN GLASGOW, SCOTLAND. 

** The Glasgow Society for the Monthly Distribution of Tracts" has 
recently been formed ; and its constitution and objects presented to 
the community in a spirited Circular, showing the indispensable ne- 
cessity of some such effort to carry the Gospel to the firesides of mul- 
titudes even in that city and its suburbs, who now scarcely feel its 
influence from any source whatever. The city will embrace about 
40 Districts of 60 families each. Very neat cards of directions for 
Distributers have been prepared, and subscription books on which 
they may enter contributions received. 



UNION TRACT SOCIETY, HARRISBURG, PENN. 

The first Anniversary of this Society, embracing Christians of dif- 
ferent denominations, was held in the German Reformed Church, 
July 10. Its prominent effort has been the sustaining of the Monthly 
Distribution: 800 Tracts distributed each month — total for the year 
107,327 pages — expense $67 28. An individual now indulging a 
hope was awakened by the Tract A Traveler's Farewell. To another 
individual. The Sinner directed to the Savior, was much blessed. A 
number of persons have been induced to attend public worship, and 
several children brought into Sabbath schools. Many of the Distri- 
buters are faithful in conversation, and in some Districts female 
prayer meetings have been established. The Report presents the 
various arguments for this system of effort, and the motives for sus- 
taining it by contributions, effort, and prayer. 



DAYTON BRANCH, OHIO. 

First Anniversary, May 1. Amount of sales $225 64. Stock in 
the Depository $309 14. The Board express their gratitude for 
the assiduous labors of Rev. William Yonce, Agent of the Parent 
Institution, within their field. 

The Monthly Distribution has been vigorously prosecuted in Day- 
ton by the Female Auxiliary, who have supplied 600 families ; by the. 
Branch in 600 families in remote parts of the township ; and by twen- 
ty-five other Auxiliaries which have, on an average, supplied 5,009 



116 SUPPLYING OCR COUNTRY. [Sept* 

families monthly for 6 months. New Auxiliaries are forming eyery 
month; and the need of them is great, as it is believed not more than 
oiM third of the population within the field, of the Branch and parts 
adjacent, regularly attend on public worship. 

Utefulntss of the Monthlif DistribtUion, 

The Femiile Auxiliary of Dayton state, that a mother who could 
not read, had her hope greatly shaken by Tracts read to her by her 
children ; a careless man had his attention seriously arrested ; and a 
profane and intemperate man was induced to promise reformation. 

One Distributer says, " all in my District receive the Tracts thank- 
fully, as they are destitute of preaching, and spend the Sabbath at 
home." A woman thinks the Tract on the Sabbath has been useful 
to her husband in preventing his laboring on that day. 

Tracts in a Family of Sabbath Breakers, 

In a family, where, though the aged mother professed religion, her 
sons profaned the Sabbath by Hunting and fishing, she would per- 
suade one of her sons, the only member of the fhmily who could read, 
to read the Tracts to her. This was the means of his conversion. He 
is now a member of the Methodist Church ; the moral character of 
the family is changed, and the Sabbath by them now regarded. 



TRACT SOCIETY, ATHENS, EAST TENNESSEE. 

At a meeting, June 27, the Rev. William W. Woods, Agent of the 
Parent Society, having delivered a solemn and interesting address, he 
was followed by Rev. Dr. T. A. Anderson, who moved and supported 
with great force and propriety, the following resolutions : 

*' Resolved, That we highly approve of the agency of Rev. W. W. Woods, and 
deaire it may be extended throughout our country i and that, as Uie occasional and 
monthly distribution of religious Tracts has been greatly blessed in this and other 
lands to dying men and to the Church of Christ, we feel ourselves encouraged, obli- 
gated, and constrained to continue our exertions in this cause. 

^ Retoloedj That we co-operate with the American Tract Society in their laud- 
able and benevolent enterprise of disseminating religious truth throughout the 
length and breadth of the land, and that we endeavor to carry into effect their 
object in BTMian county." 



ARGUMENT FOR SUPPLYING OUR OWN COUNTRY WITH TRACTS 
AND THE LABORS OF TRACT DISTRIBUTERS. 

Whether we regard the value of the souls of our countrymen, or 
the influence this nation should exert in the conversion of the world, 
the duty is most imperative to do all we can without delay, to bring 
every individual of this great community to embrace the salvation of 
the Gospel. But it is estimated, that not far Arom 6,000,000 of our 
population are now unblessed with the stated means of grace. Minis- 
ters to supply the deficiency are not to be found, and with all the en- 
ergy that can be put forth it can hardly be expected that they will be 



1892.] AWARD OF PREMIUM. 117 

nuted up, till the present g^eneration at least shall have g^one to eter- 
nity. The Bible must be placed in every family ; yet it is known 
that maltitudes, from indolence and disrelish of its truths, neglect to 
read it. Sabbath schools must be every where formed ; but. they affect 
mainly the young, and meet an alnu^st resistless counteraction in the 
example and influence of parents, so far as they live estranged from 
religion. What then shall be done to carry the Gospel to the mass 
of population, whose souls are perishing, and whose ungodly in- 
fluence is diffusing itself far and wide, and descending from genera- 
tion to generation ? What other means is devised, and what better 
can be, than for faithful devoted private Christians to take the Gospel 
Tract, and present it at their firetidea-^teWmg them the story of the 
cross — ^persuading them to be reconciled to God — inducing them to 
attend on public worship if within their reach — to search the Scrip- 
tures — to place their children in Sabbath and other schools — and thus 
doing all in their power for their salvation. It has ** pleased God by 
thefooluhness of preaching to iave them that believe"— and as there 
are not ministers, will he not bless the same message on the printed 
page, when presented by his praying people 7 Will he not bless it, 
as read by their lips to those who cannot read, and explained and 
enforced by their persuasive arguments, and by their own Godly life 
and example ? Will not he, who orighaally gave the (?ospels and 
epistles to men in the form of Tracts, bless his own truth, when thus 
presented for their perusal and meditation ? Let these visits and 
labors be renewed, with longing for the salvation of men, and prayer 
and fasting ; and God will give a multitude of souls as a rich and 
glorious reward. Most blessed results have already attended these 
labors ; and God is showing himself ready to bless them yet more and 
more, if his children will be faithful. There are Christians to per- 
form these labors, scattered throughout almost every portion of our 
land; and their united influence, with the blessing of God, in answer 
to prayer, would shake the very empire of sin. In laboring for others 
they will themselves be revived ; their light will shine *, they will 
strengthen the hands of all faithful pastors; the power of their ex- 
ample will be resistless ; their influence will be felt throughout our 
whole nation ; and ere long throughout the world. This work may 
be prosecuted toithout any delay. The present generntion of the des- 
titute may thus be reached ; and almost every family, within a few 
months, or years'at farthest. 

AWARD OF PKEMIUM. 

The Committee, to whom was referred the examination of Manu- 
script Tracts on Prayer, have performed the duty a«signed them, and 



118 NSW PRBMTOM TRACT. fSept. 

miaiiiiDOusly mgreed to award the premium to the maniueript marked 
Ifo. 4. On ascertaining the author's name, it was found to be the 
Ber. Sbth Willistoh, late of Durham, N. T. The Tract has been 
adopted by the Publishing Committee of the American Tract Society, 
and the Author has generously made the premium a donation to aid 
in perpatnatuig its circulation. , 

Warrev Fat, Chairman. 



Manuscripts for the premium of f^ASO ^of the best Tract on *^ iht 
manjitr in tohich Christians should show the Spirit qf thtir Master in 
labors and sacrifices for the conversion of the world" may be sent to 
Rer. Thomas H. Skinner, D, D. Philadelphia, and Mr. Wiltiam A. 
Hallock, 150 Nassau- street, New-Tork, until December 1, 1832. 



NEW PREMIUM TRACT— ON PRAYER. 

No. 271. Prater. A premium Tract. — pp. 34. Written by Rev. 
Stth WiUiHon, late of Durham, N. Y. showing its ciiligaiiony bfeing 
inculcated in the Scriptures by precept and example, and represented 
as binding on all, and essential to Christian character — its nature ; 
the spirit in which it should be offered, its matter, objects, style — its 
benefits, in promoting sancttfication, honoring God, and being pre- 
valent with him — its ouasums : sanctuary prayer ; prayer meetings, 
monthly concert ; prayer among select friends ; family prayer ; prayer 
connected with pastoral visits, schools, and the transaction of public 
busine«8; ejaculatory prayer;, closet prayer; importance of stated 
seasons, and of fasting ; together with a forcible appeal to the spirit- 
iial followers of Christ, to use this most powerful instrument in the 
great warfare with sin, as a means of bringing forward the latter day 
glory. The Tract is rich, scriptural, serious, and affectionate ; and is 
probably the fullest presentation of the subject now to be found within 
MO short a compass in our language. It will be ready for delivery 
carty in September. 



RAPID TRACT CIRCULATION. 

Of the " Appeal to the Prepared and the Unprepared on the SoN* 
ject of Cholera," (Occasional No. 4>) 166,000 were printed by the 
Society in four weeks, nearly all of which have been put into circu- 
lation. 



The Rev. Dr. Holies, Secretary of the Baptist Board of Foreign 
Missions, lately stated to a gentleman in Boston, that their mis- 
sionaries had received to their communion fifteen or twenty persons 
who had come from the interior beyond where a Bible or a missionary 
had ever been: being warned by a J^aet they had come a great. dis- 
tance, to iearn more of the truth and connect themselves with the 



children of God. 



RJBCEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 



During the month ending Angnet 15, 1833. 

FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 

VERMONT.— Sudbury, Female, Min Susan Ranger, Agent, . 

MASSACHUSETTS.— Boston, John Tappan, Esq. Treasurer, (ft>r 
IlliuQis, f t61 37; for Asia, $16 35; for Burmab, $3 50; for 
Monthly Distribution in Clay, Ohio, $13; for do. Madison, 
Ohio, $12,) 

CONNECTICUT.-^Bridgeport, Rev. John Blatchford, Agent, 

Brooklyn, (Windham County Auxiliary,) Edwin Newbury, Agent, 

Green's Farms, Edward Hyde, Agent, .... 

Miiford, Rev. AtaM. Train, Secretary, 

Northford, Ralph Linsley, Secretary, . . . 

Norwich City, F. A. Perkins, Esq. Treasurer, 

Stonington, Rev. Joseph Whittlesey, Secretaryr 

West Greenwich, Solomon Mead, Secretaiy, 

NEW-YORK.— Arkport, James Hurlbut, Agent, . 

Brooklyn, Long-Island, Joseph Howard, Treasurer, . 

Cazenovia, Female, « . 

Dashville Falls, Female^Mrs. Jane Ann Butter, Treasurer, 

Newburgb, R. B. Williams, Treasurer, .... 

New-York City, Alfred Edwards, Treasurer, 

Rye, Female, Ann H. Buckley, Secretary, 

Scoharie County,John Ingold, Treasurer, . 

South Salem, S. Saunders, Agent, 

Tompkinsville, Female, tix: Miller, Treasurer, 

Troy, Charles Lyman, Treasurer, 

Utica, Edward Vernon, Secretary, . . . - . 

NEW-JERSEY.— Bellville, Sebastian Duncan, Secretary, 

Bloomfleld, Juvenile, Z. B. Dodd, Treasurer, 

Boonton, J. H. Woodhull, Agent, . ... 

Caldwell, Jonathan Provost, Treasurer, 

Hanover, N. P. Thomas, Treasurer, , . . 

Lawrenceville, Female, Mrs. Maria L. Phillips, Secretary, 

Newark, Female, Mrs. Sarah M. Graham, Treasurer, 

Rockaway, Female, Sliss Emily Beach, Secretary, 

Westfield, Female, Mary Pieraon, Secretary, . 

MARYLAND.— BjklUmore Branch, 0. A. Hall, Treasurer. 

VIRGINIA^— FarmviUe, John Rice, Treasurer. . 

Lexington, J. W. Paine, President, .... 

Lynchburg,.CasweU Poe, Secretaiy, .... 

Staunton, Charles Patrick, Esq. Treasurer, 

St. George Parish, Accomac Co. Fern. Mrs. Maria S. Jo]mes, Pres. 

Winchester, Daniel Gold, Treasurer, 

SOUTH-CAROLINA.— Charleston, South-Carolina Branch, D. W. 
Harrison, Agent, 

ALABAMA.— HuntsviUe, Samuel Coltart, Agent, ... 
SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 

MAINE.— Winthrop, Temperance Society, D. Thurston, Agent, 

NEW-YORK.— New Utrecht, L. I. Female Missionary Bible and 
Tract .Society, Mrs. C. Knapp, Tr^fl^surer, .... 

Tracts sold at the Depository to individuals, (including $3 from 
S. S. Waldo, Agent in New-York,) 

. Directors for Lift. 
CONN.— North Cornwall, Rev. 

Walter Smith, by his Chnrch 

and CongregfUioD, (in part of 

$50,) $43 68 

N. YORK.— Acra P. O., Green 

counQr, Rev. Setb Williston, to 

perpetuate premium Tract on 

Prayer, 90 00 

New-York Ci^, Arthur TftppaQ, 

(for Foreign Distribntion, in 

partof$l$)00 310 00 

Membert for Life, 
CONN^— Humphreysville, Rev. 



ForTr. 



614 30 
64 

10 00 

11 62 

6 00 

1 75 

13 75 

1 85 

65 00 

530 

5 00 

1013 63 

1 14 

50 00 

7 10 
1 13 
1 90 

93 00 

18 06 

3 33 

80 

3 40 

1 OU 

14 88 
11 14 

530 

3 75 

30 00 

33 00 
100 00 

43 20 
30 00 
10 00 

34 50 

50 00 
38 00 

700 

86 

166 15 



Don. 
3 10 



204 12 



31 35 



3 OO 
10 OO 



15 00 



18 



S7 00 



10 00 



Charles Thompson, .... 

New-Haven, Yale College, Pro- 
fessor Denison Ofansted, by Ju- 
nior Chiss, (in full of $31,) . 

Sali4>ury, Mrs. Maria Coffin, (in 
part of $30,) 10 00 

SflJisbury, Elisha Sterling, . . 30 00 

Salisbury, Mrs. Sarah Sterliw, . 30 0^ 

S<mth Canaan, Rev. Churles Pren- 
tice, 1^ his Church and Cong. 

South Corawall, Rev. WiUiam 
Andrews, by his Ch. and Cong. 

South Cornwall, Rev. Timothy 
Stone, by his Ch. and CoDf. , 



30 00 
30 00 



30 00 



120 



RECEIPTS. 



NEW-TORKw^Buffalo, Israel 

Ely, (for China and Spain,) . 20 00 

FUhkill, Rev. George H. Fisher, 
by Female Juvenile Society, . 5iO 00 

MARYLAND.— Baltimore, Danl. 

C W. Hall, Esq. 20 00 

B^timore, Mrs. Sarah Ann Hall, 
^ Daniel W. Hall, Esq. . . 20 00 

FreaericklowD, Mrs. Sally Balt- 
zell, by Mr. George Bamhart, 
Winchester, Va. (in part of 
$20,) 5 00 

VIR. — Lexington, Mrs. Selina 
Nichols, by Daniel Gold, Win- 
chester, (For. Dis.; .... 90 00 

Winchester, Mrs. Elizabeth Lit- 
tle, by James Little, (For. Dis. 
in part of $20.) ..... 5 00 

GEORGIA.— MiUedgeviUe, T. - 
W. Baxter, SO 00 

Hilledgevilte, H. Craft, ... SO 00 

TENNESSEE.-Silv^r Spring, 
P. O. Rev. John Beard, by 
Luggs Greek Congregation of 
Cumberland Presbyterian Ch. 20 00 

OHIO.— Zanesville, Mrs. Elienor 
Culbertson, by Ladies of B-ev. 
Mr. Culbertson's Society, . . 20 00 

Other Donations, 

NEW-HAMP^-Lebanon, Ch. of . 

Rev. P. Cook, 13 00 

MASS.— Enfield, Monthly Con- 
cert, (Foreign Distribution,) . 50 00 

CONN.-^olebrook, Society of 
Rev. E. Clark, 86 78 

Derby, In4ividual8, ..... 41 76 

Lebanon, Solomon L. Williams, 
(Foreign Distribution,) ... 5 00 

New-Haven, Students, Yale Col- 
lege, to aid Monthly Distribu- 
tion in Greenvey, Licking Co. 
Ohio, 7 00 

Norfolk, Rev. Joseph Eldridge, 10 00 
Do. Joseph Battelle, Esq. . 5 00 
Do Oliver B. Butler, ... 5 00 
Do. Individuals, .... 32 00 

Salem, Individuals, .... 5 00 

Salisbury, Dr. Caleb Tickpor, for 
Valley . of Mississippi, ... 3 00 

Salisbury, Individuals, ... . 50 12 

Somers, Individuals, .... 1 25 

South Canaan, Individuals, . . 10 33 
Do. Rev. John G. Lowe, - . . 1 50 

Vernon,. Individuals, .... 6 51 

NEW-YORK— Highlands, Fish- 
kill, Female Praying Society, 
A. Wright, Treasurer, .... 3 00 

New-York City, A Friend, . . 50 
Do. Mrs. Jerret, . .' 2 00 

Schenectady, Faculty and Stu- 
dents of Union College, . . 15 87 

Utica, avails of Jewelry, $4 63; 
cash $2 62 ; fbr Burmah 50 cts. ; 
for HeatheB in India 25 cts. . 8 00 



WMtmorel|ind, Individuals, . . 7 50 

PENN.— Covington, Tioga Co. 
Ephraim B. Gerould, . . . ] 00 

VIRGINIA.— Winchester, Rev. 
D. H. Riddle, for Distribution 
in Siam,. 5 00 

Winchester, John Sherrard, fruit 
of self-denial, for Heathen Chil- 
dren, ....*.... 50 

Winchester, Kent-street Church 
Sabbath School, Maria Brome, 
Treasurer, for Tracts for Chil- 
dren who can rend in Siam, . 5 00 

GEORGIA.- Louisville, Jeffer- 
son county, Mrs. W. S. E. Ber- 
rien, $ 5 ; Mrs. Susan Jenkins 
f 1 ; Rev. H. Safford $1 ; Dr. 
L. W.Robbins fS; Mrs. Sarah 
Robhins$5, ..;... 17 00 

Sunbury, Liberty county, A. May- 
bank, (for Burmah,) .... 5 00 

Waynesboro, Burke county, Mrs. 
Ann Urquiiart $ 5 ; Mrs. Rnth 
Whitehead $5-, Mrs. Sarah 
Green 1 5 ; Mrs. E. M. White- 
head $5 ; Mrs. Waker $1 ; Mrs. 
Sturges $1 ; Mrs. Paythress #5 ; 
Mrs. Barnes 1 ; Mrs.E. Jones $1 ; 
Mrs. J. Badley $1; J. C. Pay- 
thress $5 ; T. H. Capers $1 ; T. 
H. Jones |1 ; C. Smith $1 ) N. 
L. Sturges $1 ; Dr. T. Harlow 
$3 ; Rev. J. H. I. Kilpatrick 
$1; Dr. Edward Hughs $4: 
Col. William E. Walker $1, . 48 00 

OHIO.— Chillicothe, Miss Clari- 
na Backus, (deceased) in part 
of legacy, 301 50 

Coshocton, Margaret Renfi^w, 
(for Burman Mission,) ^ . . 3 00 

Martinsburg, G. Brown and fiimi- 
ly, (Foreign Distribution, . . 1 37 

Prairie, Holmes county; John 
Hamilton, i OO 

Roscoe, Coshocton county, Me- 
thodist Episcopal Church, (Fo- 
reign Distribution, .... 1 87 

Roscoe, Coshocton county, J. R. 
Johnson, (for Burman Miss.) . 1 00 

The above list contains donations— 
For Iltinois $161 37; fpr Clay, 
Ohio, $12 ; for Madison, Ohio, 
$12 ; and for Greenvey, Ohio, 

♦7, . $192 37 

For Foreign Distribntion, (in.** 
eluding $20 for China and 
Spain; $16 25 for Asia; $12 
for Burmah ; $10 for Siam ; 25 
cents for India, $451 04 

IVhole amount of Donations, $1,769 19 
Received for Tracts sold, . 2,495 80 



Total, 



$4,863 39 



THE AMERICAN 

OL. Til. OOTOBBR, IBSa. NO. 



ABIBRICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 

It is hoped the rHenda of Zion will not forget the luo grtal objteli 
before this Society— the one to lupplj our avmcovnlTy mlh Tract) 
and iht labori qf Trael Distrilmten— the other, Id extend the same 
UeMngi in Foreign and Pagan landt. In reipecl to both these ob- 
jecti, the Frovideuce of God ii full of encouragement. We now 
confine outselvei to i lin^e point, the raiting; up of laborertftr our 
Weilem and SovihieeMttm Statu. 

THE KEY. JOEL H, LINSLEY, OF BASTFORD, OOlflr.. 

Hni yielded to the requeil of the Committee ^d iccepled a com- 
miiaioD ■■ Stenlary and Qaurai Agtni fur tht valley of tkt JHtuit- 
gippi; and !i expected without delay to enter on bit labort. Hiiob- 
JMI will be penonally to liiit the piindpit towni ; to countel and 
■04perata with Agenti located ia dUbrent part* of the wide field ; 
to obtain new laboren where none an ^et prorMed ; and gcnerallf 

Vol.. FII. 10 Wboli No.m 



122 BtRMAH. [Oi^t 

to employ his powerg, in every way which Providence may open, to 
rouse Christians to effort, and through their labors, and the Society's 
publications, do what can be done for the spiritual welfare of the en- 
tire population. 

FOtJB ADDITIONAL AGENTS; 

All Western men, have also just been commissioned for Missouri, 
Western Kentucky, and Western and Middle Tennessee, who it is 
hoped will permanently occupy their designated fields ; and the Com- 
mittee are in correspondence with a number of others, in whose 
qualifications they have confidence, some of whom have already con* 
sented to enter into these arduous labors. 

Considering our inhabited territory as 600,000 square miles, and 
deducting 60,000 where the privileges of the Gospel are more richly 
enjoyed, there remain 640,000 square miles, probably containing a 
population of 9,000,000, and embracing thirty Agents' fields. Each 
of these Agents' fields, on an average, is equal to 500 townships of 
six miles square, or 180 miles in length by 100 in breadth ; the popu- 
lation of each township being, on an average, 600, and of each 
Agent's field, 300,000. The Society have now, including those com- 
missioned since September 1, fourteen Agents in the field; and the 
Committee feel bound to persevere in their efibrts, by Divine grace, 
till every vacancy is supplied, and the influence of this Institution is 
felt, in behalf of immortal souls and the interests of Zion, to the re- 
motest extremities of our land. 



BURMAH. 

TRACT DISTRIBUTION TO EVERY FAMILY IN TAVOY. 

Rev. Mr. Mason, Missionary in Burmah, writing under date of 
Tavoy, Sept. 24, 1831, says, I have completed the work in which I 
have been lately employed, of supplying every Burman family qf the 
dty and suburbs with a couple of Tracts, Though intending to visit 
every house in a place like this, which at the present season is literally 
a swamp, and where nearly all the houses are scattered amid trees 
and bushes, that some should be omitted is to be expected. The 
number, however, I am persuaded, is extremely small, as I have re- 
peatedly gone over the same ground to make sure of having done 
my work thoroughly. In this way I have distributed three thousand 
Tracts, comprising more than forty thousand pages. They have oA«i 
been received with interest, often with evident mai'ks of displeasure, 
and as often with indifference. 

In one case, I met a man from the country, who requested Tracts 
with which toi supply his neighbors. 

Tbei« are many schools in town with which we have no eonnee- 
tioB, and in passing, a whole school has repeatedly run out en masss 



1632.] TBACT8 IN INDIA* 123 

and A«9RUed me for Tracts. An ability to read waa all the qualifica- 
tioo X usually required, and every one who could read me a sentence 
obtained a book. In several instances women in the streets have 
asked for books, and when reluctant to supply^ them, knowing their 
usual inability to. read, they have told me their husbands could read. 
One or two women told me, as an inducement for me to give them 
Tracts, that they did not worship. Which I suppose is true of num- 
bers among the lower classes, especially slaves and women. And 
naturally enough may they be indififerent to a religion which is indif- 
ferent to them. For, although heaven is so beautiful that the eye 
cannot be satisfied with gazing — meads adorned with the passion 
flower — waters on which floats every species of thelily-*and groves 
the fragrance of whose trees is wafted by the breeze twelve hun- 
dred miles — though all these are promised those who make numerous 
and costly oflerings ; yet (o the poor, to the slave and broken hearted, 
it has nothing to offer but inevitable punishment. What was true of 
Elysium, is emphatically so of the Boodhist heavens. 

Rev. Mr. Jones, in his journal, makes constant mention of the dis- 
tribution of Tracts, having distributed in the month ending Septem- 
ber 7, 1964 Tracts. 



TESTIMONY TO THE VALUE OP TRACTS IN INDIA. 
From ike Rev. Dr. Marehnuatf of Seranpore. 

Tracts have been, from the beginning of our mission, among the 
choicest of our missionary means; as, of all the seventeen European and 
East Indian missionary brethren in connection with us, and the fifteen 
native brethren who assist them, no one can do any thing to purpose 
among the heathen, without distributing Tracts on the great things 
of salvation. It was through a Tract that our excellent Petumber was 
drawn to us, in 1801, from the solitude into which he had, in despair, 
retired. It was through another that Futika, and Deep-chund, and 
Kanta, were brought to us a year or two after, who so eminently 
adorned the Gospel by their conduct ; and the last of whom, Kanta, 
for many years a preacher of righteousness, died only a few months 
ago. Tracts, holding forth a Savior's grace to a lost world, therefore, 
have been among our readiest instruments of labor for these thirty 
years past. Now, indeed, the field for their dispersion is wider than 
ever, extending, as it does, from Arracan in the Cast, to Delhi and the 
surrounding tribes on the west ; and from Assam in the north, to Orissa 
in the south of India. 

In the department of translation and printing, the sacred Scrip- 
tures hold, of course, the chief place ; yet religious Tracts, and books 
of elementary Christian instruction, are of no small moment; for 
even the brethren of this mission are unprovided for the effective pro- 
secution of their work, unless tjiey have at all times supplies of Tracts 
in Bengalee, Assamese, Burmese, Hindee, Oordoo, Puniabee, Nei>alee, 
Persian, and various other dialects. For the publication of Christian 
Tracts and books we need assistance. We hare always been accus* 
tomed, according to our ability, to supply any missionary, and indeed 
any Christian friend, with Tracts for distribution; but even were we 



124 A WfiBTERN CHRISTIiLN. {Oct» 

to limit our issues to our own missionaries, much less^han 100,000 
copies would not be a sufficient yearly supply for our stations ; the 
cost of such a supply would be about 4,366 rupees, or nearly ^,000. 



A WESTERN CHRISTIAN. 

A gentleman near the banks of the Mississippi, in acknowledging 
a grant from the American Tract Society, says: The Tracts you 
gave me, I have long 'since faithfully distributed, and in addition, 
^17 worth of my own purchase; yOt I am o0en under the painful 
necessity of giving a denial, where I have every reason to. believe 
they would be blested.^ I dare not ask a further donation ; for the 
many claims upon your funds, in our own country, aside from those 
of heatheik lands, I am certain never can be met, till your receipts 
are far greater than they have yet been. ^ I must try to purchase, 
and if prospered in my undertakings during the present and the next 
years, I trust I shall be able ta devote one hundred dollars to that glo« 
rious object. The avails of this Pott-office are sacredly devoted to 
the same cause. Its income is small, but rapidly increasing, and will 
at least furnish 'some destitute families.' Ever since I came to this 
settlement I have had a Sunday School in operation. For a few of 
the first years, it was the only one in this county. As we have almost 
no preaching, it has been my practice to read Tracts and other books 
at the close of the school, and thus many are brought under the 
sound of the Gospel ; for the people very generally attend to hear 
me read. I lend to the scholars and others such books as I have. The 
effects of this course have been truly cheering. You would be aston- 
ished at the intelligence of the children and youth in this secluded 
settlement/and at the insatiable thirst for information, that has been 
excited in the minds of not a few. The Sabbath is now held sacred, 
and the moral character of the people undergone a great and happy 
change. I am firm in the belief that the time is not distant when the 
Spirit of God will be poured out like a flood upon this people. 



AN AGENT'S LABORS. 



Mr. Thompson, the Society's late Agent in Michigan, thus writes: 
I have been travelling for a few days past through Jackson, Calhoun, 
and Kalamazas counties. This has been a very laborious task, on 
account of the large quantity, of rain fallen since I started. The 
streams of water are extremely high, and the marshes, which are 
frequent, are filled with water. After miring my horse two or 
three times, I found that I must leave him or tarry until the waters 
fell, for I could not return. I left him in Jacksonburgh and, pursued 
my way on foot I have waded the streams, two of which are four 
feet deep— a cold bath indeed-<-^but as 1 found families far separated 
from religious privileges, eager to read religious Tracts, I have felt 
amply compensated. This seems to be the only way of getting the 
subject of religion before the minds of so scattered a population. 



1832.] USEFULNESS OF TRACTS. 125 

CHILDREN^ TRACTS AT THE WEST. 

A derg^yman on the Mississippi says, I am especially pleased with 
the children's Tracts of the American Tract Society. I can say of 
them, in the language of a sweet little girl : " They are beautiful;'' 
and as she did, when I replied, yes, they have many pretty pictures ; 
" The beauty of them is, th^ are so good" They are a great benefit 
in all our feebly Sabbath Schdob, and serve to gain me friends among 
all the infant minds throughout the country. They are so attractive, 
that, if they had the arrogance of Hume, they might say as he did, 
** I must be read, whether lam believed or not." 



TRACTS INSTEAD OF WWE. 

Rev.' Mr. Kent, of Galena, Illinois, says. General S , a member 

of the Grand Jury of M , Michigan Territory, has paid me $2 25 

for Tracts, being the amount of fines imposed on themselves, and 
w^ich they voted to appropriate for Tracts instead of Wine. 



TRACT, " CHILDREN OF THE FOREST," BLESSED TO A CHILD. 

Mrs. L., of Stratford, Conn., informs, that a pious mother, in the 
western district of New-York, gave this Tract to her son about twelve 
years of age, which he took into the housekeeper's room and began 
to read. He read at first with much indifference ; but his countenance 
soon began to change; he burst into tears, and continued weeping 
till it was finished. The housekeeper inquired the cause, and learned 
that he was deeply convinced of his lost condition as a sinner, which 
this Tract seemed in a wonderful manner to bring before his eyes. 
He continued In this state (often asking hig two brothers, who bad 
recently experienced, religion, to pray with him,) until he found joy 
and peace in believing. Soon after, bis father, aged sixty, his three 
brothers, and htn^self, constituting the whole family^ except the pious 
mother, made a public profession qf religion. 



TRACTS AT A CAMP BIEETING IN OHIO. 

Soon after my arrival on the ground, says an agent of the Ameri- 
can Tract Society, I put itoo Tracts into each tent, (viz.) in one, 
Quench not the Spirit,,and Hope of Future Repentance ; in the next. 
Do you want a Friend ? and A Voice from Heaven, and so on, alter- 
nately ; after which I distributed among persons who appeared to be 
only lookers on, such Tracts as A Strange Thing, Warning Voice, 
Progress of Sin, Parley the Porter, Word in Season, Worth of the 
Soul, and those of kindred character, which were calculated to make 
all feel the importance of the subject. This distribution very much 
interested Christians. One was heard to say, ** Go on, ur, you are 
doing a good work, and may the Lord bless your labors.'' It also ex 
cited great alarm and surprise among the careless. It was new, and 
the curiosity of hundreds was excited by its novelty. Very soon the 
inquiry for Tracts was heard all over the gnmnd. Three persons 
together gave me 86 cents, and said, « Go on, and distribute many 

10* 



1596 GSEFuxinEss of tracts. fO^ 

more of those predous little tlings.'' The effects i&f this effort, no 
doubt, will be seen at the judgment ; and I do confidently believe 
that it^waa the means of causing some, if not many, to decide for 
Christ. During the intermission I could look over the ground^and 
see many employed in reading them. . 



A SABBATH SCHOOL FORMED, AND SUPERINTENDENT CONVERTED 

BY MEANS OF A TRACT. 

Mr. E., in Schoharie Co., N. T., says, A young gentleman at 
M. informed me that his first religious impressions were produced.by 
the reading of a Tract. He is now an active leader in prayer meet- 
ings, and a superintendent of the Sabbath school in his village, which 
was established through his exertions. I addressed that school, and 
though I have seen many Sabbath schools, I nefer saW one more 
orderly and attentive. 

A clergyman in R., Montgomery county, also informed me, that a 
number of persons in his congregation had lately become hopefully 
pious through the blessing of God on the systematic Tract distri- 
bution. 



INFLUENCE OF TRACTS ON THREE CLERGYMEN. 

After the communion service in the grove at a four days' meeting 
in Indiana, says' Mr. M. H. Wilder, I presented the solemn claims of 
the Tract cause. " When I had closed, Rev. B. R. H. arose, and 
gave his testimony in. favor of the object; ** My first religious im- 
pressions," said he, " were received from the reading of Tracts." 

The Revl Mr. E , of Illinois, then rose and said, I too have 

reason to bless God for Tracts. I owe my first serious impressions 
to a sentence in a Tract — *^ He teas looked upon as tin ornament to 
his family." This sentence is engraven indelibly on my memory. 
It was said of Sir Francis Newport in youth, and closes the first 
paragraph of the Tract which relates the circumstances of his 
awful death. What, thought I, will prevent my dying such a death? 
What though I be esteemed a blessmg to my family — so was New- 
port. What though I have had a' religious education — so had he. I 
too nlay die an enemy of God, and in all the horrors of despair. This 
reflection arrested my attention, hastened conviction, and never left 
I me till, as I trust, my feet were taken from the horrible pit. 

I Rev. L. M^— , a Baptist minister, then arose and said, V I too am 

\ a living witness to the usefulness of Tracts. Till last year I was en- 

gaged in retailing ardent sptrils. I read the Tract, Ditiillert and their 
AUies, it convinced me of the folly and madness of my practice, and 
1 gave it up." 



TRACT CAUSE PLEAD BY A JUDGE IN CONNECTICUT. 

After presenting the Tract cause in , says Rev. Mr. Coch- 

ran, Agent of the American Tract Society, I was much pleased to see 
a gentleman of respectability, and a judge of the court, get up in the 
church and plead the cause of Tracts. With tearful eye and feeling 



1833.] 178tFULNE09 OF TSACTS. Uff 

heart he iaid that he hoped he gboidd have reason to blest God to 
eternity for the circulation of Tracts. For, said he, not long since 
I looked upon all these things as priestcraft and imposture, was a 
sceptic and despiser ; but God in his mercy threw a little Tract into 
my hands which drove me from my delasions and led me to the Savior. 
The Tract was Common Errors, 



Suftarer't Prayer seiU through the Post- Office to a profane Clerk 

in New- York. 

On Friday evening, Feb. 10, 1831, three devoted Christians being 
together, and anzions for the welfare of a proAme clerk in a store, 
determined to send him the Swearer^s Prayer, through the Post-office. 
On opening the communication the next morning, he poured forth 
the most blasphemous oaths and imprecations on the man who sent 
it — but read it, put it into his pocket, and in the course of the day 
I'ead it again. Conscience now began to tell him he was wrong, and 
God was right.' On the day following he heard a solemn discourse 
from the Rev. Mr. N. and went again in the evening, though with 
great reluctance. Here he was cut to the heart under a sense of his 
sins, and after great struggles, rose up among those who thus ex- 
pressed their desire for the prayers of God's people. He found no 
hiding place for his guilty soul that night, nor on the two following 
daysy when he was almost unable to attend to business. On Tuesday 
night, as he retired to rest, he tried to read the Bible, but could jnot*- 
tried to pray, but could not — and sank almost into despair. At 
length, he says, I heard the whispers of the Savior's mercy, " Give 
up — throw yourself into my arms — lay down the weapons of your re- 
bellion — ^make a full surrender." I resolved to do it ; and such a 
flood of joy and light burst upon my view as to overwhelm me with 
a sense of the love of Jesus. He arose, the next morning, rejoicing 
in the hope of pardon^ and with tears and penitence testifying of the 
love of Christ. He has been very faithful to many of his impenitent 
friends, and still adorns the Gospel of Christ." 



PREMIUM OF S290. 

The time of presentation for the premium of two hundred and fifty 
dollars for the best Tract " on the manner in irAtcA Christians should 
shoio the spirit of their Master, in labors and sacrifices for the conver- 
sion of the world,** is extended to December 1, 1832. Examming 
Committee: Rev. C. P. M'Hvaine, D. D.; Rev. Thomas H. Skinner, 
D. D. ; Rev. A. Peters, and Mr. Arthur Tappan. The manuscripts 
to be sent to Rev. Dr. Skinner, Philadelphia ; or to WiHiam A. Hal- 
lock, 160 Nassau-street, New-York. 

The donor of the premium expresses an earnest desire that a Tract 
may be prepared which shall duly impress this important subject on 
the minds of Christians in this age of the church. 



128 EDWARDS ON 'THE AFF£OTION0. [Oet 

CHRISTIAN ALMANAC FOR 1833. 

This little work is fall of instructive Rnd entertaining monl and 
religious matter, which cannot fail of exerting a salutary influence 
on all, especially the young ; tend well merits the efforts of parents, 
and others friendly to religion, to give it an extensive circulation. It 
is published in 16 different editions. iSee notice on cover. 



EDWAEDS ON THE AFFECTIONS. 

The Publishing Committee of the American Tract Society have 
unanimously adopted thi^ great standard discriminating work on 
the evidences ef a vital union wUh Christ, The edition is that of 
W. Ellbrbt, who transcribed the entire original work ; attempting, 
with the most scrupulous fidelity, to present the precise thoughts of 
Edwards in a more modem style, with no addition, and the omission 
only of his tautologies and redundancies. ' ' 

It is designed to print it in a neat 18mo. corresponding with the 
Society's edition of the Pilgrim's Progress. Its size will be about 
275 pages ; price probably 37} cents. 

It will be stereotyped and pipnted as soon as the requisiU funds are 
contributed for perpetutding it: viz. $2, per page, or $560; $60 
of which are already subscribed. Donations will be gratefully re- 
ceived from Societies, or individuals, who desire to see this invalua- 
ble treatise^ in a cheap and attractive form, in general circulation. 



NEW PREMIUM TRACT ON SABBATH SCHOOLS. 

No. 272. The Advantaoss of Sabbath Schools. A prkhiuu 
Tract, pp. 12. An able and persuasive appeal in behalf of the Sab- 
bath School system, both in respect to the benefits imparted, and the 
manner in which they are conferred. It provides for the intellectual 
improvement of its pupils and their moral and religious education, 
both by its Schools and by furnishing them suitable reading. Its 
blessings are bestowed in youth — ^affectionately — freely— universally— 
and on the Sabbfith, which is thus redeemed from profanation, and 
improved in the service of Jehovah. The Tract, We believe, will ex- 
ert a decided influence wherever it shall be read, and is well adapted 
for (he systematic and general distribution throughout our country. 



INTERESTING DONATIONS. 

Tke fmi^ MisHoiuay fVcnd. 

A Clergyman of the Protestant Episcopal Church thus writes t '' I 

enclose $ 20, for Tract operations in Greece, to constitute Rev. Richard 

Channing Moore, of the Protestant Episcopal Church, Philadelphia, a 

life member of the American Tract Society. The above is from a 



1832.] iNTERBfinmm i^oXATiON. ISO 

fund which has risen from the continued savings of an humble mi«- 
sionarjr, by his laying aside portions of fees and presents at the time 
they were receiTed ; the entire amount of feet received on Sunday and 
Thursday in every week ; also free-will offerings under peculiar pro- 
vidences ; one tenth of his regular salary ; and one tenth of the balance 
which has remained of his receipts during the year, over his family 
expenses, &lc. 

"You will please forward to Brother Moore a certificate of his life 
membership; also beg him to lay aside portions of his regular salary, 
of his fees, presents; of the balance in favor of a kind Providence at 
the end of the year, he, &c.— thus will he ever have a fund for the 
Lord. Urge him, in like manner, to constitute at least one of his 
friends a life member of your important Society ; and in so dbing, 1 
would beg him to request that friend, thus constituted, to constitute 
some other individual a life member. In this way, passing the ex- 
citement around from friend to friend, an amount of good will ac- 
cumulate which the full glories of the Eternal World alone can 
unfold." 



DONATIONS OF $12, FOR DESTITUTE TOWNSHIPS. 

The Ladies of Norfolk, Conn., have contributed $60, for supply- 
ing five destitute townships in Ohio, with Tracts monthly fora year-— 
$12 for each township. A friend, on learning this, says : 

" What an age is this in which we live ! One dollar now will dis- 
tribute more than a thousand pages of sacred truth to the destitute; 
and what a harvest will this seed bring in ! Every soul now con- 
verted, may in his day be the means of the conversion of many 
around him, and each of them, of the conversion of otbers, and they 
of others, and so on until time shall be no longer ! What a fbarful 
responsibility rests upon those, then, who withhold even their miie, 
from the treasury of the Ijord ! and on the other hand, how unspeaka- 
bly happy will those be in eternity, who will constantly meet those 
that will say to them, * Through the instrumentality of your chari- 
ties, I was brought to embrace the Savior !' It gives me pleasure to 
enclose $12, that one township more may be monthly supplied. 
Please appropriate it to some township where you know it to be 
needed." — [Appropriated to Elizabeth, Miami county, Ohio.] 

The following townships have been reported to the Society as spe- 
cially in need of similar donations of $12 each : vis. In Ohio, 
Adams, and Harrison, Champaign Co. ; Washington, Clinton, and 
Turtle Creek, Shelby Co, ; Sugar Creek, Greene Co. ; McArthur, 
Logan Co. In Jnitorui, Riker*s Ridge, Lancaster^ and Saluda, Jef- 
ferson Co.; Geneva, Vernon, and Paris, Jennings Co.; Dartmouth, 
Ripley Co, ; Lexington, Scott County, 



lao 



RBCEIPT9. 



[Oct. 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETT, 



During the nuntth ending SepUmJber 15, 1832. 

PROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 

B.HODE ISLAND—'Bristol, Female, Mn. Susan Chickerinf , Frea, 

Providence, Isaac Wilcox, depositary, • 

CONNECTICUT.— Brooklyn, (Windham County Auxiliary,) Ed- 
win Newbury, Treasurer, 

.Darien, Charles Whitney, Treasurer, 

Durham, Female, Mrs. Udosia Booth, Treasurer, 

Hartford, Connecticut Branch, Charles Hosmer, Secretary, . 

Kent, Female, Miss Jane Miller, Treasurer, 

Norfolk, (Ladies Aux.) to supply with Monthly Distribution, the 
following towns in Ohio, yiz: Jackson, JelSerson, German, Mont 
gomery Co. Franklin, Warren Co. and Bath Greene County, 

Sharon, l)aTid Gould, Treasurer, 

Stratfqrd, Asa Curtis, Treasurer, . , 

West Greenwich, Solomon M6ad, Treasurer, 

Westminster, (For. Distribution,) ...... 

Winchetser, James Beebee, Treasurer, . . .' . 

NEW-YORK.— Bedford, Fern. Mrs. Susan N. Nichols, Treasurer, 

Bullhack, Joseph Little, Secretary, 

Dashville Falls, Female, Mrs. Jane Ann Butler, Treasurer, 

Fallsburgh, Charles VaU, Treasurer, 

Florida, Dr. H. R. Chapman, Secretary, .... 

Forestburgh, Jeremiah Terbell, Treasurer, .... 

blip and Huntington, South L. I., Henry Brewster, Secretary, 

Liberty, . . ^ 

Newburgh, T. D. Lander, Secretary, 

New Rochelle, Miss S<n»hia Brewster^ Secretary, . 

NeW'York City Tract Society, Alfred Edwards, Treasurer, 

Plattsburgh, Rev. Moses Chase, Agent, 

Rockland, 

Do. (Union Auxiliarir,) 

Rye, Female, Ann H. Buckley, Secretary, ; . . . 

Seienceville, in Windham, Greene Co. Julia A. Ives, Secretary, 

Sottthold, L. 1., J. McNeal, Secretary, 

Tompkuisville, Stat. Isl. Female, Mrs. Miller, Treasurer, . 

Troy, Charles Ljrman, Treasurer, . . . ... 

Walton, Delaware Co. Bliss Hannah N. Seymour, Treasorur, 

Westfield, Erastus Dean, Treasurer, 

West-Hampton, L. I., Steohen F. Griffing, Secretary, 

Williamsburg, L. I., John Morrel, Treasurer, 

Wurtsborough, Sullivan Co., Rev. Thomas Edwards, Secretary, 

NEW-JERSEY.— Baskingridge, Horace Sheldoli, Secretary, 

BoontoD, Mr. Woodhull, Agent, . . . , 

Elizabethtown, in 3d Preabyterian Church, 

Morristown, Female, C. C. Allen, Treasurerr 

Newark, Jesse Baldwin, jun. Treasurer, .... 
Do. Female, Mrs. Sarah M. Graham, Treasurer, 

Princeton, Nassau-Hall, D. S. Kaufman, Treasurer, (For. Dis.) 
DoJ in Theoloffical Seminary, Richard Webster, Sec. 
Do. Female, Miss F. W. Morford, Treasurer, ' 

Somerville, Female, Ann M. Griffith, Treasurer, 

Washington, Female, Mrs. Phebe S. Miller, Treasurer, . 

PENNSYLVANIA.^Mereer, (Meroer Co. Aux.) Wm. Stewart, Se. 

Philadelphia Branch,. Rey. Joel T. Benedict, (Seneral Agent, 

Pittsburgh, Rev. Robert Patterson, Agent, .... 

PIST. COLUMBIA<-TWa8hin|ton City, John Kennedy, Trees 

BIARYL AND.^Hagerstown, Female, Rebecca U Martin, Sec. 

VIRGINU.-'Rickmoad, N. TaUey, Treasurer, 



ForTr. 

3 20 

36 96 

22 00 

1 97 

1 92 

125 00 

3 50 



333 
1 60 
90 



10 00 
8 00 



66 
00 



2 41 



00 
04 
25 
00 
80 
50 



4 
4 
3 
5 

7 
10 05 

4 00 
6 00 
2 67 

5 00 
8 60 
06 

150 00 

70 
17 62 

6 81 
427 
2 13 
390 

2 34 

1 40 

5 60 
10 51 

6 75 

500 

3 68 
3 67 
420 

42 50 

381 OQ 

157 07 

40 50 

13 00 

mo7 



Don, 
11 5» 



60 00 



10 00 
35 50 

4 25 



258 

10 00 

025 



33 00 



1882.1 



Ancfixpra. 



m 



TENNESSEE.— EHsalMthtowii^Carter Co. A. Ciirterigeiit, 

Oreenville, . 

Marjrrille, (Blount Co. Auz.) Jamea Betty, Secretaryt 
NaahviUe, Samuel B. Snowden, Treasurer, .... 
Winchester, Hon. Nathan Green, Secretary, 
KENTUCKY^— Danville, M. G. Youce, Treasurer, 
Louisville, Wm. S. Vernon, Treasurer, .... 
OHIO.— Cincinnati, Silas Woodbury, Agent, .... 
Cleveland, Female, Mrs. Mary A. Hoadly, Secretary, 

Dayton, Dr. Job Haines, Secretary, 

Deerfield, Morgan County, 

INDIANA.— Madison, Ind. Branch, Uev. Moses H. Wilder, Cor. Se. 
Vincennes, (Knox Co. Aux.) Dr. Kuykendall, President, . 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXILURY- 
MASSACHUSETTS.— Goshen, Mrs. H. B. Holmes, Treasurer, 
PENNSYLVANIA^Zebianople, . . . . 

VIRGINIA.— Morgantown, 

Rehoboth, 

Tracts sold at the Depository to individuals, (inchiding $47 97 
from Travelling Agents,) '. 



13 00 

700 

20 00 

69 50 


42 39 

500 
10 00 
13 00 
74 49 


13 44 
22 12 


284 75 



10 50 

800 
1 00 



3 37 

4 5D 
4 00 
4 10 



Directors for Lijk, 

MASS^— Beverly, Rev. Jonathan 
Aldrich, by Ist Bap. Ch. (|30, for 
Burmab, and $20, for Val. Miss. 50 00 

Salem, Rev. Rufus Babcock, by 
bt Baptist Church and Cong. . 50 00 

R. ISL.^ — ^Providence, Naxhaniei 
T. Eldridge, Esq. (in part 
of $50,) 25.00 

CONN.— Hartford, Rev. Horatio 
N. Brinsmade, by free Church, 50 00 

N. YORK.— Geneva, Rev. Henry 
Dwight, 125 00 

New-York City, Arthur Tappan, 
inAillof$l,000,($190For.Dis.)690 00 

Rome, Rev.. Jacob Helffenstein, 
by Benevolent Association, (in 
AiUof$50,) 30 00 

Sjrracuse, Rev. J. W. Adams, by 
his Church and Congregation, 63 25 

N. JER.— Lebanon, Rev. Jacob ' 
Schultz, by Congregations of 
Lebanon and White House, (an 
ftaiof$50 62,) 18 00 

Members fir L\fe, 

MASS.— Windsor, Stepb. Dawes, 
by Miss Mary Walker Plain- 
field, (in part of $20,) ... 200 

CONN.^Hartford, Thomas Spen- 
cer HuntiDgton, by Eleazer 
Huntington, 20 00 

New-Britain, Rev. Jonathan Cogs- 
weU, by Ladies,. 20 00 

North Canaan, Rev. Pitkin 
Cowle8,byhisCh.andCong. . 20 00 

Torrittgford. Uri Curtis, ... 20 00 

Windham, WUliam R. Spragne, 
Cupartof $20,) 5 00 

Winsted, Litchfield Co., Mrs; 

Elisabeth Miller, 20 00 

Do. Miss Rboda Skinner, Qn 
partor$20,) 10 00 



N.YORK.— Auburn, Abij. Fitch, 20 00 
Do. Horace Hills, . 20 00 
Do. C. B.Hotchkis8, 20 OD 

^Bloomingburgb, Rev. Samuel Van 
Vechten, by Ladies, .... 20 00 

Canandaigua, Rev. Evan Johns, 20 00 

Clarkson, Rev. Charles* Fnrman, 
by Ladies, (in part of $20,) . 15 00 

Crawford, Orange Co., Washing- 
ton F.Kennedy, (in part of $20,) 5 00 

Forestburgh, Jubal Terbell, . . 20 OD 

Rome, Jane £. Hooker, by J. W. 
Bloomfield, 20 00 

Trumansbun[h, Rev. John H. 
Carle, by Herman Camp, Esq. 20 00 
Do. Mrs. Mary C. Camp, by do. 20 00 

Wallkill, Orange Co., S. Bull, . 20 00 

N. JER.— Kingston, Rev. David 
Comfort, by hisCh. and Cong. 20 00 

Princeton', Prof. Charles Hodge, 
by A. T. S. Theol. Sem. (in part 
of$20,;For. Dis 10 00 

Shrewsbury, Rev. J. W. Wood- 
ward, by his Ch. and Cong. . 21 60 

PENN.-Philadelphia, Rev. R. 
Channing Moore, by a cler- 
gyman of Prot. Epis. Church 
for Greece, 20 00 

Shippensborg, Rev. Henry R. 

■ Wilson, by a Lady, .... 20 00 

TENN.— Farmington, Mrs. Polly 
Massey, (inAiUof $20,) . . 15 00 

Na8hvUle,Mrs.PheddyS.Whyte, 20 00 

Annual Dvrtctor, 

N. JER.— Newark, Hon. Theo- 
dore Frelinghuyien, for 1631 
and 1838, . 10 00 

AnnmL Members. 

N. YORK.— New-York City, B. 
U Kip, $2 } Leander Mead, $2, 4 00 



132 



RECEtPtdk 



LOet 



so 00 

50 00 

51 50 



Other Donatiotu* 

|fASS.«-New-MaIboroiigh, (ITth. 

Society,) 40 00 

Do. (South Society, 13 77 

Plainfield, Abraham Clark, for 
Burmah $3} Miss Irene Stod- 
dard, for do. $2; Mrs. Rachel 
Whiton, for do. 50 cents, . . 5 50 

West-Hampton, Female Friend, 
$2; Mrs. Esther Parsoiu, a be- < 
quest, $ 2, 4 00 

R. ISL.~Bri8tol, Miss C. DeWoIf, 
$ 9 ; Mrs. Maria Rogers, $3, . 12 00 

Centreville, J. Aliens .... 2 00 

Pawtucket, Bosworth Walker, . 1 00 

CONN.— Canterbury, Rev. Mr. 
Piatt's Society, ..... 3 25 

Colebrook, Baptist Society, . . . 12 71 

Fisherrille in Thompson, sundry 
individuals for (For. Dis.)- by 
Edwin Newbury, Esq. . . . 

Hartford, Free Church, ... 

Killingly, sundry individuals, . 

Norfolk, Baptist Society, . i . 

North- Canaan, Civ and Cong. • 

Salisbury, iudiv^iduals, .... 

Saybrook, (Pettipaug So.) sev. fr. 

South-Canaan, sundry Individ. . 

South-Killiogly, individuals, . . 

Sterling, Rev. Otis Lane, . . . 

Torringford, Ch. and Cong. . . 

Windham, (Scotland Soc.) . . 

Winsted, Litchfield Co., Church 
and Congregation, . ... . 

N. YORK.— Auburn, First Presb. 
Ch. $ 78 10 ; 2d Presb. Ch. $ 40 ; 
Students of Tiieol. Seminary, 
$40 07; individuals, $5 87, . 164 04 

Cambridge, a Friend, for Mo. Dis. 
Elizabeth, Miami Co. Ohio, . 12 00 

Camden, Oneida, Co., Presb. Ch. 42 04 

Canandaiffua, Mrs. Frances Shep- 
ard, a Legacy, 10 00 

Geneva, E. Hastings, Esq. $2; 
Mrs. Hastings, 50 cts. Miss Has- 
tings, 25 cts. Mrs. Bogert $ 2, . 
Do. Two Children, .... 

Greenville, Cash $ 15 47 ; do. 31 
cts .David Morse, 50 cts. a friend 
fl; Mrs.' L. Suffield, 25 cts. 
Miss B. Ai Bishop, $1, . . . 

Monticello, Sullivan Co., Stephen 
Pierson, (For. Dis.) .... 

Hoscai, Tioga Co., Children of 
Miss Lyman's School, ... 51 

New-York City, J. Monroe, # 1 ; 
Sunday Schoola of Ist and 2d 



4 
2 
4 
2 
3 
1 
1 



12 
35 
00 
50 
75 
00 
00 



88 25 
4 37 

20 14 



75 
12 



18 53 
1 00 



Ftree Presb. Churches, by John 
Dillingham, Treasurer, 1 4 88, 5 86 
Rome, 1st Presb. Ch. C. Bowman, 
$1{ T.Jarvis, |3; N.M.Ley- 
bert, $1; Cash fl; A. Field, 
$1 i Cash |7 16) W. Wrigh^ 
$2; avails of ornaments by 
several Ladies, $4 25, . . . 90 41 
Do. 2d Presb. Ch. IndividnaVi 
$1 75; G. Stedman, f2i P. 
Darrow, $ 1 -, Dr. Blair, $ 3 ; SL 
B. Roberts, |3; Miss E. 
Vaughan,, 1 1 ; Mrs. Ann Helf' 

fenstein,$l, IS 75 

Sag Harbor, Mrs. ClarissaSleight, 5 00 
Seneca Falls, S.Wakeley, . . 100 
Syracuse, Mr. Dana, .... 5 00 
Utica, Dutch Reformed and Pros* 

by terian Societies, .... 53 00 
Western Distr. avails of jewelry, 6 80 
Windham, Charles Morse,- . . 50 
N. JER.— Collected by J. W. 

Barr, for (For. Dis.) ^ . . . 04 
AUentown, Individuals, ... 8 50 
Chatham Village, a friend, . . 1 00 
Goshen, George Down, ... 1 00 
Kingston, sundry Individuals, . 10 00 
Middletown, Individuals, ... 36 
Middletown Point, Individuals, . 1 50 
Millstone, Church and Cong. . 5 00 
Shrewsbury, Rev. James W. 

Woodward, 5 00 

PENN.— Rev. TJiomas Hunt, . 2 50 
Hopewell Cotton works. Rev. Jno. 

Dickey, ^ • . 2 00 

KEN.— Danville, Centre College, 
Rev. Wm. R. Breckenridge, 

forChina, 5 00 

OHIO.— Deerfield, Andrew Byer, 

forChina, 1 06 

Olive, Dennis Gibbs, 25 cts. Robert 
McKee, 25 cts. ..... . SO 

Salem, Rev. Luke Dewitt, (For. 
Dis.) $ 1 ; Daniel G. Stanley, for . 
do. 25 cts. 1 25 

The above list contains donation*— 
For Valley of the Mississippi, . $92 00 
For Foreign Distribution, (in- 
cluding $35 50 for Burmah, 
$20 for Greece, and $6 for 
China,) $337 30 

Whole amount of Donations, $2,537 39 
Received for Tracts sold, . 1,853 59 



Total, 



$4,390 88 



Note.— The $80, appropriated tp constitute Allen Leeper, Esq. Francie H. 
Woods, Esq. Mrs. Elisabeth E. Smith, and Mrs. Polly Massey, Life Members of the 
Society, was -collected as follows: viz. by Mrs. EinmaW. Hall, in Bedford Co. 
Tennnessee, $64 87; in the neighborhood of ComersviUe, Gik» Co. do. $8 13; in 
Lincoln Co. do. $2 ; by Mrs. Smith, in Maury Co. do. $5. 



THE AMERICAN 



vovBKBBK, leaa. 



CIRCi;X.AR.-NEW TRACTS. 

Tbe operations of the Anemcah Tkact Society are notv 
so estenaive aa justly to put in requisilioD the best iHlents in 
our coantry for the prepaiation of its publications. Of a 
ungle Tract, " Quench not the Spjrit," It ha« printed up- 
wards of 400,000 eapiea; of the " Swearer's Praver," and 
the " Importhnce of ConEideration," not far from 3D0,(H)0 
each ; and of others nearly hd equal number. Of the narra- 
tive of the " Mountain Miller," 140,000 were printed during 
the last year; and of the " Appeal on Cholera," at Ihe time 
of the appearance of that sconrgn in this country, 166,000 in 
four weeks. The' Society are now making vigornua and 
aysteroatic effbris, by planting AKent« in appropriate Aelda 
(hroughoul all our iohabited (e>rit6ry, to reach the entire 

Vol. VII. II WiiotiNo.eo. 



134 - CIRCULAR. [Nov^ 

population. Should this be done, copies of the same Tract 
might visit from orte to two mtUions of families. Who does 
not see the importance that such a Tract be fitted in the 
highest possible degree to meet the moral wants of this great 
community ? And who can estimate the responsibility or 
usefulness of the man who, in the. language of one that has 
reflected much on. the subject, ** should prepare a Tract for 
monthly circulation, new, timBly, interesting, and adapted to 
the millions to whom it might, in a short time, by the Society's 
Agents and Distributers, be sent ? Such a man should be a 
giant in intellectual and tnoral strength ; for he wotdd preach 
to the largest congregation this side of the other world,''^ It is 
not improbable that one Tract, thus prepared and circulated* 
exhibiting the naked " sword of the Spirit," and accompa- 
nied by the personal, christian endeavors of praying, faithful 
Distributers, may be blessed in bringing more souls to Christ 
than all, won directly by the author's preaching, or other 
labors, through a long life. 

Many Tracts already in the series, present Divine truth with a 
clearness and moral power scarcely paralleled in our language ; 
yet there is a call for new Ih-acts which should not be disre- 
garded ; and the Committee feel assured that there are indi- 
viduals in our country, especially those who have been called 
to deal with souls under the awakening and sanctifying influ- 
ences of the Holy Spirit, who are eminently qualified to pre- 
pare such Tracts, and whose attention and efibrts, though 
many of them are severely pressed with other labors, can be 
secured for this important object. 

As an encouragement to some who may feel that they need 
the pecuniary avails of their labors, the Committee are ena- 
bled, through the appropriations of benevolent individuals for 
this specific object, hereby to*announce, that the sum o( Jive 
hundred dollars will be paid to the authors of the best ten ap* 
proved Tracts that shall be received on or before the first day 
of March next, in. the proportion of $50 for each Tract ; the 
mamiscripts to be submitted to the following gentlemen as 
the Committee of award : viz. Rev. Thomas Dc Witt, D. D. 
of New-Tork; Rev. Charles P. Mcllvainc, D.D., of Brook* 
Jjrn, and Rev. Thomas H. Skinner, D. D., of Philadelphia ; 



1832.] CIRCULAR. 135 

or in the failure 6f either of them, a person to be designated 
by the Society's Publishing Committee to fill the vacancy ; 
and all the manuscripts submitted^ to be, after the award, at 
the disposal of the Society, so far as desired for publication. 
Each manuscript should be accompanied by a sealed envelope 
containing the name of the writer, which will, not be opened 
unless the Tract is adopted, or communicatioli with the author 
relative thereto is desired ; and the requests of writers as to 
withholding their name^ from the public will be strictly com- 
plied with. iThe manuscripts should be addressed to Mr, 
William, A. Halldck, Cor, Sec, American Tract Society, No. 
150 Nassau-street, New- York, 

The SUBJECTS oh which Tracts may be usefully prepared 
are as various as the moral wants of men. In general, the 
Committee believe writers will be most successful in select- 
ing the subjects that press on their own minds and hearts with' 
peculiar force ; and they have great pleasure in stating, that 
though it is the object of the Society to inculcate only those 
great truths in which evangelical Christians harmonize, the 
instance they believe has not yet occurred in their experience of 
seven years, in which a Tract, ably and powerfully written, while 
the heart was warm, and with the single aim of honoring Christ 
in the sdlvation of perishing men, has been found objectionable 
inpowt of doctrine; while hundreds, in the mean time, thej 
have felt constrained to lay aside for the want of directness, 
discrimination, and moral power. 

The Committee desire Tracts clearly enforcing all those 
great doctrines of the Gospel announced at the time of the 
Society's formation as '* the basis of their union — roaq*s na- 
tive sinfulness— the purity and obligation of the law of God — 
the true and proper Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ — the 
necessity and reality of his atonement and sacrifice— the effi- 
ciency of the Holy Spirit in the work of renovation-— the free 
and full offers of the Gospel, and the duty of men to accept 
it — the necessity of personal holiness — and an everlasting 
state of rewards and punishments beyond the grave." They 
desire Tracts adapted to the various states of men's minds, 
from the careless impenitent sinner, urging his way nncon- 
i:«rned down to death, to him trho has made most progress k 



136 CHINA. [Nov. 

the Divia« life— Tracts adapted; by the blessing of the HoJy 
Spirit, to promote revivalt of religionr^to awaken the secure 
in sin — ^guide the inquiring to Christ — ^point out the discrimi- 
nating evidences of saving conversion— promote t)ie sanctlfi- 
cation of Christians, and portray the duties they owe to God, 
to the church, and a world lying in wickedness. Authentic 
narrative9i clearlfr ii|,usti:ating tli«se, or other important truths, 
and embodying facts, which, In the Providence of God, have 
come to the knowledge of writers, the Committee consider 
admirably adapted to arrest the attention and affect the heart 

It is particularly requested, that those who thus consecrate 
a portion of the ability which God has given them, to the 
promotion of the Redeemer's cause, will perfect their manu" 
scripts before transmitting them ; fitting them for the press, 
and giving them precisely the form in which they would wish 
them to appear before the pubKc. 

By order of the Executive Committee of the American 
Tract Society. 

Jaiaes MiLiroR, Ch^rman, 
WiLLiAU A. Hallock, Corresponding Secretary, 

New-Yorky October 15, 1832. 



CHINA. 

From Rev, Elijah C. Bridgmanf American Miuionary in CAitio, dated 

AprU 20, 1632. 

The resolution of your Society to embrace m their operations dis- 
tant lands, and to supply their fellow laborers in foreign fields with 
the g^ood seed of the wor^, puts joy and gladness in our hearts. It is 
the Lord's doing, and we will bless his holy name. This field is very 
large in extent, and truly of *' untold " numbers— requiring many 
laborers, and no small amount of means. The field must be surveyed 
by actWe Agents, who shall travel through all the length and breadth 
of th« land, leaving, wherever they go, Uie' pFedous seed. ' 

There is an urgent demand for the aid of your Society ; and the 
extent of thig demand will doubtless constantly and rapidly increase 
«ntil the whole lump is leavened, and all the millions of China are 
made heirs of the grace of God. 

Rev. Dr. Morrison has received from European societies several 
small sums to aid in publishing Tracts ; several have been printed 
and widely circulated by himself and Leang Afa, jointly i and they 
have several aew eaes, eight or ten at least, now in hand, which will 



llBi3.] 



FRANCS. 137 



be published during the summer. The " Christian Union in China/' 
has also, and recently, published two small editions of the Scripture 
Lessons ; about 100 copies of which have been distributed in and 
about Canton { 100 copies have gone in care of Br. Gutzlaff to Japan 
and Cora, and regions north east of this ; Dr. Morrison has for- 
warded a few copies in Junks to the north of China ; and he is now 
with a native Christian publishing sheet Tracts from his lithographic 
press at Macao. In addition to these works, I have procured tl>e 
blocks for two small Tracts, one on the Souli by Leang A fa, and the 
other on Gamblingf by the late Dr. Milne, and 2100 copies have been 
printed, and most of them circulated. 

The Scripture Lessons, noticed above, ^re those ** for Schools on the 
British System of mutual instructiooi; in four partsr, third edition, 
London, 1823." The editions in Chinese are, as to matter and ar- 
rangement, an exact transcript of th6 English edition, taken from 
Drs. Morrisdn and Milne's translation of the Bible. 

Small portions of these Lessons, say from part ill, " of God ;" *' of 
the Holy Scriptures ;" '* of Salvation by Jesus Christ ;" " duty which 
children owe to .their parents;" " of hoIine,s8 ;" *' of justice," &c — 
from Part IV, " the pardon of injuries;" " of the last judgment;" 
or the Parables: any, or all of these would make the best of Tracts. 
I have conferred with Dr. Morrison on this subject,, and. he likes very 
much the suggestion of publishing^ Scripture Tracts from the Les- 
sons. Two, three,, or four hundred dollars would make a beginning. 
Your Committee could, if they pleased, designate the portions, and [ 
could render to them an account of the copies printed, and of the 
manner distributed. 



FRANCE. 

The following touching appeal is from Mr. Henry Luiteroih, Secre- 
tary of the Religious Tract Society at Paris, dated July 13, 1832. 

[Translated from tjie French.] 

We have been inexpressibly gratified, well beloved friend, by your 
favor of the 2d April, in the name of your committee, remitting 
1^070 franks ($400,) to be disbursed by us according to the principles 
of your Society, with which we can with ease and pleasure comply. 
This gi(t has reached us at a time when the need of money is parti* 
cularly felt, and when we were doubting whence we should receive 
assistance. We may well say with the Psalmist, ** help cometh from 
God !" He has thus far provided for all the necessities of our So> 
ciety, and furnished us such aid as enabled us to discharge our most 
pressing obligations. It is to Him we render thanks for having given 
you the heart to offer us a brotherly hand on this occasion, and shown 
you the necessity that America should unite with France in the effort 
to bring our countrymen4o Christ. 

The fifild which now waits to be cultivated is immense. We have 
access to Catholics as well as Protestants, especially by means of 
hawkers, who are employed in many departments to sell our Tractt 
from village to village. 

11* 



138 FJUMCS. [Nor. 

Tiracti on the Cholera, 

Yon know well, beloved brother, ttiat the vUitationi Df God's wrath 
hkve been upon this poor countrf , and especially upon this city. 
For a time people deceived themselves ; but when they found that 
the indignation of the Lord fell on all, without distinction of rank or 
age, they trembled. Our Society felt themselves called on to make 
special exertions on .this oecasion. We published Tracts having re- 
lation to the existing circumstances, and among other things a placard 
containing directions for treating the tick before the arrival of the 
phjrsician, and a solemn and pressing appeal to them to turn to the 
great Physician of body and soul and cry for tnereyf while yet the 
forbearance of God spared- them. This placard produced a. very 
great effect. The hawkers eried tkem, and sold them in Paris, and 
people bought them with jo great eagetriess that the printer could 
pot supply the demand : the sellers of them crowded his office to 
assist in hurrying the copies rit>m the press. We also thought it 
would be profitable to the people to remind them that the transgres- 
sion of the law of God, more than the possibility of death, ought to 
fill them with iiear ; and lo this effect we afiixed to all the walls of 
Paris the Ten .CommandmmU. Groups formed tben^elves every 
where to read this advertisement, posted in the midst of the king's 
ordinances and commercial notices. Our Tracts have been freely 
distributed in the hospital^ destined for the cholera patients; the 
schools have offered us a very fair opportunity ; and, in all, our cir- 
culation has been greater this year than id any preceding one. 

Additional Laborers. 

The Tract cause is blessed in France. We have received more 
letters than usual, giving us account^ of conversions by the means 
of Tracts. The number of laborers here ia yet small, and these toil 
painfully through the heat of the day. Think what is their joy when 
they see running to them one laborer more, who comes to enlist his 
powers in the same glorious work. This, in France, is the result of 
each conversion. 

* ' Reqtutt for further Aid. 

You inquire, dear brother, what sum we could usefully employ 
annually, and in what manner ««r friends In America can assist us in 
our work 1 1 shall not fear to alarm you in naming a large sum, since 
you know that the resources of God are great ; and I shall reply to 
you, that if our Committee had to-day twenty thoueand francs (nearly 
$4000) at its disposal, we could expend it in a few months, without 
extraordinary efforts, through the channels already opened. A still 
greater sum would enable us to visit the departments where we have 
yet no relations, and perhaps to excite a spirit of inquiry after the 
truth. We are seconded by friends full of zeal, who feel the impor- 
tance of improving the present facilities for Tract operations by re- 
doubled efforts. It is not a demand that we make of you. We only 
pray you to contribute, on your part, accordmg to your ability, to 
Airnish ng with the means of offering to our brethren the words of 
«tenial life. 



1838.] USEFULNESS 0( TBACT6. 130 

AUXILIARY OF WINDHAM COUNTY, CONNECTICUT. 

This Societjr, at its fourth anniv«rsRrjr, recently held, hnd fifteen 
Auxiliaries. It circulated, the last year, more than 200,000 pages; 
making a total, in four years, of nearly 800,000. Beside prosecuting 
the monthly distribution in many of the towns, more thao $200 has 
been raised in the county for Tracts lor the heathen. The Rev. 
Messrs. At wood, Fitch, Piatt, and Tillotson, aasumed the labor of 
presenting the claims of the foreign field throughout the county ; 
and the month of January 19 now agreed 01^ as the time when th« 
effort for the coming year shall be made in all the churches connected 
with the Society. The Directors believe that $600 might be raised 
annually in the county for the Tract cause abroad, and the churches 
thus contributing, be the stronger and b^er for it. 



FEMALE AUXIUAIlYt JAMESTOWN, NEW-YORK. 

Receipts during the year, $38 ^ ; distributed 16,244 pages ; 51 
families monthly supplied. 



FEMALE AUXILIARY, CLE^VELAND, OH^O. 

Monthly distribution reeolarly sustained, with very little opposi- 
tion. An aged man and his wife, who cannof read, get their neigh- 
bors to read the Tracts to them, and since reading the first Tract (on 
the Sabbath) have not profaned that day as they used to do, and 
have embraced .every opportunity of attending on public worship. 
Circulated, during the year, 38,980 pages. 



MONTHLY DISTRIBUTION IN PROVIDENCE, RHODE ISLAND. 

This system has been prosecuted vitb energy in Providence for six 
months. On the Uut Monday evening im every monihy (an- evening now 
lomewhat extensively observed as the Tract DistrUnUtr^e Concert for 
fraycTf) meetings of Distributers and oth« friends of religioli have 
been held, and have been highly interesting. At these meetings the 
re]|l^orts of the superintendents of the different wards have been pre- 
sented, and some of them have been very enc0ara|^ing, calculated to 
cheer the heart of every Christian. 

One Distributer reported an instance of hopeful conversion in her 
district by means of a Tract; and that two others were hepeing in 
Christ, and four others anxious about their souls. 

A colored woman, who had been seven months confined with sick- 
ness, said no one spoke to her on the concerns of her soul but the 
Tract Distributer, 

A woman, about 70 years old, who had grown gray in sin, was 
found hopeing in Christ. She said the monthly Tract Quench not the 
Spirit f first awakened her to a sense of her sins, adding that it was a 
blessed Tract. The Distributer, at her request, read it to her again, 
and conversed and prayed with her. It was a spiritual and delightful 
interview. 

In another district, a man was found seriously inqutHng for the way 
Of salvation, by means of the convertation of a Distributer, and a 
Bible he had furnished him ; and two other individoaU wer« anxioHt. 



140 OCCASIONAL rOLtJMEfl. [NoV. 

IMPRECATIONS AGAINST A TRACT. 

A modthly Distributer In Providence says, In the month of May I 
f ave the Tract Pertuarivt to PubUe^ Worahip to a man from the coun- 
try, who neglected the house of God. A few weeks sioce^ he came 
into my store with a stern, solemn countenance, and with much 
apparent agitation said, ** He would give one ihotLsand doUart if that 
cursedTrtiCt had still remained on my counter!" I replied, I hoped 
it would prove to be worth more than ten thousands of dollars to liim 
and his family, and asl^ed him what damage it had done ? He said he 
carried it home and read it, and gave it to his wife and she read it ; 
and from that time she had done nothing, and said nothing, but about 
religion, mutings, Jerus Christ, salvtUion, and her wicked heart ; pray- 
ing, and crying out, '' How 'can I escape the damnation of hell." 

I told him she was under the strivings of the Spirit, and only saw 
something of her true character in the sight of a Holy God. " Well," 
said he, " I suppose that is the case with her,, and I begin to think 
there is a bottom line somewhere to what you call religion ; I have 
said and done all I could to keep her at home, and from religious per- 
sons, and tried to divert her attention, until I could say no more ; but 
she has grown worse and worse." 

A few days after I saw him again, when he informed me his wife 
** was now another woman entirely ; she was calm, serene, and joyful, 
and took a deep and lively interest in all her domestic concerns, and 
be really believed she was a Christian f^ and he further said, "he 
was now resolved to do all he could for her to go to meetings, or join 
the church, or whatever else she might think to be her duty." 



SALE OF THE SOCIETY'S OCCASIONAL VOLUMES. 

Mr. Eberezer M'Dowall, having visited Monmouth county, N. 
Jersey, as Agent for the Society, and finding, in that part especially 
called " The Pines," an unwillingness among the people to unite in 
Auxiliary Tract Societies, resolved to attempt the sale of the Socie- 
ty's bound volumes, particularly the Saint's Rest, Call to the Uncon- 
verted, Rise and Progress, Pilgrim's Progress, and Persuasives to 
Early Piety. The' effort was attended with very gratifying success. 
The volumes were found attractive, and great eagerness, in many 
places, was manifested to obtain them at the Society's low prices. In 
a few weeks he received in cash, for publications sold, the sum of 
282 dollars 46 cents. 

Is not here a new field of usefulness opened 7 There are men in the 
county of devoted piety, unauthorized to preach the Gospel, but who, 
by such means as this, accompanied by religious conversation and 
other efforts, might go out, and in almost every portion of our coun- 
try accomplish great good. 



^ The Rev. Mr. Livslet, being on the eve of departing, as General 
Agent of the American Tract Society for the valley of the Missis- 
sippi, has received a call from the Park*8treet Church, Boston, to 
become their pastor. 



1832.] 



BCCEIPTS. 



141 



We are called to the painftil duty of recording the death of Mr, 
THOMAS STOKES, one of the founders of the Americaa Tract 
Society, and, from the time of its formation, the. Chairman of the 
Distributing Committee. Mr. Stokes was active in those early Mis< 
sionary operations in London which gave a character to the present 
century ; and with a humility and gentleness, becoming a follower of 
Christ, has perseveringly deTOted himself to the prosperity of Bene- 
volent Institutions until the close of life. He was an esteemed mem- 
ber of the Baptist Church ; but loved and ri^ced to co^yperate with 
all engaged in his Master's service. His age was 68. 



We are also called to record the deMh of Mr. Sxhkoii S. Waldo, 
who bad recently entered tlie service of the Society as an Agent, and 
died of lever, after a few day's lUness, atSangerties, V, York, in the 
midst of his usefulness, aged twenty-four. He was a young man of 
modest deportment, respectable talents, and Q^^oted piety, and ex- 
pected soon to enter on apermanent field in b«baif of the Society in 
one of the Western states. 



See cm cover, Anecdote of Tadldag in Sleep— Pi emiu m c»f $850 — Simnltaneous 
effort in Western District, N. Y. 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OP THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCDETY, 
During the month ending October 15, 1833. 



Jeta 



FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIBTIESL 
VERMONT^— Fairhaven, Rev. Amos Dniry, Agent, 
MASSACHUSBTTS.^B«8ton, American Tract .Soeiecy, 
Tappan, Esq. Treasurer, ...... 

Dedfaam, Mrs. Julia Metcalf, Treasurer, - 

North Tyrinrham, Femide, Mrs. Locinda Slater, Ptresidest, 
Richmond, l^rkshire county, Abraham B. Rosaeter, Secretary, 
RHODE-ISLAND.~ProvideBee, Isaac Wikwx, DepesiCary, . 
CONNECTICUT.— Bridgeport, Rev. John BlaCohfbrd, Agent, 
Brooklyn, (Windham Co. Auz.) Edwin Newbury, Agent, t^ 71 
donations ; contributed as follows, |13 by Rot. F. Tliayer's So> 
ciety , village corners, in Woodstock j f 11 SO, Rev. D. Doraa's So- 
ciety, Thomson ; |3 21 , Female Tract Society, South WoodsCoofc, 

for foreign distribution, 

Hartford, Connecticut Branch, Claries Hosmer, Secretary 

New-Haven, J. L. Cross, Agent, 

New-London, Robert Goit, Treasurer, ... 
Norwich City, F. A. PerkiiDs, Esq. Treasurer, 
Reading, Rev. William C. Knifln, Presidettt, 
Salisbury, FemaV), Emeline H.- Norton, Treasurer, . 

South Britain, Female, Nancy Mitchell, Treasurer, . 

Southii^ton, Oliver Lewis, Agent, 

West Greenwich, Solomon Blead, Secretary, 
NEW-YORK.— Bainbridge^ J. S. Fit<:h, TreMurer, 
Berea, in Montgmnery, Female. Wm Marim Hoosioa^ TVeasurer, 
Coldiester, DeUware county. Female, EUata Downes, Secretary, 

Cooperstown, H. 8. Bradt»rd, Secretary, 

Coxsackio, A. Van Dyck, Agent, ...... 

iPelhi, DeUware oowity. Female, Miss Sarah L««l| Trefniurer, . 



TvrTr* 


80 5e 


57 37 


6 36 


5 00 


2 50 


113 96 


96 


12 39 


SO 00 


SO 00 


55 53 


00 15 


61 


17 00 


3 10 


342 


363 


742 


10 26 


10 14 


400 


373 


500 



Don. 



3 44 



27 Tl 



7 0* 



S4» 



142 



KECEXFT8. 



[Nov. 



For TV. 

Florida, Oranft ooimty, Dr. H. K. Chapman, Secretary, 10 54 

Franklio, Delaware county, Deacon I«aac Piatt, Treasurer, 15 00 
Fulton, OawMTO county, D. H. Kingsley, Agent, ... S 76 

Coshen, Dr. f» 8. Crane, Treasurer, 8 00 

Oraveaend, Female, Mrs. Mary Magaw, Secretaiy, 5 00 

HarpersAeld, Lewis E. Lockwood, Secretary, 3 20 

Hudson, Female, Miss O.Olcott, Treasurer, .... 400 

Kingston, Ulster county, 10 00 

Hina, Bfr. Keeler, Agent, . 7 00 

MoresviUe, in Roxbury, Alexander Daniel, Secretary, 8 00 

Newborgh, T. D. Lander, Secretary, 8 00 

New- York City Tract Society, Alfred Edwards, Treasurer, 8 00 

Do. by Female Branch, Mrs. E. B. Lethbridge, Treasurer, 30 00 

Rochester, Monroe county, Levi A. Waid, Treasurer, . . 45 36 

Schoharie Kill, Female, . 5 00 

Sheldon, Genesee county, .....'.. 3 25 

Sauthfield,Dtttchesscottnty,C.K.Halsey, Agent, . . 2 25 

TdmpkinsTille,T.Fardon, Treasurer, 3 36 

Utica, Edward Yemon, Secretary SO 00 

Williamsburg, L. I., Mr. Meserole, Treasurer, .... 54 

Windham, Oreene county. Female, Mrs. Elizabeth B. Strong, Tr. 1 50 
NEW-JERSEY.— Bloomilald, Juvenile, Robert R. Kellogg, 3ec. 1 53 
Colt's Neck, Monmouth county, Female, Mrs. Maria Craig, Pres. 

HacketUtown, Female, Mary Campbell, Secretary, . . S3 00 

Hanover, N. P. Thomas, Secretary, . . ... 1 .00 

Harlingen, Mary Skillman, Treasurer, . . . 1175 

Kingston, Female, Miss Jane K. Comfort, Treasurer, 13 00 
Millstone, Female, Mrs. Peter Staats, Treasarer, . 6 64 
Fompton Plains, Female, Miss Margaret Berry, Treasurer, . 5 39 

Rahway, Rev. Thomas L. Janeway, Agent, .... 3 00 
Upper Freehold, Female, Mrs. Deborain Perrine, Agent, . 3 00 

Wantage, Rev. Peter Kaoouse, Agent, 10 00 

Westfield, Female, MisH Mary Pierson, Secretary, I 1 25' 

PENNSYLVANLk.— Erie, Female, Enuly Wight, Secretary, S5 30 

Philadelphia Branch, Rev^ Joel T. Benedict, General Agent, . 139 12 
- WilkeslMurre, W. C. Gildersleeve, Treasurer, ... 5 00 

ViR6INIA.->Caira, P. O. (Cumberland county Aux.) William M. 

Thornton, Treasurer, 37 50 

Lynchburg, Charles Poe, Secretary, 11 85 

Richmond, N. Talley, Treasurer, ...... i 40 

Winchester, Daniel Cold, Treasurer, 59 62 

NORTH.CAROLINA.-p43aUsbury, Philip L. Link, Secretary, 40 00 

Wilmington, Rev. Thomas P. Hunt, Secretary, . . 50 00 

TENNESSEE.— Memphis, Littleton Henderson, Treasurer, . 84 55 

OHIO«— Aurora, Portage county. Rev. John Seward, President, 1 70 
Cincinnati, Silas Woodbury, Corresponding Secretary, . 1 go 

Columbus, Rev. James Hoge, D. D. Agent, .... 73 32 

Elyria, (Lorain Co. Aux.) Rev. D. W. Lathrop, Secretary, 17 38 

Granville, (Licking Co. Aux.) Rev. Jacob Little, President, 15 00 
Kinsman, (Granville Countv Female,) ..... 

Putnam, (Muskingum Co. Aux.) Edwin Putnam, Agent, 53 OO 
MICHIGAN TERRITORY.— Aon Arbour, Fem. £. H. PUtt, Tr. 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 

MASSACHU8ETTS.-^Northbridge, Paul Whitin, Treasurer, 5 77 

RHODE-ISLAND,— Warren, Seamans' Friend Society, 90 00 

NfiW-YORK.— Esopus, B. Van Keuren, Agent, 5 00 

Fiat Lands, Mrs. Cjrookshank, Directress, ..... 2 41 
N«w Utrecht, Female Bible Misaion^y and Tract Society, Mn. C. 

Knapp, Treasurer, 1 38 

NEWWERSEY— Freehold, Female, IS SO 

Hardiston, in North Presbyterian Chnrch, Female, Mrs. Matilda 

Fairchild, Secretary, 

Tracta sold at the Depository to individuals, (including $125 from 
Jtey. Wwren Day, Agent in New- York,) .... l74l 74 



Don. 



1 #0 
5 10 



i 70 



19 50 



5 00 
3 38 



400 



1832.] 



RECEIPTS. 



143 



Directors for Life, 

MASS. — ^Amherst, Rev. Royiil 
Washburn, by gentlemen and 
ladies of 1st Parish, (in full of 
$50,) $20 00 

Middlefield, Gen. David Mack, 
(in full of $50,) 30 00 

N. YORK..^Albany, Hon. Ste- 
phen Van Rensselaer, in part 
for stereotyping " Edwards on 
the AffecUons," ..... 100 00 

Carlisle, Schoharie county. Rev. 
Charles Wadsworth, by bis ch. 
and cong. (in full of $50,) . 30 00 

Fishkill, Rev. Robert Q. Arm- 
strong, by his church and cong. 5Q 00 

Do. Rev. Charles Whitehead, by 
Fem. Miss. Soc. (in full of $60) 
for China, 40 00 

Living8tonville,Rev. John Gray, 
by his church and congrega- 
tion, (in full of $ 51,) , ... 31 00 

New- York City, Mrs. Col. Rich- 
ard Varick, in part for stereo- 
typing "Edwards on the Af-' 
fections," . 50 00 

N. JERSEY.— Princeton, Rev. 
Charles Hodgey by Auxiliary 
Tract Society in Theological 
Seminary, (in part of $50,) . 10 00 

VIRGINIA.— Briery Congrega- 
tion, Prince Edward county, 
Rev. Michael O^born, (in part 
of$50,) 38 50 

Charlotte CoUrt House, Rev. 
Abner W. Ciopton, by his ch. . 
and congregation, ~ .... 50 00 

Rev. Andrew Hart, tiy his ch. 
andcong.(infullof$50,) . . 30 00 

Cubb Creek, Charlotte county. 
Rev. Clement Read, by his con- 
gregations, .'...... 50 00 

Shepherdstown, Jefferson county, 
Rev. E. C. Hutchinson, by ch. 
and congregation, (in full of 
$50,) 30 00 

Menibers for Life. 

MASS.— Williamstown, Profes- 
sor Ebenezer Kellogg, by Fe- 
male Charitable Society, . . 90 00 

Worthington, Hampshire couniy, ' 
Mrs. Betsey C. Pomeroy, by 
Rev. Jonathan L.Pomer«y, . 90 00 

CONN.— Eastford, Windham Co. 
Rev. Reuben Torry, by his ch. 
and cong., (for. dis.) through 
Windham County Aiuiliary, . 90 00 

Glastenbury, Norman Hubbard, 90 00 

Le Grange, Rev. Milton Buttolph, 
(in part of $90,) 15 73 

New-Haven, Mn. Joanna Lathrop, 
by bar son C. L. Lathrop, Cleve- 



land, Ohio, (for Ceylon,) . . 90 00 

Windham, Dea. Thomas Welch, 
by Auxiliary -fract Society, 90 OO 

Woodstock, Rev. Orson Cowles, 
by his church and congregation^ 
(through Windliam Go. Aux.) 
for.dis 90 09 

N. YORK— Broome, Schoharie 
county. Rev. Winslow Paige, 
by his church and congregafion, 90 00 

Catskill, Mrs. M. G. W. Smith, 
by Mrs. Lucy Day, .... 90 00 

Do. Miss Caroline Woodruff, by 
her mother, 90 00 

Clinton^ Rev. Jedediah Burchard, 
by ladies, ....... 90 00 

Hudson, Miss Serena M'ClanaBaiT, 
(in part of $90,) ^00 

Lenox, Miss Eliza Ann Hall, by 
her mother, (in part of $90,) . 10 00 

Salina, WUmot WiUiams, . . 90 00 

Troy, Mrs. Emma Willard, by 
Misses Sarah F. Seward and. 
Eunice D. Rosseter, . . . 90 00 

N. JERSEY.— PlainficW, Rev. 
Lewis Bond, by ladies, (in fuU 
of$90,) 10 00 

PENN.— Greencastle, Rev. Mr. 
Buchanan, by church and cong. 90 00 

MD.— Williamsport^ Rev. Mr. 
Winter, by individuals of St. 
PauFs congregation, (in part 
of$90,) 6 9« 

VIR.— Martinsburg, Rev. Jacob 

, Medtart, by Shepherdstown and 
Martinsburg congregations, . 90 00 

Providence Congregation, Hali- 
fax county r Rev. Thomas A. 
Ogden, by his congregation, . 90 00 

Shepherdstown, Mrs. L. B. Hutch- 
inson, by Rev. £. C. Hutchin- 
son's Sodety, 91 06 

Tuscarora, Berkley connty, Mra. 
Mary Ann Brown, by Ger- 
rardstown, Tuscarora and Fall- 
ing Water congregations, . . 90 06 

S. CAR.— Union Court House, 
Rev. J. Harrison, by a friend, 90 OO 

WEST-INDIES.— St. Thomas, 
Miss Eliza Paanett, .... 90 0$ 

Jinnual Direeton, 

N, YORK.— New-York city, Jo- 
seph Fottlke, 5 0$ 

James M'Gregor, Jun. ... 5 OOi 
GEORGIA.— St. Maryi, Rev. A. 
Benedict, 5 0$ 

Jtnnmal Membert, $2 each. 

N. YORK.— Fiahkm,MinF.M. 

Gary, 9 0$ 

New-York eity, Hngh AiksiM, 



144 



SECEIPT8. 



Gabriel A. Arnovx, Joha Bram- 
nar, Un. Eltea F. CKbborn, 
Oliver Edwwda, Slaawn Hjrde, 
M attlMW Kealer, Mm Horti- 
mar, John Pfayft, Dr. J. W. 
I>ttryea,($li) ........ 00 

Other DoiuUi»nti 

BIASS.^North Tyrte^kan, Bap- 

ti«t Society, • 00 

Do. Confreyi^ioBal Society, . 16 19 
Plainfield, Mrs. Almriiani Clarli, 

avails of jewdry, for Barmaii, ..4 75 
Ricliaiioad, church and con^^. . 33 06 
Sandi«field,BafpCi8t Society;. . 1113 
Do. Conpragatiooal Society, ; . 49 00 
South Ke^, rondrv iadiTkhiab, . 14 73 
Stockbridge, a lady, for Val. Misa. 1 00 
West Stockbridce, indiTidaaia, . 17 00 
R. ISLAND^^BarriBftoOyacon* 

tribtttion, .• 17 31 

Newport, a eontrlbatiota, ... 7 83 

Warren, do 4 22 

CONNw~BoaErahvi]le,iadiTidtt&if, 3 75. 
Bridg^water, M rs. SCreiet, ... 50 
Cornwall, Ezrai&rdeey, $1; a 
friend, 95; L. C. Rouse, Agent, 
a balanee, 19 aents, .... 1 44 

Coventry, 6. Page, 1 00 

L^e, Ladiea BenevolaBt Society, 

(for. dk.) 4 90 

New Hartford^ chwcli agdtMkng. 31 86 

Do. (North Society.) 18 56 

West Haven, sundry individvals, 39 00 
Woodstock, Village Comers, a 

friend, (for. dia;^ • .... 1 00 
N. YORK^Beawr Da«, indivi- 

dnal8,(for.dia.) 16 00 

Bridgwater, Oneida eoonty, Esq. 

Boatwick, • . 9 00 

Canaan Centre, Cokuabia caunty, 

Presbyterian congregation, . 9$ 00 
Clinton, female friend, . . . . 1 00 

FisbkiH, Rev. Mr. WWtebead's 
Society, ........ 5 45 

Jefferson, individuala, (for. die.) 97 69 
Middlebnry, individaalB, do. . . 3 00 
Noresville, Delaware oeun^, in- 
dividuala, (for. die.) .... 18 00 

NeW'York city, a friend for 

Adams, Champaign county, O. 19 00 
Do. $1; do. in psrt for stereoty- 
ping and perpetuating " Ed- 
wards on the Affections" $90, 91 00 
Otisco, sundry individuals, . .' 3 90 
Otisco, Amber, P. O. J. Arnold, . 1 95 

Otsego county, lliss P , avails 

ofgold chain, (for. dis.) ... 3 75 
Pleasant V^ey, .Rev. Benjamin 

Wiles' Society, 90 50 

Shelter island, a friend, for China, 10 00 
N. JERSEY.— Caldwell, Samuel 

A. Marshall, for Bnrmah, . . 5 00 
Freehold, Lower Society, sundry 

individuals, • 9 95 

De. Upper Society, sundry indiv. 3 19 



Middletown Foint, several friends, 9 00 

Morristown, individuals, . . . 13 50 

New-Brunewick, Ebenexar Mc 
Dowall, Agent, 1 DO 

PENN.-~Phtfautelphia, a lady, by 
hands of Rev. Dr. M'Auley, 
(for. dis.) 4 .' 17 50 

VIR.— BameFs Mill, P.O. Fau- 
quier county, Rev.i. J. Roydl, 5 00 

Bedford county, Hiss Mary Hop- . 
kins, for Barman misaion, . . 9 00 

Charlotte CouK House, Mrs. Su- 
san Ho^e, for Liberia, ... 5 00 

Farley, P. O^ Culpepper county, 
John Gles^enn, 9 00 

Fredericksburg, Mr. Adams* con- 
gregation, for Burmah, ... 9 83 

Jefferson, Culpepper county, in- 
dividuals, 95 

King William county, Mrs. Mury 
G. Braxton, for Barmah, . . 5 00 

Liberia, P. O., Prince William 
CO., W. J. Wier, for Burmab, 4 00 

Louisa county, Southanna Ch. 
fur Burmah, 11 14 

Martinsburg, si friend', (for. dis.) 5U 

Mecklenburg ceuntyt Mrs. Susan 
Jiggetts, 10 00 

Pisgah, Bedford county, femide 
prayer meeting, (for. dis.) . . 5 OO 

Powhatton county. Rev. Mr. Bap- 
tist's congregation, for Burmah, 6 39 

WarrentM, Charles Kemper, . 4 00 

Wilderneas, P. O., Orange county. 
Rev. Mr. Gordon's congrega- 
tion, for Burmah, 11 71 

Wihnhngton, P. O., Fluvanna Co. 
Miss N. Farrar, 50 cents ; J. 
Forbee, Esq. |1 ; John Holland, 
ibr Burmah, f 1 ; Mrs. R. B. Per- 
kins, 50 cents; A. SHiepherd, 
Jun. 50 cents, 3 50 

OHIO. — AnonyraoiM, for Dr. Jud- 
son, in Burmdi, 10 00 

Clayton, Perry county, Thomas 
King, 50 

Jerry Township, two little chil- 
dren for the Heathen, ... 90 

ILL.— Paris, Rev. Enoch Bouton, 1 00 



- The above list contains donataona— 
In part, for perpetuating " Ed- 
wards on the Affections," . 1 170 00 
For Valley of the Missisaippi, . 13 00 
For Foreign Distribution, (in- 
cluding $63 74 for Burmah; 
$ 50 for China -, $90 for Ceylon ; 
and $5 for Liberia,) . . $980 43 



Vlliole amount of Donations, $1,696 31 
Received for Tracts sold, . 9,118 40 

Total, . . $3,814 80 



THE AMERICAN 
OL. TO. DaoaKsmt, issa. ho. i: 



THE GREAT WORK NEGLECTED. 

It ia uniTentallj acknowledged I hat Iba Gospel ii inieniledraTALi. 
lu proviiioiu Br* Kdapled to ali. Ila inTiUlioni are addrMied (« 
ALt.. lU bcDeralence embrace) all. Il rcTeali the only method of 
(alnlion (or all. tl re^rdi, ai -alike preciaui, (be loul* or all. 
Chriil'econnBaDdil thatilbe eoareyed, and the apsitlea and primi- 
tin Chriiliani Inbored to eilend it to all. 

Hub far hat the church acted in attordanet ttilk Iht Divbtt com- 
Mouf , tiact Jpotlvlie dayi J 

Ai ioon ai ihe gaiacd aacendencg tn the Roman empire the fumed 
uwnj rrom caring for all, that ihe mighl mainlain her own iinctil; 
and authority. To lecore ihe formsr, her Tarored onei ahellered 
themialvei in the cloiiter from the very touch of an ungodly world. 

Vol. VII. 13 WBouNa.ei. 



146 THE GREAT WORK NEGLECTED. £DeC* 

To secure the latter, she wantonly held the great mass of her own 
members in ignorance. 

The reformation disenthralled a part of the church, and revived the 
principle, that the light of truth, like the light of heaven, was for 
^ll; but the great mass, even of Protestant churches, for three cen- 
turies, were mainly occupied in arecnring their own standing, and the 
enjoyment of their privileges. They saw in the Gospel, indeed, that 
it was the purpose of God to save men through its diffusion by his 
church; they could not help praying that it might be extended to all; 
but still, with small exceptions, they who had itj hept it, till the life- 
giving Spirit was withdrawn ; a small minority only, of the churchea 
continued evangelical; and in pagan lands Satan still held an almost 
undisputed sway. 

The nineteenth century introduced another era, when the church 
again opened her eyes to the duty of giving the Gospel to all. Mis- 
sionary institutions were formed for sending it abroad by the living 
preacher, and Bible, Tract, and Sabbath school institutions, that it 
might be carried to the entire population : there was an unwonted 
liberality in contributing; some individuals consecrated themselves 
to self-denying services amid the moral desolations of the world; and 
the hope began to be cherished by many, that they saw the dawning 

of the latter day glory. 

And now, in the thirty-third year of the nineteenth century, what is 
the attitude of the evangelical churches? The obligation to give the 
Gospel TO ALL is universally acknowledged ; and nearly every minis- 
ter, and every member, feels that he himself should take part in the 
work, ^nd yetr while, in respect to the Heathen, all that was given in 
our land in 1831, for foreign and Indian missions, was equal only to 
the interest for two nionthi of what was sent out of the country during 
the same period for the five articles of tea, coffee, sugar, spirits and 
wine ; in respect to our own population, the solemn fact is, that the 
Gospel is constantly REITERATED in the hearing of a fewy while to 
the minds of the majority of our inhabitants it is scarcely presented, 
in its purity, at all. 

The abler churches secure to themselves a profusion of privileges, 
till the converted become fastidious hearers, and the unconverted 
Gospel hardened ; few ministers vie with the Apostle in zeal to preach, 
<' not where Christ has been named,'' lest they " should build upon 
another man's foundation;" more than 900 members of the churches, 
out of every 1000, are intent on the enjoyment of their privileges, 
and do little more for the conversion of others, than to pray that 
Christ's kingdom may come, and give a small sura when appeals 
are spread before them, such as there is reason to believe cost 



lBd2.] THE GREAT WORK NEGLECTED. 147 

the life of a Cornelius and a Barr; and thus the church still, as in 
ages past, appropriates to herself her privileges ; violates the Savior's 
commhnd ; loses the fulfilment of the promise, that in blessing others 
she shall herself be blessed ; and withholds from perishing millions 
their only remedy. 

We cannot dwell on this painful subject. We beg ministers and 
Christians of tivery denominatibn, seriously to consider it, with 
prayer to God that they may individually know hh will, and do their 
doty to free the churches from the blood of souls. 

To say nothing now of what we mfght do for the Heathen, and 
passing by other instrumentalities equally or more important for our 
own country, there is a department in the 2Vad system entirely adapted 
to carry the Gospel to the firesides of our perishing and neglected popu- 
lation, and of incalcuUi^le power if properly applied. Let every 
family be ranged within a certain district, to be committed to one 
devoted Christian, male or female ;• who, taking the monthly Tract 
as an introduction, shall, become acquainted with the spiritual wants 
of all, and with love to souls, and supplications to God for a blessing, 
shall labor in every way which his providence may unfold for their 
eternal welfare ; especially by personally tendering to them the offers 
of the Gospel ; and they may thus bring Divine truth into contact 
with multitudes of minds otherwise far away from its influence. 
Where distributers have thus sought for souls, and have selected indi- 
viduals as the special object of their prayers and labors, the convert- 
ing influences of the Holy Spirit have signally attended their endea- 
vors. Let this effort be faithfuUy and perseveringly made, till every 
Christian in our country, qualified for such a service, shall be thus 
employed ; ^and there is reason to believe it will be among the most 
productive of all the means of ^race. If a better system can b« 
devised for the same end, let it be introduced. If not, shall not all 
possible effieiency be given to this ? There is not a Minister whose 
audiences may not be increased by God's blessing on such an effort; 
not a Sabbath school which may not receive an accession. to its 
pupils; not a church which may not at once free itself from guilt, 
and be strengthened by accessions to its numbers, and the graces of 
its members ; not a Christian who may not be spiritually refreshed 
in the performance of such labors, and who may not reasonably ex- 
pect his persevering endeavors to be the means of ** turning many 
to righteousness." 

Will the Minister of Christ, who has cast his eye over this article, 
spread out this subjeet before God, and do what seems to him his 
duty, for rousing his people to action, and wisely directing their 
e/Tortg fbr t)i6 souls among whom they dwell 7 



148 YOICB FROM BQMBAT. [DcC. 

Will the private Christian, male or female, aik, in view of thia anb- 
ject, what God would hare him do, in personal labors, and in exciting 
other Christians to action, till not an individual shall remain within 
the sphere of his influence, who can saj, ^' No man hath cared for 
my soul f" 

If this isaeUnmofOcdupfm his churches, it cannot be disregarded 
without infinite hazard ; nor will it be properly regarded without the 
reception of spiritual rewards, such -as God alone can give. 



VOICE FROM BOMBAY. 

The last report of the Bombay Tract Society s^rs: << Many Tracts, 
during the year, have been distributed in the varioui languages of 
India. l*hey are every where demanded with eagerness, and read 
with avidity. 

** * I have often witnessed,' irrites the Rev. C. P. Farrar, of the 
Church Mission at Bandorah, * the astonishment of the Hindoo on 
tfaei first perusal of some one of the Tract*. He seems to labor under 
the conviction that it contains truth, but truth beyond his power to 
receive; and perceiving the aptitude of the book to its proposed. ob- 
ject, he has said, Whtnyou hant diatributtd a great many such, and 
the people generally are JamUiar with their contents, tbxn thkrx will 

U ▲ OHAaOK.' 

" The Committee have not now the means of defraying the ex* 
penses already incited for printing, while the Depository is entirely 
destitute of a great proportion of the most interestuig and important 
Tracts in the different languages of India.'' From this Depository 
the American Missionaries derive, to a considerable extent, their 
pupply of Tracts. 

OFFICIAK4 LETTER, 

JPVom JBev. WUUam MmMg, JiSlusionary at Bowhay, to tht American 

Tract Society, dated AprU 8, 1832. 

After a^nowledging the reception of a communication from the 
Society, he thus proceeds : 

'* The demand for Tracts is greater now than we, with our present 
means, can possibly meet. This demand is increasing, and must 
continue to increase, until the great Head of the church shall enable 
his people to supply the wants of these perishing millions. The 
Mahratta language is spoken by a population of about 12,000,000. 
The number of readers has rapidly increased within a few years, in 
consequence of schools established among them. This number, we 
think, is still on the increase. At present, the proportion of readers 
is, perhaps, as one to twenty of the entire population. 

" In visiting the continent, the Missionaries have found the demand 
for their Tracts so great, that in many cases they might dispose of 
all they have in one or two villages ; and in proportion as the people 



1833.] 



BECUPTS* 149 



be«oine aoquainted wilh the printed books, does their demand for 
them increase. 

" Beside the Mahrattas, there is an immense multitude of immor- 
tal beings whom wt can reach in no other way than thwugh the medivm 
(if Tract*. We may give the word of life to many, while we are 
unftble to speak a single sentence to them in their Own tongue con* 
ceming the way of salvation through the Lord Jesus Christ. 

*' In consequence of the great advantages which Bombay affords 
for trade and commerce, thousands of people are brought together 
from different parts of Asia. In some of these, Tracts are given 
which are carried by them, and read in parts of the country where 
the foot of a Christian Missionary has never trod, and where the 
news of. solvation, through Christ, has never been proclaimed, lil 
confirmation of this we may mention, that one of the Missionaries, a 
short time ago, made a tour on the continent, and in one village found 
several persons who hud a tolerably correct idea of Christianity. 
Upon inquiry he found that one of the villagers had been at Bombay 
on business— a distance of nearly 200 miles— had procured some 
Tracts, brought thenr home wjth him, and read them to his neigh- 
bors. In this way they had gained all the knowledge of Christianity 
whici^ they possessed ; no Aj[issionary having eyer visited the place 
previ<Ais to that time. 

[Thus the Heathen themselves l^ecome Tract Distrihnters.] 

** As to the amount of aid we need^" continues Mr. Ramsay, '*it has 
been thought advisable to mention ||1000 in money and $50 in Eng- 
lish Tracts. We shall be thankful for less, while we can easily find 
use for more ; yet others who are alike needy will also be thankful 
for your assistance. 

" In behalf of the Bombay Mission, 

*' WUXIAM RaMSAT." 



Among about fiOO laborers on the national road in Missouri, was one who at- 
timpted to benefit the bthers bj reading Tractar to them. Be was at first heard 
amid scoffs and jeers— then with attention and seriousness — the Bible was intro- 
dttced, and a stated eveninf reHgious meeting established, the results of which 
eternity only can disclose. 



(CTOn page 3 of cover will be foond an interesting letter on the subject of 
gem TracUi and on page 4 a notiee of premtttsi TraeU, 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASUEY OP THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 
Dttriiv the mawA muUmg Novembtr 15, 1838. 



FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 
TER. — Castleton, Joseph Steele, Agent, .... 

Middlebury, E. Brewster. Agent, 

Poultney, W. P. Noy es, Secretary, 

Rutland, Auxiliary Depository, A. L. Brown, Depoaitaiy, 
fit Albans, Female, Theodore W. Smith, Depositary, . 
Vergennes. Atherton Hall, Arent, . '. 

MASS.^Bostonv American Tract Soe. John Tappen, Esq Trees. 
Imox, Berkshire Co., John 6. 9taaty, Treasurer, 



Don. ForTf'. 



15,60 


97 66 


3 00 


13 80 


44 DO 


8 74 


9095 00 



ISO 



RBOiaPTB* 



[Dec. 



Monson, Female, Miss Olivia Flynt, Secretary, • 

Pittsfield, Samuel A. Daoforth, Treasurer, .... 

Sheffield, Rev. James Bradford, Agent, 

Springfield, Henry Rirkham, Treasurer, • . 

CONN Darien, Charles Whitney, Treararer, . , . 

East Haddam, Mary, R. Whitmore, Treasurer, 

Kent, H. P. Slosson, Secretary, 

Montville, Conn., Sherwood Raymond, Treasurer, 

New-Haven, J. L. Cross, Agent, 

New Milford, E. Noble, Treasurer, 

North Goshen, Female. Lucy N. Wilcox, Secretary, . 
North Greenwich, Rev. Mr. Wilcox, Agent, .... 
Norwich City, Female, Miss Sarah Backus, Secretary, 
Saybrook, 3d Society, Female, Mrs. A. P. Champlin, Agent, 
Sharon, David Gould, Treasurer, . . . . 
Stratford, Asa Curtis, Treasurer, . . . . . 
Waterbury, Solomon W. Minor, Treasurer, . . 
West Greenwich, Solomon Mead, Secretary, 
N. YORK.— Bath, Steuben county, James 6. Higgins, Treasurer, 
Bedford, Female, Mrs. S. S. Nichols, Treasurer, 

Bern, Albany county, 

Bethlehem, Orange county, Robert Denniston, Esq. Treasurer, 
Bridgehampton, L. I., Rev. Amzi Francis, President, 
Bullhack, Orange county, Joseph Little, Secretary, 
Butternuts, Abijah Gilbert, Secretary, 

Champlain, Rev. E. D. Kinney, Agent, 

Chenango Point, Rev. P. Lockwood, Secretary, 

Glinton^ille, W. Flack, Secretary, 

Clyde, Ameret MctSurdy, Treasurer, 

Dashville Fails, Female, Mrs. Jano Ann Butler, Treasurer, . 
East Hampton, Rev. Joseph D. Condict, Agent, 

Esopus, Dr. M. V. Wheeler, Treasurer, 

Eaperance, Jared Dewing, Agent, . . . . 
Flat Buah, Union, Solomon Hendricks, Secretary, . 

Flat Lauds, . . 

Forestburgh, Jeremiah Terb^l, Secretary, . . . . 

Gravesend, L.'T., Female, Mrs. S. G. Stryker, Treasurer, 
Greenville, Female, Miss Hannah Hicock, Secretary, 
Harpersville, Broome county, Uri Smith, Secretary, 
Hartwick and Fly Creek, Albert North, Treasurer, 
Horse Heads, Tioga county, Female, Mrs. Susan Gardner, Sec. 
Hudson, (Columbia County Auxiliary,) W. Rockwell, Agent, 
Hudson, Female, Ophelia Olcott, Secretary, .... 

Keeseville, Femnle, Jane Aiken, Secretary, ... . 

Lisle, Norman Marsh, Treasurer, 

Manheim, Jacob Markell, Treasurer, 

Marbletown, Dr. Lewis J. Hasbrouck, Treasurer, 
Marshallville, John Marshall, Secretary, .... 

Merideth, Samuel A. Law, jun. Secretary, ..... 
Moriches, L. L, Austin Culver, Treasurer, .... 

Naples, Female, Waldo Curtis, Agent, - 

New Prospect, , . . . , 

New Windsor, Peter Roe, Secretary, 

N0w-York City Tract Society, by the Female Branch, Mn. E. B. 

Lethbridge, Treasurer, 

Oyster Ponds, L. L, Rev. P. Robinson. Agent, ... 

Post Road in Marshallville, Bradford Pierce, Secretary, 

Rochester, Monroe poun^y, L^vi A, Ward, Treasurer, 

Rye, FemaJe, Ann B. 9ucklBy, Secretary, . . , . 

Schoharie County Ajixiliary , John Ingold, Treasurer, 

South Middletowo, ,,,.,.... 

South Salem, Rev. S. Saunders, Agent, .... 

Stillwater, Samuel G. Eddy, Secretary, 

Tompkiasvilltt Staten Island, FeiQ>, Mrs. iUn K. Miller, TroM. 



F^Tr, 


Don. 


nasi 

30 00 
1 64 




66 00 




1 50 




76 


325 


2 00 




6 00 


' 


48 00 




8 00 




3 00 


1 00 


2 13 




7 00 




4 19 


623 


4 20 




525 


ff 


9 00 




91 




70 00 




75 




13 87 




4 70 




12 40 






70 


5 74 




3 80 


• 


10 00 




2 75 




1 00 


* 


1 17 




11 93 




4 86 




6 37 




1 50 


3 18 


1 07 




5 00 




64 




8 00 




4 95 






19 97 


4 88 


1 la 


ISO 001 




3 00 




13 00 




2 67 




6 37 




4 67 


1 58 




4 5« 


3 20 




2 47 




9 00 




JO 93 




66 




46 00 




3 20 






4 50 


175 00 




1 71 




16 39 




1 50 




5 75 






500 




9Q0 



1832.] 



Bccfitmu 



151 



Uaion, Broome eountyi ftev. N. Gonld, Ageot, . • 4 
Utioa, Gldward Vernon^ Secretary, . . ... • . . 
West Ourham, Rev. Liaus Fellows, President, . . 
Williamsburg^, David M. Meserole, Treasurer, • ■ . 
N. J£Il.— Bloomfield, Juvenile, Robert R. Kellogf, Secretary, 
Eli^betbtown, 2d Presbyterian Church, .... 

Greenwich, Female, Ann E. Carter, Secretary, 

Do. do. Juvenile, Margaret McHurtree, Secretary, 

Morristown, Mrs. C. C. Allen, Treasurer, . . . 
Newark, Female, Mrs. Sarah M. Graham, Treasurer, 
Oxford,.Female, Ifrs. S. Sherrord, Treasurer, • 

Princeton, Female, Miss F. W. Morford, Treasurer, . 
Readiogtown, (North Branch,) M. Wyckoff, Secretary, 
Rockaway, Rev. Barnabas King, Agent, .... 
Shrewsbury, Female, Miss Ann Little, Treasurer, . 
^omerville, JPemale, Ann M.Griffeth, Treasurer, 
Trenton, Female, Esther Mcllvaine, Treasurer, 
PENN.— Erie, Female, Miss Emily Wight, SecreUry, 

Honesdale, Rev. Joel Cnmpbell, Agent, 

Montrose, Jerre Lyons, Secretary, . . . . 
Mount Pleasant, E. Atwater, Treasurer, .... 

Af ARYLAND.^Frederick City, Fem. Miss Mary L. Hanmer, Tr. 
VIRGINIA.— Lewisbur^, (Greenhrier County Auxiliary,) 
Lovettsville, Daniel Miller, Seczetajy, . ... 
Richmond, N. Talley, Treasurer, . . ' . 

Winchester, Daniel Gold, Treasurer, 

S. CAR. — ^Charleston, S. Car. Branch, D. W. Harrison, Agentf 

GEO. — Savannah, George W. Coe, Treasurer, 

ALA. — Huntsville, John J. Coleman, Esq. Agent, 

TENN. — Kaoxville, James Park, Treasurer, 

OHIO.— Cincinnati Branch, Silas Woodbury, Corresponding Sec. 

Hudson, (Portage County Auxiliary.) Prof. E. Wright, Agent, 

MICH. TERR.— Gull Prairie, Samuel Brown, Agent, 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 
N. YORK.— New Utrecht, Female Bible, Missionary, and Tract 
Soc.Mrs. C. Knapp, Treasurer, 

Rodman, . 

Tracts sold at the Depository to Individuals, (including $58 54 

from Revt W. W. Woods, Agent in Tennessee,) 



2 251 

182 00 

1 89 



D9%. 



3 57 



4 
4 



00 
53 



30 00 
2 00 

8 40 

9 10 

4 02 

5 00 
14 97 
50 00 

5 60 
13 00 

6 50 
4 43 
8 61 



2 
4 



00 
66 



35 00 
50 00 
20 00 
22 42 



3 
4 



94 
54 



37 00 
2 00 

50 00 
31 71 

38 00 
7 00 



3 17 
9 37 

290 15 



50 00 



650 



Directors for Lifs* 

N. YORK.— Geneva, Rev. Hen- 
ry Dwight, 125 00 

Manlius, Rev. Carlos Smith, by 
his Church and Congregation, 50 00 

Norwich, Rev. H. P. Bogue, by 
Ch. and Cong. (For. Dis.; . 50 00 

Owego, Rev. Charles White, by 
his Church and Congregation, 
(in full of $50,) 30 00 

Vernon, Rev. Aaron Garrison, by 
Ch. and Cong, (in ftill of $50,) 30 00 

N. JER^— Bound Brook, Rev. 
Ravaud K. Rodgers, by Ch. 
and Cong, (in fUll of $50,) . 30 00 

OHIO.— Cincinnati, Rev. B. P. 
Aydelott, by Ladies' Tr. Soc. 
Christ Church, (in full of $50,) 
ibr Greece, 30 00 

Members for Life. 
MASS.~^mh6rtt| Prof. Sanittel 



M. Worcester, by Ladies, Had- 
ley. Upper Mills, 

CONN.— Canton, Miss Amelia 
Everest Hosmer, by an appro- 
priation from the Everest fund, 

Jewett City, Rev. George Per- 
kins, by Lad. (in part of $20,) 

N. YORK.— Athens, Rev. Cor- 
nelius Van Cleef, by Lad. Ref. 
Dutch Church, (For. Dis.) 

Binghampton, Cary Hurdock, . 

Do. Mrs. Louisa Lockwood, (in 
part of $20,) 

Canandaiffua,Mr8. Harriet Martin, 

Do. Miss J. Smith, 

Do. Miss H. Upham, .... 

Do. Walter Hubbell, Esq. (in full 
of $20,) 

Clarkson, Rev. Charles E. Fur- 
man, by Church and Congre- 
gation, (in lUll of $20,) . . . 

Fishkill, Alson Sherwood, (in 
part of $20,) 

Flatbush, Dr. Adrian Vanderveer, 
by 9th. Sch. Teach. (For. Dia.) 



20 00 

20 00 
10 00 



20 00 
20 00 

10 00 

SO 00 

20 00 
20 00 

10 00 



5 00 
16 00 
SO 00 



m 



BfiCfilPTI* 



GraeiiTilto, Mlii Loow Noftom 
Do.Mia8ManrScofieM, . . . 
Jamestown, £lialT.Fool«,* . 
lUnlittfli Axarifth Smith, . . • 
New-York City, Mi« Charlolte 

H. Lathrop, by Cw.See^ availa 

of preaching in &ef. Dutch Lb. 

Brooklyn, (in part of ♦»») . 
Owego, Col. Charlea ». Fjrfey, 

by Cong, of Rev. Mr. White, 
Do. Mrs. Lttcinda Jones Putnam, 

by her mother, Mrs. Mary £. 

Putnam, ...••••* 
Do. Frederick Piatt, by WiUlam 

Piatt, Esq. (in ptart of $»,) . 
8attgertie8,Rev. Henry Osttan- 

der, by Ladles of his Cong. . 
Stephentown, Rev. B. A. Beach, 

by Ladies, . • • • • _• • 
N. JER^-Dtttch Neck, Rer. John 

Jay Rice, by Ch. and Cong. . 
Newark, David D. Crane, . . 
New Gef mantown,ReT. Wm. W. 

Blauvelt, by his Ch. and Cong. 
PENN.— Rev. Robert S. Grier, 

by Tom's Creek and Piney 

Creak Congs.,Marylai^», . 
Bmmettsburg, J<*n H. Williams, 

by his mother, Mrs. J. Williams, 
Philadelphia, Rev. G. B. Perry, 

by a Clergyman of the Prot. 

Episcopal Ch. Philadelphia, . 
BIALTA. — Mediterranean, Ho- 

maa Hallock, jnn. . • . • 

Do. Moses Hallock, 

Do. Martha Hallock, . . . '• 

by their uncle. Rev. Wm. A. 

Hallock, N. York, (in part for 

perpetuating Brainerd*a Life,) 

Other DowUiont, 

MAINE*— Haltowell, Ladies 1st 
Coagl. Ch. for BalaVia, Cler- 
mont county, Ohio, .... 

MASS.— Pittsfield, Young Ladies, 
for valley of the Miesissippi, . 

Do. Miss Naocy A. Inf^ersolf, for 
valley of the Mississippi, . . 

R, ISL.— Newport, Mrs. Hannah 
H. Patten, for Burmah, . . 

0ONN.r— East Haven, a Lady, . 

tmae. Ladies Benev. Soc, avails 
of Jewelry, (For. Dis.) . . 

Waterbury, Lewis A. Hickock, . 

N. YORK.— Binghamptou, Pres- 
byterian Church, 

Buffalo, Ist Presb. Church, . . 

Canandaigua, Collection in Rev. 
Mr. Eddy's Church -'- 

Hartwick and Fly Creek, Lad. 
Benev. Assqc. for Harrisori, 
Champaign county, Ohio, 

Leroy, Individual, 



90 00 
90 00 
90 00 
90 00 



900 
90 00 

90 00 

10 00 

90 00 

39 18 

90 00 
90 00 

90 00 

90 00 
90 00 

90 00 

90 00 
90 00 
'JO 00 



19 00 

80 00 

500 

10 00 
500 

9 75 
900 

91 33 
75 00 

191 00 



13 00 
695 



609 

18 

48 41 

86 69 

47 85 



630 



9 75 

60» 
560 

700 



Montf cello. Rev. Stephea Sergeant, 3 00 



New-York City, J. Middtents, . 3 00 

Do. Female B. School, No. 10, . 1 fiO 

Do. Sab. Sch. Teach, for Burmah, 1 00 

Norwich, sundry ladiv. (For. Dis.) 10 00 

Owego, Mrs. Carter, for Montl^lv 
Dis. in Rev. E. O. Hovey's 
Cong., Fountain Co., Indiana, 

Do. Two Children, ..... 

Oxford, Presbyterian Church, . 

Rochester, 1st Presb. Church, . 

Do. 3a Presbyterian Church, . . 

Western District, avails of Jew- 
elry, by Re^. S. Woodbridge, 
Agent, (For. Dis.) .... 

White Lake, Mrs. Hannah Hoi- 
lister, avails of Jewelry, (Fbr. 
Dis.) 

N. JER.— A Younc Lady, for 
valley of Mississippi, . . . 

Caldwell, Collection at Mon. Con. 

East Rochfie d, 1st Presbyterian 
Society, (For. Dis.) .... 

ReadingtowD, Mr. Hall, f 1, M. 
WyckoflT, t1> 3 00 

PENN. — ^Emmeltsburff, J. Ban- 

Iher, $5; Dr. S. Shields, $1; 
. Baugher, f 1 IS ; Mrs. Ann 
Hugh, 50 cts. I Miss B. Win- 
ters, 50 cts.; -Mr. Richenban- 
gher, 75 cts. 

Gettysburg, aContrib. (For. Dis.; 

Lancaster, Presb. Ch. (For. Dis.) 

Lancnster county, a Friend, . . 

Marsh Creek, Church and Con- 
gregation, (For. Dis.) . . . 

Do. M. Frosdier, 50 cts. ; J. Wel- 
dey, $1 ; J. Mussleman, $1 ; 
Julia A. Hoke, 50 cts. . . . 

MARYLAND.— Liberty Town- 
ship, Wm. McCurdy,(For. Dis.) 

Do. James Smith, do. 

Tom's Creek and Piney Creok 
Congregations, (For. Dis.) . 36 38 

VIR.— Prince Edward Co.^ Bri- 
ery Cong., a Lady, avails of 
Jewelry, (For. Dis.) .... 1 63 

S. CAR.— Charleston, Juv. Assoc. 
3d Presb. Ch. (For. ^is.) . . 10 00 

ALA.— Whitesburg,Mrs. Ann D. 
Bell, 1 00 

Do. Mrs. Elizabeth Gardiner, . 3 QO 

The aboV« list contains donations-*- 
In part for perpetaating Brai- 

nerd's Life, $ 60 00 

For valley of the Missiasipfii, 181 00 
For Foreign Distribution, (inclu- 
ding $30 for Greece, and $11 
for Burmah,) #384 40 

Whole amount of Donations, $1,771 13 
Received for Tracts sokl, . 4,030 36 

Totid, . . $5,801 48 



887 

8 54 

99 55 

4 OU 

53 51 



30q 

1 00 
3 00 



SPECIAL TRACT MEETING 

r 

IN THE 

0ZT7 or xraw-7oxix. 



A special public meetings was held in the Chathnni-street Cha'peli 
l^Jew-York, on Wednesday evening, November 21, for the purpose of 
awakening Christians to labor for the souls of men, in connectioii 
with the systematic Tract distribution. 

Z. Lewis, Esq. was called to the Chair, and the meeting was 
opened with prayer by Rev. Mr. Sommcks. 

Rev. William A. Hallock stated, that the meeting was called in 
view of the obligations of Christians to labor for the salvation of all 
who are living estranged from Christ. The duty had in all ages been 
neglected ; and those by whom it was recognized too often satisfied 
themselves with making pecuniary contributions ; or, if thev engaged 
in personal labors, it was without that love to soulSf that dtreciness of 
jmrposCf and spirit of prayer ^ which alone it could be expected God 
would bless. It was hoped the present meeting Would <ixett sotne 
influence in exciting Christians to fidelity and apirUualUy. Their 
efforts, in connection with the systematic Tract distribution, were a 
grand means of farthering every other means of Gospel grace, by 
bringing multitudes within theic influence whom otherwise they 
would never reach. It would not be doubted, that nearly half the 
population of this city were living, in general, quite removed fieom 
the influence of the Gospel ; and including all our new settlements, 
and the ceaseless tide <^f emigration, the proportion throughout onr 
country, there was lamentable reason to believe, was scarcely le«» 
Something was. doing to reach thi« portloii «f our population, in con- 
nection with the systematic Tract distribution in almost all the prasu 
cipal cities, towns, and villages of the country; and it could net be 
denied that the tone of the effort in this city nad given a charaeter 
extensively to the efforts of others. It was the special object of the 
meeting, first to engage the ministert of Christ to cotMider wed the 
nature of this work, and in their public discourses and phiy^ri, knd 
tnr every means which they see proper, grve a suitable dii'ectlon tn 
the efforts of others j and then to enga^^ the personai efforts ofthos$^^- 
JUS9€ made adwmcts in the Christian l%fe, and are qualified for the ter- 
▼ice. There needed a Superintendent in each ward, whoselort m 
•oitls would be tttch that all Christians would love htm— a maajof 
«inei;gy, perseverance, and self-denial—* whose minit could grasp the 
iMriBfs w4 ipirituality of tbis work, and irbo coiUd wisely oircct tk4. 



SPECIAL THACT MEETING. 

etbrti of otheri. There needed in eferjr diitrictof the city a faithful 
Christian, male or female, whose character should be adapted to the 
population, and who (not to perform a spiritless round of duty, saying^ 
the same words, and doin; the same things, in all circumstances, but 
with adaptation to the moral wants of the people, and the openings of 
access to their hearts,) would labor in every suitable way for their 
eternal good. The same individual should continue somewhat per- 
manently in the same district, that he may be to the people as a friend, 
mad not as a stranger. Thus he may induce many to an attendance 
on the house of God ; gather children into Sabbath, Infant, and other 
schools; promote the circulation and the reading of the Bible; ad- 
▼ance the cause of temperance ; and by the Tract, (read to those 
who cannot read,) and, above all, by presenting from his own lips 
the message of salvation by Christ, and pressing the Divine claims 
with tenderness and love upon the heart and conscience ; by prayings 
ybr, and, as opportunhy presents, tri/A those for whom he labors; 
bringing small circles together in the social prayer meeting, and per- 
severing in efforts for those whose attention becomes awakened, be 
an angel of mercy, and a co-worker with the Lord Jesus Christ. 

J. F. Robinson, Esq., Secretary of the City Committee, presented 
a view of the existing operations of the city. In some wards the 
superintendents and distributers were faithfully striving for the souls 
of men, and lOS persons had been reported since January 1, as hope- 
fully converted by means of Tracts and their personal labors. In 
several wards there was need of additional laborers, and greater 
devotedness. The following resolutions were then adopted, vis. 

Besohedf That in the view of this meeting the well directed efforts 
and the prayers of Christians, accompanying the Systematic Tract 
Distribution, should be regarded as an efficient means, under the 
blessing of the Holy Spirit, of promoting their own growth in grace, 
and bringing sinners to repentance. 

Ruolvedt That this meeting recognise the obligation devolving on 
Christians personally to labor, as they have opportunity, for the sal- 
Tation of those who are far from God ; and that the system of effort 
BOW presented demands the services of those who have made ad- 
vances in the Christian life, and the counsel and co-operation of the 
ministers of Christ. 

lUtohedt That it be recommended to the Board of the City Tract 
Sodetv, to re-organise this system of effort throughout the city, in the 
hope that valuable accessions may be gained txt the number of laborers, 
defects in the system be remedied, and more important results, by 
the blessing of God, be secured ; and that all those now present who 
aro willing to engage in this service be requested to give in their 
aames and residence, that they may be employed where their labors 
are most needed. 

The Rev. H. G. Litdlow, in moving the first reSblution, showed 
how holiness of heart is cultivated by holy, christian action. One 
had said that the graces of Gabriel would stagnate were he confined ; 



SPECIAL TRACT HEETINQ. 



but his spirit glows and burns, whUe flying as a swift messenger f<i 

unrr'.V^\r'?"""^'u?^ ^°^- ^ C*'""*^". "ttiLffTtK. life 
under the ablest preaching, might become theologically cornulent^ 

He conM™'^^' ?! ^f^ ^^ ^'^^'^ "'"^ ^" •'^-^ ^ould be dLrk and coW 
lie could appeal to his own conrreeation H« k^i-« j ? ?"*'f *''°' 

to «i,e .oul.' „ Tract DistrafoTi^Sd S.bta^'sew'l''T' "t"' 
were among their richest ipiritual bIe..iDg.. ' ' ~'' Teacher.. 

Mr. HARLAif Paoi, Snperintendent of the 14th W.rH ,t.t.A tu . 

w.'rne'h"n ' "i"* VT' ""* "-o"""' «<» "bu.So?ghoi. th'e 
ward, he believed only four conversioni were renon.H n . . ? 

monthly prayer meeting in January l«t!a nlrnKfth; dS.". h"^."" 
agreed to select individual, as the object of theTr m«if»/ -J^ ? '"'5 
prayers. At their meeting i" Febr„irr.bouHh«,&ndY 

Tn M T"? ■"'P"'*'' ?' ""=''»"'' """ •''ree as hopefuMy converteH 
In March, four more had obtained hope in Christ • in Ai^rJ T • " 

^u'' Vl".'""''^' -O '» «'^ *i°« January, S„./„;frl^^^ 
whom had been received as members of evangelic^ churched A 

ahree mdividu.ls hopefully submitted to God while the .li^r^^*" 
was praying with them ; and a man, who had for six ve.r. 1^. •" 
temperate, has for four months abstained entirely h^^^r^^n ! " '"" 
Christ, and now. a, he send. hi. children r.'iJe sXba^.'cto'ne 
kneels and prays with them. «"uwn scnool, he 

•ff^!"? ***'• .?• ?*«™*'' alluded to the influence thi. .v.tem «f 
•ffort IS exerting in other parts of the country. He remembrr,^ 
the interest felt we.t of the mountain., when he th"e he"rd of fhe 
.y.tematic effort commenced in Ihi. cityj and he honed to be en 
couraged in h.s expected visit to the.outh and west, by know^nV^.h..' 
the effort ...lill well .ustained in JSew-York. He relafed an /iSS.^. 
ing anecdote of an ,g.d lady. who. in distribmini T™'u h.^'" 
encountered an infidel, succeede.1 in removing his pryud?ce^indJ«5 

« led he told her he could not get over that Tract; and now not 
only Ae ha. apparently become a Christian, and is liberally patronirini 

rbrcLfthtCfir'"' "•""'' '"" '*•"«'"'"• "«• -"- "oPTuJJ^ 

The Rev. Dr. Spring, in moving the second resolution, presented 
a most solemn appeal. He had often met a little circle of Chri«tS!« 
in a period of darknegg, to consult what should be done to promof« • 
reriTal of religion; but he never before met a great audience from 
different churches, and of different denominations, thus to cinimll 
for the population of a great citj. The little circ It-s usually camriL 
the result, that they must themselves be more holy, and that tW 
would go from house to house conversing and prayinff. The sam* 
thing was proposed to be done by that large assembly. We mus^ 
begin by humbling ourselves, going to Ciod for spiritual life, and 
cherishing a love for souls. No man has more J-eligion than he 
has love for souls. He alluded to the tenderness of God-of th! 
Savior-Hrf the Holy Spirit, for the souls of men-to the wrast 
iingt of Abraham for Sodom, and the lamanudoof of David for 



SPECIAL TRACT. HErriXO. 

Absalom. He urged on all— not the young merely, hut those ad" 
vaoced in the Christian life ; upon the officers of churches, aad the 
'ministers of Christ, to unite their noblest energies, in a humble de- 
pendence on God, in seeking the salvation of souls perishing in this 
city. Let no Christian neglQct his duty that he may become better 
prepared ; let him go to God for strength, and in reliance on him, and 
with entire consecration to his glory, labor as his duty calls. Why 
should not Christians come forward, and by these labors aid their 
pastors in those parochial duties which many of them, from the pres- 
sure of their public duties, could not perform? Allusion had been 
made to the small success that attended Christian efforts during the 
prevalence of the cholera. He had thought with comfort of the 
language of the apostle^ '' No chastening for the present seemeth to 
be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless afterward it yieldeth the 
peaceable fruit of righteousness/' He hoped the time had come 
when God'a blessing should thus visibly succeed his judgments. 

The Rev. Dr. Proudfit expressed his joy in being present on such 
an occasion. He remembered when there was no Tract, Bible, or 
Sunday School Society in the United States. He knew two ministers 
of Christ, one of whom was brought to repentance by means of a 
Tract, publi^ed in Salem more than twenty years since, which he 
met on the borders of the St. Lawrence; the other, by a Tract foun(l 
in the meadows on the Connecticut. Very soon, like the £ngli|)i 
statesman on his death-bed, we shall repent of all the time we have 
spent, except what has been employed in serving God and doing good. 

The Rev. Mr. Patton forcibly urged the duty of giving our whole 
selves to God with singleness of heart, and claimed from the audience 
more than a subscription of money, which many might be willing to 
give as an excuse for neglecting duty. Many more laborers were 
needed, and those qualified for the work ; and could they not be found 
among the thousands in the churches of our city f Did not the mon- 
bera of churches acknowledge their obligation to labor for souls f 
Will they select any part of the population, and throw a wall around 
them, aiMl say, for their salvation no effort shall be madet The call 
was now on the meeting for those who were willing, personally, to 
devote themselves to this service ; ftnd who could refuse to enroll his 
name 7 

. The Rev. Dr. Jakbway, in seconding the resolution, expressed his 
delight in meeting a company of the children of God, devising means 
for the salvation of omo, in that house so lately devoted to the service 
•f the adversary. 

Slips of paper were then circulated, and the names and residenee 
ef a large number of individuals given in ; after which the exercises 
were closed by singing the Doxology, and the benediction by Dr. 
Janeway. 

We hope the friends of Christ will be roused to activity ui everx 
part of the country, and that not only Tracts will be distributed* but 
that they will be accompanied by those personal Christian laborm for 
the souls of men, whkh God will bless io reviving his wo^gt, and la 
the salvatioii of multitudes. 



- ♦» 



• * 



! 



r 



