Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 




■p- 



7 7/ j~t^sr^- y^. 



n^n* 



F 



} 



%* V * 



///^^ 



\ 



\ 





', V 



^ \ 



\ X 'A 



AMERICAN 
TKACT MAGAZINE. 



FOR THE YEAR 1830. 



VOL. V. 



NEW-YORK. 

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 

D. FuutaiR, Prinler. 
1S30. 



ZXTDEZ. 



Page. 
Actdresses of— 

Rev. John Todd ... 74 
Rev. J. B. Waterbury . . 77 
Rer. James Mc Aboy . 79 

Aged Blaaphemer converted . 127 
Agents at the West . 13—19 

Agent, labors of an . . . 18 
Agent at the West, faithfblness of 19 
Alexandria, D. C. Fern. Aux. . 44 
AUen, Rev. C. W. . .141 

Amelia Gale, at the West . 8 

Anerican Tr<ict Society — 

5th Anniversary and Reixirt 61 

Receipts 9, S3, 35, 46, 59, 83, 95, 107 

[119, 133. 143, 158 

Recent Publications 13, 24, 48, 59 

[131, 159 
Agent Sc Tracts for N. Orleans 33 
Executive Committee . . 63 
State of the Funds . . 65 

Branches &■ Auxiliaries 67 

Systematic Monthly Distribution 67 
Gyrations in the Valley of the 

Mississippi . . 68,121 
Divine Blessing on the Society's 

Publications ... 71 
Circular of the Exec. Com. . 85 
New System of Prices and 

Discounts . . . 87,97 
Tract Manual ... 106 
PainAil deficiency of means . 130 
Report of a Special Committee 
on Tract operations in Pa- 
gan lands .133 
Operations in the West to be 

sustained . 141 

Guide to the Monthly Tract 

Distribution . • 145 

American Tract Society, Boston — 105 
16th Anniv. & Report . . 89 
Receipts of— communications 
from— See Amer. Tr. Soc. 
receipts. 
Baltimore Branch ... 22 
Baptist General Tract Soc. 6tb Anni. 46 
Brewer, Rev. J. Letter from . 4 
Case, Rev. Francis H. . . 16 

Do. do. Report of agency 

in Ala. & Tenn. . . 121 
Oylon, India, Tract cause in . 49 
Christian Almanac for 1831 • . 119 
Cincinnati Branch Tract Soc. . 117 
3d Report . 92 
Cincinnati, Ohio, Young Men*s Aux. 34 
Circular of the American Tract Soc. 85 
Connectient Branch, Hartford 43 

Denominations, union of . . 125 
Dublin City Mission ... 52 
Eastman, Rev. O. Ag. for West 14, 119 
East Tennessee Aux. . 44 

Excellent fVuits from reading a Tract 40 
French Tracts on the Mediterranean 1$ 



Fa^e\ 
Germany, call for help . . lOO 

" Great Question Answered" . 6 
Greece, Tract cause in . . . 1 
Hamburg Tract Soc. . . . lOO 
Hartford, Connecticut Branch . 43 
History of American Tract Soc. 109 
HuntsviUe, Ala. Aux. ... 45 
Information, necessity of . . 123 
Laborers, want of . . .. 12.3 

Legacies 142 

Letters fVom- 

Rev. J. J. Robertson . 2 

Rev. Josiah Brewer . 4 

Female Missionary on the Medi- 
terranean ... 9 
General Agent at the West . 14 
Agent in Ohio ... 15 
Agent in Ala. A. Tenn. . . 16 
Agent in Western Penn. . 17 
A Gentleman at the West . . 54 
London Prayer Book Sc Hmnily 
Society .... 112 
Liverpool Religious Tract Soc. . 51 
London Prayer Book & Hom. Soc. 112 
London Religious Tract Soc. . 51 
31st Anniv. and Report 1L1 
Extracts from the Addresses 127 
Madras, Tract cause in . .115 

Methodist Tract Soc. 4th Report 143 
Middlebury, Vt. Aux. ... 58 
Milnor, Rev. Dr. Delegate to Lon- 
don Tract Soc. . 40»157 
Missouri and Illinois Branch . 93 

Mobile, Ala. Aux 58, 93 

Modem Greek Tracts ... 3 
Monthly Tract Dutributum-- 

Origin of .... 90 
Outline of the plan ... 26 
Progress &. Usefulness of 8, 90, 96 
[29, 30, 42, 57, 102, 103J3! 
Ten d<dlars for . . . 9 
Three Arguments for . . 20 
In Albany, N. Y. . • 55 

In Utica, N. Y. ... 55 
In Norwich, Conn. ... 57 
Hand of Providence ia . . 67 
Plea in behalf of ... 99 
In New-<>rleans . . . 102 
Guide to the .... 145 
Nature of explained . .145 
Three departments of usefulnesi^ 146 
Commended to Auxiliaries . 14G 
Duties of a Distributor . .151 
Duties of Ministers respeeting 152 
Objections answered . . 15^ 
Cheering results of . .154 
Noble examples for Imitation ].')5 
Conversions by . . . 156 
Moral Desolations ' . . . 53, 54 
Much good done with small means 94 
Must the work happily begun be 

now relinquished? .141 



I NDEX. 



T42 
33 

102 
4n 



Natchez, Mi. Auz. 
X«w-0rleaii8, grant ^ Agent fbr 

Tract distribution in 

Tract meeting at . 
New Tracts, subjects for . . 9i4 
New- York City Tract Soc. 3d Annir. 

and Report ... 25 

Female Branch ... 30 
Norwich, Con. Fern. Aux. . . 57 
Novel Tract Publication . . 109 
Objections obviated . . .122 

Two Infidel, contrasted . Ill 
Pennsylvania Branch, 3d Anniv. 

and Report . ... 91 
Philadelphia, City Tract Soc. . 35 

Tract meeting in . • 58,158 
Pilgrim's Progress, perpetuated 22, 33, 58 
Pittsburgh, Pa. Aux. . . 118,158 
Powerful preaching on a Death-bed 72 
Premiums, awai4 of . . 12, 105 
Premium Tracts 12, 21, 58, 82, 83, 106 

[143, 158 
Prices St, Discoimts, change in 85 

New System of . . . 87, 97 
Real Convert .... 31 
Report, Usefiilness of a . . 40 
Richmond, Rev. Legh's Tracts veri- 
fied .... 157 
Robertson, Rev. J. J. Letter from 2 
Roman Catholics, Light among . 127 
St. GeorgeN Ch. N. Y. Fern. Aux. 34 
St. Louis Branch. See Missouri. 
Second Commandment in an Ita- 
lian Tract ... 19 
South Carolina Brauch 4th Report 92 
Striking effects of Tracts . . 7 
Subjects for New Tracts . . 94 
Temple, Rev. D. Anecdote from 19 
" The Stanwood Family" . .109 
Tract Cause in Ceylon, India 49, 116 
In Greece .... 1 

Importance of, at South & West 125 

Opposition to . . * 1'3G 

Tract Manual . . . .106 

Tracts, Charge of Fiction in . 33 

Eager reception of . . 122 

For Pagan lands. Report on 133 

Striking effects of . . . 7, 16 

Tractg, usejulness of— 

"The Great Quenion Anewornl" 

To a School Teacher 

•' Dinah Doudney** 

•' Amelia Gale" 

•* Young Cottager** . 

" Rewards of Drunkenness" 

'♦ Kittredge's Address" 14, 17, 

[40 



7 

8 

15 

17 

139 



•* Dairyman's Daughter"" 
♦• Well-Conducted Farm" 
** A Curse made a Blessing" 
To an Intemp'^rate man in Ala 

a Husband and Wife . 

a OoDtleman in Tennessee 



17,41 
17 
31 
31 
31 
31 



TraeU^ ntefidness of-~ 

A Drunkard reclaimed . 

" Advantages of Druukmmesa" 

In the mountains of £. Tenn. . 

To a Clergyman's only Son .. 

'' a Ferryman on the Tenn. . 

" Address to a Youth'* . 

In Georgia . . . 

" Little Henry and his Bearer^ 

" Swearer's Prayer" 

" The Christian Atonement" 

To a Father .... 

" The Way to be saved" 

In Norwich, Con. 

On a Death-bed 

In numerous instances 

In New-Orleans 

Two, dropped by the way- side 

To a Ploughman 

To a Workman 

On a Steam-boat 

Distributed at Meetings . 

In Alabama and Tennessee 

To an aged Blasphemer . 

"Poor Sarah" 

" Sabbath Occupations" . 

" Tract and Peach Orchard" 

To a Gentleman in Georgia" . 

'* Heaven Lost" - . . . 

** To a Person in Lawsuit" 

** More than One Hundred Argu- 
ments, &6." 

To an aged Sinner . 

To a Family of German Emi- 
grants 140 

"Blind Ellen" ... 140 

To a Sabbath-breaker • . 140 

See Monthly Distribution. 
Tracts, want of— 

On the Mediterranean 2, 3, 135, 136 

In Turkey and Greece . . 4 

In Ohio . 

In Bombay and Ceylon 

In the Sandwich Islands 
Among the Cherokees 

In Burmah 
In China— Hamburg 
In South America 
Troy, N. Y. Aux. . 

6 Turkey & Grcecp, Tracts in 

7 Two Infidol objections coutrasted 
Utica Branch 
Valley of Mie&issippi 

■ Agents in . . . 13,6P,121 

Importance of Tract Cause in 125 

Motives to effort in . .. 126 

Washington City Aux. . . 34 

West, Affonts in . . . .13,68 



32 

32 

37 

39 

39 

39 

39 

40 

41,117 

41 

41 

41 

57 

72 

81 

lOi 

lO.'* 

117 

118 

118 

122 

123 

127 

129 

129 

129 

138 

138 

139 

139 
139 



15 



135 
135 
136 
136 
137 
137 

33 

4 

111 

3,5 



General Agent for . . 1.4 

Wignt., Isle of, Dr. Milnor's visit to 1.57 
Winchester, Vn. Aux. . . .93 
" Young Coitager" perpetuated . 94 



THE AMERICAN 

91.. T.] J.ainTAB,V, 1830. [NO. 



HI Lml."— a« Trael No. laO. 



TRACT CAUSE IN GREECE. 

Creece, unqueBtionably, now preieot* ore of Ihe moat inlerBsiiiig 
DpeniDgi in our world for Tract operilions. It will give Joy to everv 
IViend of the Americttn Tract Society, to perceiie tlie most gratiryiDj- 
results occurring from the apptopriation, made some montlis since by 
the Committee of the Sociely, througli the Rev, Jonas King- oud Iht- 
Rgt. J. J. Robertson, niiisinnariei to Greece, of the sum of $450, to 
aid them io procuring Modern-Greek Tract* for tbal suflering- coun 
try. Manj encon raging fscli, com muni cateU by Rct. Mr. King, show- 
ing the great eagerness with nhich Tracts are received in Greece 
liara been puUitfaed in the ADierican Tract Magazine and elaewherc 
Our readers will not peruse with less inlereit the foUeniog eMrscl^ 
of a letter from Rev. Mr. Robertson. 

Vol. r. 1 IWholb No. 49. 



S TRACT CaUS£ IN GREECE. [Jail' 

From Rev. J. /. Robertson, Episcopal Missionary to Oreece, dated 

Calamata, August 2, 1829. 

Dear Sir — ^Having now had some experience of the spiritual con- 
dition of Greece, and having enjoyed the privilege, through the libe- 
rality of the American Tract Society, of putting into wide, and, I 
trust, profitable circulation, a considerable number of its valuable 
publications; I employ a leisure hour in giving you some account of 
what I have seen and done. 

Of the English Tracts, I furnished a supply, during my voyage out, 
to the captain and crew of the vessel, and to my fellow-passengers, 
officers in the United States' navy^ and had the satisfaction to see 
them frequently read. On my way from Malta to Corfu, I gave a 
number of copies to three poor Irishwomen, who seemed unable to 
find sufficiently warm expressions to manifest their gratitude. At 
Corfu I gave 1000 pages to Rev. Mr. Lowndes, and the like number 
to Rev. Mr. Winnock, chaplain of the forces in the Ionian Islands, for 
circulation. To the pious captain of an Englisli eollier, I fucnished 
794 pages ; to the lady of a captain in the army 880 ; to Professor 
Bambas 272, and to an excellent servant at the inn 110. To Nicoli 
Conduri, of Lixuvri, I gave 135 pages ; to D. Maniaki, principal of the 
public schools in Ithaca 170 ; and to Signor Draculi, son of the prefect 
of the police there, 112. Besides these I have furnished, in smaller 
numbers, a multitude of persons who had become somewhat acquaint- 
ed with English. The last I pave at Fatras to an Englishwoman who 
had many years since married a Greek. This evening I have had a 
new application from a gentleman at the house of the Governor here, 
who has been acquainted with Mr. Hartley, Dr. ftorck, and Mr. 

Brewer. 

French 2Va£ts. 

Of French Tracts, I have still a small supply, but have had oppor- 
tunities of putting into circulation thrice the number which I brought 
out. In most of the towns of any size, Frencl|^8 either understood or 
is a subject of study in se viral of the principal families. The great 
dearth of books of every description makes them seize with avidity 
almost any thing that comes in a printed form ; and these little preach- 
ers of the Grospel are sure of receiving considerable attention. I have 
thus supplied many respectable families, and have heard warm ex- 
pressions of gratitude for American liberality. Several French phy- 
sicians and men of science, have also received copies with pleasure. 
The sight of our *' land's language " when at a distance from our na- 
tive home, often gives an interest to publications, which, under other 
circumstances, would be wholly disregarded. Far also from our 
dearest friends, the mind is often in a pensive frame, and the gayest 
have hours of reflection favourable to serious impressions, of which 
it may please God to make these little volumes the instruments. 

A large number of Tracts in French I also distributed among sol- 
diers of that nation in the fortresses of Corinth, Patras, Navarin, and 
Modon. At Navarin I was present when a considerable body of troops 
embarked on board a frigate to return to their native land. I had 
with me a number of Tracts, and offered them to some young officers 



J 690.] TRACT CAUSE IV aREECS. Q 

to distribiite them among the crew. At first they thought it a matter 
of merchandise, and asked the price. 1 told them that I should feel 
repaid by their trouble in circulating them. They still seemed not to 
understand the matter, when, to destroy all suspicion, I begged that 
they would hand them to the captain, that he might distribute them. 
Upon this they thanked me in strong terms, and said that they would 
see them attended to, asking, at the same time, what they could do 
to serve me. I had scarcely reached the room when one of them called 
with several officers of the land service who wanted Tracts for their 
men. They had much to say of the light and liberality of my country ; 
and seemed much interested in the account I gave them of your press. 
All were anxious to furnish me some gratification. They procured 
me the latest gazettes, brought me refreshments, helped to forward 
my letters, and the young naval officer returned very early the next 
morning with a hat for my servant. 

Modem Greek Trctets. 

With regard to Greek Tracts, I have circulated them through a very 
large portion of the Morea, and some parts of Roumelia, among all 
classes of persons, l>oth lay and ecclesiastical. JVever have IwUnetsed 
such an eagerness for books. Jn no pari of the wwrld, lam convinced, 
are they more diligently read, I have seen^ priest take a Tract and 
read it aloud on the Lord's day to a little circle of hearers, in a place 
where the sound of the preached Gospel hatf'hot been heard for more 
than a year. In fact, there are few places in Greece where the Gospel 
is preached more than three or four times a year. What better sub* 
stitute can there be, until a better order of things is introduced, than 
the circulation of the Bible and these little messengers of truth. And 
where there is such a readiness to receive and attend to these little 
silent preachers, how can American Christians, with a safe conscience, 
neglect to exercise a bounteous liberality toward their impoverished 
brethren. 

In very many places Mr. King had been before me, and the name 
of the Priest Jonas, for so they generally call him, is always pro- 
nounced with respect and alSection. At MginR, where I passed a 
fortnight, I could scarcely pass through the. streets, during the latter 
part of the time, without a throng after me, with applications for books. 
The inn was in like manner beset, and I had begun, I believe, to be 
looked upon by the landlord as almost an unwelcome guest, from the 
disorder I caused about the house. At Patras, where I spent a week, 
I had in like manner constant applications. 

Having passed a night at a mountain village, between Patras and 
Tripotamia, the next morning I distributed a few Tracts. When I 
had got about a mile from the village, I was overtaken by a young man 
with five or six boys, with a letter from the schoolmaster, begging a 
supply for his school. I told him that I could not unload the mules 
until we reached our dining-place four hours ahead, and that as I had 
already distributed go many, I could not well afford more than six or 
eight others. " IwUl readily follmo you the four hours,'^ was the re- 
pUf. I was quite overcome with this proof of earnest desire, and could 
not think of suffering him to walk eight successive houis. Ordering,- 
therefore, the baggage to be unloosed, I sent twenty Tracts to the 
master, with m^ best wtsbes for the prosperity of his school. 



4 TRACT CAUSE IN 6RE£C£. [Jan. 

I feel, my dear sir, exceedingly grateful to your Society, both for 
the good which it has enabled me to doj and for the attentions and 
friendly feeling it ha3 helped me in so many places to secure. I trust, 
however, that it will be still more liberal to all other disciples of Christy 
who may visit this interesting portion of the vineyard. 

That this may be done to still better purpose, allow me to make 
one suggestion to your Committee of selection. The number of Tracts 
common to your list and those of the presses in Malta is small. A 
grant from you, therefore, cannot at present be made as efficient as is 
desirable. Many valuable publications, peculiarly suited to Greece, 
cannot be purchased with your authority. Would it not then be well 
for your Committee to obtain copies of all the Malta publications, and 
pass judgment upon them. In this way their agents in the Mediterra- 
nean may have a greater latitude and be more extensively useful. 

I have the promise of a Greek translation of '* Conversations with a 
Young Traveller," from an able hand, a Tract which I consider highly 
important for the educated youth of Greece, particularly those who 
have visited the European universities. 1 have engaged to obtain the 
printing of an edition in America, and I trust the Society will enable 
me to fulfil the engagement. With the roost fervent prayers, for the 
ftrosperity and increase of your valuable institution, your sincere 
.'riend and brother in Christ. J. J. Robertson. 



TRACTS IN TURKEY AND GREECE. 

The above communication from Rev. Mr. Robertson, has a full cor- 
roboration in the following, which will be read with scarcely les3 
interest. 

From Rev, Josiah Brewer ^ IcUe Missionary on the Mediterrantan, who, 
having returned to the United StateSf sailed again for Smyrna from 
the cily of New- York, <ni the 9th ult. 

While I was residing at Constantinople, I had frequent opportunities 
of distributing Hebrew and Italian Tracts among Jews and Roman 
Catholics ; and though many, particularly of the latter, were gathered 
up and burnt, yet others, I had reason to believe, proved highly useful. 
The Armenians also often expressed a desire to have them translated 
and printed in their language. A few that were sent me in manu- 
script, by the missionaries at Beyroot, were received with the utmost 
eagerness. The mission press at Malta has lately begun to furnish 
these 2,000,000 of an enterprising and hopeful people, with a richer 
treasure than the caravans of their merchants bring from the farthest 
countries of the East. 

Probably, however, the millions in the Turkish Empire who pro- 
fess the Greek faith, are moat accessible to Divine truth in this and 
every form. 

When I first went over to the Princes Islands (a few miles from Con- 
stantinople,) I handed a few Tracts to the passengers and boatmen 
who were near me. Upon this they all let go their oars, and gather- 
ing about me, left their boat for some minutes to the guidance of the 



1830.] TRACTB IN rORKET AND GK£EC£. 5 

winds and wav ea ' g o great was their surprise and delight to read in 
their own tongue the wonderful works of God. Soon after my arrival, 
I sent others to the priests and principal persons of the island, and 
gave some also to a few children around my lodgings. In conse- 
quence of this, my doors were immediately thronged by clamorous 
^oupes, and for several days IcoUtd not walk the streets without be- 
ing followed by companies of children, exclaiming in their !l\irco- 
Greek dialect, ** Chelibe, chelibe, ena phUlada.*' *' Sir, sir, a littk 
book,^* I made it a rule to give but one to an individual, though I af- 
terwards added a second towards the close of my stay. Still so great 
was the eagerness to obtain the philladaSf that maay did not hesitate 
to Mtter a falsthood for this purpose, assuring me that they had not 
received copies, when I had evidence to the contrary. 

At Tatavla, a village near Constantinople, ray approach with Tracts 
literally caused " the lame man to leap as an hart." A poor Greek, 
with a wooden leg, on seeing them in our hands, came hobbling after 
us with such manifest hazard of a fall, that 1 stopped to give him one. 
This was a signal for a multitude of boys and young men to gather 
around, and I found no other means of escaping from their importuni- 
ty than by leaving a few with my companions, while I hastened for- 
ward to the school, which was the principal object of our visit. 

Ob the feast of St. George, thousands of Greelcs from Constantino- 
ple and the coast of Asia, assembled for merry-making at the monas- 
tery, on the highest summit of Prinkipo. During several successive 
days of the festival, I employed a young man to carry round both 
Tracts and Bibles for sale. Books to be given away, and books to be 
sold, are two very difiWrent things on such a holiday. There were, 
however, some pleasing instances of purcimses made ; one by a little 
boy from a town in Asia Minor. After having parted with three of his 
fonr paras for a Tract, he oflcred part of his dress for others. Of 
course we did not suffer him to be a loser by his liberal spirit. 

I am sorry to be compef.cd to add, that subsequent observation di- 
minished the favorable impression which this universal eagerness to 
obtain Tracts was calculated at first to produce. Many of those who 
could read fluently, were content with merely a hasty perusal, and 
oftentimes neglected even that. A book they seemed to regard as 
something to be kept, rather than to be read. The same remark will 
apply, though to a less extent, to the people of liberated Greece. Oae 
principal cause of this is the very defective system on which their 
schools are conducted. As they learn to read nothing but books in an- 
cient Greek, a habit of inattention and indifference is formed, which 
it must be the work of time to overcome. 

StHI there were instances not a few of a happier character. One of 
the principal merchants, who had formerly been the governor of 
Prinkipo under the Turks, I always found reading as I passed his 
door, until the contents of liis books were almost committed to me- 
mory. An elderly Greek lady, firom Constantinople, (since deceased,) 
I have seen alfected to tears on reading some of the narrative Tracts. 
Many of the children, on condition of receiving a new Tract, would 
give a very tolerable account of the last which they had studied. And 
in general, where they were not ftilly read, they were carefully pre- 

1* 



■IT" 



C THE OEEAT QUESTION ANSWERED. [Jan. 

served, and will, it is to be hoped, rehearse to others, in future years, 
the message which they were intended to convey. 

It would be tedious to dwell on the thousands of Tracts which I dis- 
tributed on the shores of the Marmora and the Hellespont ; in Troas 
and Tenedos ; in the islands and on the continent of Greece. On my 
second visit to the latter most inviting field of labor, I sold twenty or 
thirty thousand in small parcels, to be re-sold by Greek merchants in 
every part of the country, from Thermopylee to Crete. 

Through the blessing of God, in answer to the prayers of bis people, 
may their influence on that once lovely, yet now desolated region, be 
as " the dew which descendeth upon the mountains of Zion.'' Then 
shall the churches of Corinth and Cenchrea, of Thessalonica and Phi- 
lippi again revive, and " He whom they ignorantly worship," be 
loved and served by the multitudes on Mars Hill and at Athens. 

<< THE GREAT QUESTION ANSWERED. " 

[From an eflteemed clergyman in New-York City.] 
Much as the invaluable Tracts of Fiavel, Richmond, More, Hall, 
and others, have been blessed, I am of the opinion, that no Tract has 
been more instrumental in promoting the cause of Christ than Fuller's 
** Great Question Antwered." The Rev. Dr. Henderson, in an ad« 
dress delivered at the last anniversary of the London Religious Tract 
Society, bore the following testimony to the usefulness of this Tract. 
** It was about twenty-three years, he said, since he first addressed 
a letter from a foreign shore to the Committee of this Society. About 
that time had elapsed, since he gave away a Tract called, ** The Great 
Question Answeredf^ in CoperUiagen, which waa made the instrument 
of carrying the intentions of the Bible Society into effect in Denmark, 
Switzerland, Icelandf ana lastly in the great continent of Russia. In 
the Danish dominions, where, at that time, infidelity reigned almost 
uncontrolled, and the Bible had entirely disappeared, there are now, 
no fewer than 100,000 children receiving {he benefit of a scriptural 
education; In no country in the north of Europe could he (Dr. H.) 
direct their attention to the saving effects of the Gospel more visibly 
than in the kingdom of Sweden. When Dr. Paterson and himself went 
to Lapland, in 1808, they took a quantity of Tracts from Stockholm. 
There was one place where they distributed several hundreds of 
Tracto, consisting chiefly of copies of " The Great Question Answer- 
ed." Some years afterwards, they learned that a great sensation had 
been produced by these Tracts. Inquiry was excited, and almost 
immediately the saving influences of the Holy Spirit were poured 
out on those who read them. A concern about the immortal interest 
of their souls became very general, and the flame thus kindled was 
communicated from cottage to cottage, till all became thirsty for the 
waters of everlasting life." 

Time would fail, to enumerate the instances on record, where this 
Tract has comforted the mourners in Zion, and proved a safe guide 
to those who were inquuring what they must do to be saved. Such are 
my convictions of the great excellency of this little book, that I think 
no person should be ignorant of its contents, and no Tract Distributor 
should be without a constant supply of it. Permit me to add the fol- 
lowhig AarratiTe of facts, which came under my own observation. 



wisniii^f^WP^'HP 



•»"»""^^»- 



1830.] STRIKING EFFECTS OF TRACTS. 7 

« " The CfrecU Question Answered,** blessed to a Yaung Lady. 

' A few weeks since, I wag desired to visit Miss B. C, who it was said 
had for more than a week been in a state of the most awful despair. 
When I entered the room, and beheld the unhappy victim of terror, 
writhing under the most excruciating tortures of a guilty conscience, 
truly my fears were more than realized. I expected to see a poor, 
dejected,. unbelieving sinner inquiring after the way of salvation ; but 
fancy to yourself an intelligent and accountable being, with every fa- 
culty of soul and body quickened to the highest degree of sensibility^ 
looking forward to speedy and inevitable destruction. The deep and 
settled gloom upon her countenance gave appalling evidence of the 
laboring anguish of her spirit. Almost her first words were : •' Do not 
come near me lest I should contaminate you — no body is so vile and 
depraved as I am — I am lost for ever ! — God will show me no favor— 
I have been the very worst of sinners, and now all is lost for ever !" 

I asked permission to read a few passages of the Bible to her ; but 
the mention of that neglected book almost threw her into convulsions ; 
and when prayer was proposed, she exhibited the same symptoms of 
alarm, and begged that I would not add to her condemnation by at- 
tempting to employ means which, so far as she* was concerned, must 
for ever be unavailing. Never before have I beheld so heart-rending 
a spectacle, and I hope such a fcene may never be repeated. 

Finding all attempts to console her in vain, I bade her farewell, with 
the assurance that I should not fail to pray for her. Fully convinced 
that the above named Tract was adapted to her wants, I left a eopy of 
it with a member of the family,- requesting that it might be placed in 
her Chamber. Two days elapsed before she would touch it ; but on 
the third day she was seen to take it up ; and when left alone she read 
it through. On the first reading, the darkness of unbelief began to 
vanish from her mind, and after reading it a second and third time, it 
pleased God to lead her to the foot of the cross. There indeed she 
now beheld her sinfulness in its true light ; but there too she saw the 
glory and fulness of that atonement which was effected by the death 
of Christ. She now be^gan to bless God for redeeming mercy through 
the blood of Jesus, and to rejoice in hope of salvation. 

Such are the unvarnished facts in this case. I pray that their pub- 
lication may promote the glory of God, and the increase of Tract 
distribution. 



STRIKING EFFECTS OF TRACTS. 

At a meeting of a Tract Society, in Cumberland Co. Me., says an 

Agent, Rev. Mr* — stated, that what he was, he owed, in an 

important sense, under God, to Tracts given him when he was a small 
school-boy. Also that the first fruits of his labors in , was a case 

of the hopeful conversion of a young lady in consequence of the bless- 
ing of God on the reading of the Tract Dinah JDoudney. 

I also learned that the first case of awakening in a revival of religion 
in this town, where more than one hundred were in the judgment of 
charity brought to the knowledge of the truth, was that of an instruC' 
tor of a school, who was brought deeply to feel bis need of Christ by 
reading a pitc^ of a Tract, which he foaiiid^ lying upon the floor. 



S MONTHIiY DISTRIBUTION. [Jan. 

.TRACT « AMELIA GALE" FAR AT THE WEST. 

Far in the Western wflds, sayi a highlj respectable grentleman, the 
interefting account of Amelia Gale reached my hands, and such was 
the pleasure enjoyed in the perusal of that narrative, by one who at- 
tributes the awakening of his slumbering soul to the divine and pre- 
cious influence of the grace of Almighty God, that he formed a reso- 
lution to perpetuate it to the ages of posterity ; and I enclose you 50 
dollars for that purpose. 

I could add much in favor of Tracts. 7b myself they have proved 
the source of inexpressible joy ; and much instruction has been im- 
parted by my reading them to the isolated inhabitants dispersed orer 
the frontier settlements of our dearly and justly beloved coun^. I 
have learned from them one duty, which I perform, in keeping Iracts 
on my counter for gratuitous distribution. When travelling, a supply 
is also taken with me. I have placed a set of the bound volumes in 
a distant settlement to be lent out, and intend to extend my mite in the 
farther distribution of your works; and farther, I hope, ere long, to 
add a codicil to my will in a legacy to yuur all-important and most de- 
fserving institution. 

PROGRESS OF 
THE MONTHLY DISTRIBUTION. 

Rarely have we fixed our ejfres upon any Christian enterprise in 
which the finger of Divine Providence has been more distinctly visible, 
than in the progress and success of the system of monthly Tract dis- 
tribution. 

In J^ew* York City, the work has been prosecuted with great suc- 
cess for ten successive months; audit is haiti to say, whether the bless- 
ing into the hearts of the 600 Distributors ; or the good accomplished 
incidentally through thf ir personal influence ; or the salutary impres- 
sions made through the reading ofthe Tracts, is the greater g^und 
of thanksgiving and encouragement. 

In Philadelphia^ the work is undertaken systematically, and up- 
wards of 20,000 copies each of Tracts Nos. 46 and 148 arc ordered 
for two successive months. 

In Baltimore^ a most respectable Committee of one member for 
each Ward, is vigorously prosecuting the work, and 7000 copies of 
No. 226 are just forwarded for the next monthly distribution. 

Among other towns of considerable magnitude, for which Tracts 
have been ordered for monthly distribution, are Hartford, Middle- 
town, Norwich, Danbury, Conn.; Jamaica, Brooklyn, Poughkeepsie, 
Catskill, Hudson, Albany,. Tro>, Salem, Utica, Auburn, Rochester, 
N. Y.; Newark, Elizabetntown, and Princeton, N. J. ; Pittsburgh, Pa. ; 
Alexandria, Dist. Col. ; Richmond, Petersburg, Ya. ; Augusta, Savan- 
nah, Darien, Geo. ; Natchez, Mi. ; KnoxviUe, Tenn. ; Lexington, Dan- 
ville, Ken. ; Cincinnati, Ohio. 

Numerous towns of less magnitude, which are supplied from the 
General Depository in New-Tork, and many others, supplied by large 
Branch Societies, as in Boston, Philadelphia, &c. have commenced 

this work. 
In several instances it is commenced for entire Counties ; as in 



1830.] 



RECEIFTS. 



9 



Montgomery Co. N. Y.; Portage, Ashtabula, Lorain and WoodX^oun- 
iles, Ohio. 

Indeed, orders are now arriving almost daily for Tracts for the 
monthly distribution ; and the unanimous testimony from every part 
of the country is, that there is great encouragement to prosecute this 
system of effort. Wherever suitable exertions have been madC} suc- 
cess in the effort has, so far as we are informed, invariably followed. 



AGENTS AT THE WEST. 

In our next number we shall, Providence permitting, present our 
readers with many facts showing the abundant labors and animating 
success of the Society's Agents in the Valley of the Mississippi. 



$10 From a Female Missionary on the Mediterranean, 
I am glad to see in your Report, that you do not first look into your 
Treasury and graduate your efforts accordingly ; but feel that you 
must press forward, trusting in God to supply your pecuniary wants. 
None ever trusted in Him in vain. Friends, I have no doubt, will be 
raised up to contribute all the funds that shall be needed. I enclose 
my mite, ($10,) and feel grateful for the privilege of aiding so noble 
an object. 



$10 for Monthly Distribution. 
Meeting one of the professors in the Theological Seminary, says 
the Agent of the Auxiliary at Auburn, N. Y. he expressed great in* 
terest in the monthly Tract distribution in this place, and asking 
whether our means was sufficient, placed in my hands, unsolicited, 
$10, for the object. 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 



During th* numth ending December 15, 1829. 

FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 
VER. — ^PawletjRev. Fayette Shepherd, Sec. 
MASS.— Boston, Amer. Tr. Soc. John Tappan, Esq. Tr. 
New-Marlborough, (South Soc.) Dea. Gideon Canneld, Sec. 
Richmond, A. B. Rossiter, Sec. . - 
Springfield, S. Warriner, Jun. Tr. 
R. ISL.— East Greenwich, Michael Burdett, . 
Fawcatuck in Westerly, George P. Maxson, Sec. 
CONN.— Bethel, Fern. Miss Hannah Starr, Sec. 
Branford, Fern. 

Brookl]m, (Windham Co. Aux.) Edwin Newbury, Ag. 
Danbury, Horace Bull, Tr. 
East Haddam, Fern. Mrs. Sarah B. Parsons, Ag. 
Guilford, Henry E. Hodges, Ag. 
North-Killingworth, Fem. Miss Eunice King, Ag. 
West-Haven, William Stebbifis, Soc. • 
N. YORK.^Albany , Central Branch, D. McKercher, Sec. 
Auburn, C. B HotcUuss, Ag. . ■ 

Do. by their Fem. Aux. Genoa, 
ffridgehamptos, L. I. Rev. Amzi Francis, Pre^. 



ForTr 
1 20 
24 03 
556 



50 
52 



6 75 



1 
3 



00 
38 



20 00 
3 75 

12 94 

2 40 

3 19 

13 55 
101 00 

23 19 

1 56 



JDOR. 



1 85 
12 00 


225 


1 12 
1 12 


1 25 
4 31 
8 33 
1 08 
12 45 



%Zl 



10 



RECEIPTS* 



[Jan. 



Caimonfvina, John Randall, Tr. . . • . 

Carmel, Miss Elizabeth Belden» Sec. 
Chatham, Colttmb. Co. Wm. A. HtttchinflOD, Sec. 

do. do. Fern. Mrt. Cidharme Hutchinson, Sec. 

Chenango, Broome Co. Peter Lockwood, Sec 

Claverack, Fern. Hn. G. Gunn, 

Clove in Rochester, Ulster Co. Rev. B. B. WestfiUl, Pres. 
Columbia in Walton, Del. Co. Darius Seeiy, Sec 

Delhi, George Wifht, Sec 

Deposit, Rev. EUaha Wise, Tr. 

FishkiU Landing, Fern. Miss H. W. TeUer, Sec. 

Glenn's Falls, caias Hawlev, Tr 

Harlaem, Fern. Mrs. Ann Ball, Tr 

Hempstead, Rockland Co. Fern. Mrs. Elizabeth Coe, Tr. . 
Hopewell in Fisbkill, Fern. Mrs. Ann R. Swartwout, Tr. . 
Islip and Huntington South, Henry Brewster, Sec. . 
Jamaica, L. I. Marvin W. Fox, Sec. ... 

Johnstown, (Montgomery Co. Aux.) Xenopiion Haywood, Sec. 

Lansingburgfa, E. R. Parmelee, Sec 

New RocheUe, Fern. Miss Sophia Brewster, Sec. 

New-York Cily Tract Soc. Alfred Edwards, Tr. . . . 

do. by Fern. Aux. Mrs. J. R. Hurd, Tr. . 

Peru, Clinton Co. Fern. Mrs. Harriet, W. Wells, Ag. 
Poughkeepsie, Fem. Mrs. Eliza Raymond, Sec. 
Rochester, Ulster Co. Rev. B. B. WestfaU, Pres. 

Somers, John Owen, Pres 

Troy, Charles Lyman, Sec 

Upper Bovina, Robert Hamilton, Pres 

Utica, Edward Vernon, Sec 

N.JER.— Bedminster, JohnD. Worton, Tr. . . . . 
Frankfort, Sussex Co. Fem. Miss Eliza Gttstin, Tr. . 
Jersey CiQr, Fem. Mrs. Sarah Olcott, Sec. .... 

Lyon's Farms, Fen. Mrs. R. W. Lambdin, Sec. 

Newark, Fem. Mrs. Frolinghuysen, Tr 

Qran^, Allen Dodd, Tr 

Pennington, Fem. Eliza A. Rue, Sec. 

Readingtown, (North Branch,) Martin Wyckoff, Sec. 

Woodbridge, Fem. Miss Jane E. Barron, Tr 

PENN.~Erie, Fem. EmUy Wight, Sec 

Montroee, Jerre Lyons, Tr 

DIS. COL. Alexandria, Fem. Mrs. E. S. Ladd, Sec. . 

Washington City, John Coyle, Jon. Sec 

VIR.—FarmviUe, John Rice, Tr 

Leesburg, Loudon Co. 

Winchester, Daniel Gold, Ag 

do. by their Fem. Aux. Wickliff Con. Frederick Co. 

GEO.— .Augusta, Joel Catlin, Tr 

MISS.— Zion's Ch. Covington Co. Norvell Robertson, Jun. Sec. 

TENN — ^Knoxville, James Park, Tr 

Nashville, Samuel B.Snowden,Tr 

KEN.— Midway, (Liv. and Cald. Co. Aux.) Benj. G. Rice, Sec. 

Richmond, Fem. Susan H. Irvine, Sec 

OHIO — Cincinnati, Henry B. Funk, Tr 

Columbus, Aux. Dep. Rev. James Hoge, D. D. Ag. 
Martinsburgli, J. D. Johnston, Esq. Ag. ... 
MICH. T£R<— Mackinaw, Robert Stewart, Esq. Sec. 
SOCIETIES NOT AUXILUBT. 

MASS.— Williamstown, (North ViUage,) 

N. YORK^-New-Utrecht, Fem. Bib. Miss, and Tr. Soc. Mrs. 

Catharine Knapp, Tr. 

Peru, Clinton Co. Temperance Soc M. Hopper, Tr. . 

Windham, Fem. 

N, JER^Elizabethtown, in dd Preb. Ch. James Crone, Tr 



ForTr. 


Don. 




880 


4 18 


187 


4 13 


1 37 


3 38 


337 


13 92 


4 64 


9 00 


3 00 


88 78 


9 59 




400 


6 75 


225 


11 35 


3 75 


500 




12 00 


4 00 


6 42 




8 63 


287 


11 25 


3 75 


11 07 


2 91 


2 80 


93 


33 00 




14 29 




1 80 




425 00 




70 75 




527 


1 76 




500 


21 75 


725 


2 25 


75 


30 00 




12 37 


1 00 


80 00 




16 01 


534 


1 00 




500 




1 00 




20 00 


80 00 


4 00 




338 


1 12 




1 50 


14 46 




744 




11 UO 


14 00 


49 90 


31 00 


23 80 


1120 


40 00 






625 


73 37 






800 


446 85 






10 00 


400 00 




200 00 




10 00 




10 00 




100 00 




100 00 




51 37 




28 50 




12 00 




306 




350 




2 37 




300 





1830.] 



RECEIPTS. 



11 



Washington, Fem. iCss Phebe S. Miller, Tr 

VIR.— Frederielubttrg, Pr. Jiook and Tr. Soc. R. T. Thom, Tr. 
Tracts sold at the Depository to iBdividuab, inoluding $50 for 
use of room; and |3 99 cents from Agents, 



ForTr, 
50 
24 57 

^4 44 



Don. 



00 



50 



00 



00 



IHreciors for Life, 

CONN.~Bridgeport,ReT. J. Blatch- 
ford, by E. Wickes, Esq. of Jamai- 
ca, N. Y 50 00 

Mrs. Frances Blatchford, by do. 50 00 

Lebanon, Daniel Metcalf, . . 100 00 

Norwich City, Rev. Alfred Mitchell, 
by Ladies, (in part of $50,) . 30 

N. YORK i€anandaigua. Rev. An- 
sel D. Eddy, by Ladies, (in full 
of$50,) 16 

VIR^—MillwQod, Frederick Co. Rt. 
Rev. William Meade, by Ladies, 
(in frOi of $50,) ... 20 

.Shepherdstown, Rev. Jacob Beech- 
er, by individuals in Shepherds- 
town and Smitbfield, (in part of 
$50,) 46 

Winchester, Rev. William Hill, D. 
D. by Ladies, (in fuU of $54 25,) 34 25 

TENN.— Hawkins Ca Rev. James 
Gallaher, by Ladies ofRogersville 
and New Providence Congs. (in 
part of $50,) .... 29 
Members for Life. 

CONN.— Litchfield, Sirs. Lucy Shel- 
don, by Dr. Daniel Sheldon, . 20 

Ljnne, Miss Mary Ann Noyes Ely, 
1>y her Aunt, Mrs. Mary Noyes, 20 
do. Miss Mary Ano Noyes, by do. 20 
do. Matthew M. Noyes, by do 20 

Middletown, Miss Mary Ann Noyes 
Bulkley, by do. . .20 

New-Haven, James Donajghe, . 20 

New-London, Benjamin Brown, (in 
AtUof$20,) .... 15 

MiU. Thomas W Williams, (in full 
of $25,) 20 

Northford, Mrs. Mary Noyes, . 25 00 

Norwich, Chelsea Soc. Rey. Daniel 
Hemenway, by a few Ladies, . 20 

N. YORK —Augusta, Oneida Co. 
Johns. Knox, (in full of $20,) . 

Sunoel Moss, do. 

N. York city, Mrs. Susan Aycrigg, 

Miss Eliza Bancker, 

Windham, Mrs. Elizabli B. Strong, 
by Mr. A. Strong, (inpart of^,) 10 00 

N. JER. — Cranberry, Rev. Symmes 
C. Henry, by Lames, . 20 00 

Monmouth, Ist Presb. Church, Rev. 
Robt. Roy, by his Ch. and Cong, 
(inlhllof $24.) .100 

PailcersviUe, Rev. Mancios S. Hnt- 
tooi by Ladies, . . 20 00 



18 



00 

00 
00 
00 

00 
00 

00 

00 



VIR— Leesburg, Loudon Co. Rev. 
E. C. Hutchinson, by his Church 
and Congregation, . . . 30 00 
Washington Co. James King, . 20 00 
Winchester, Mrs. Elizabeth Barn- 
hart, by Mr. George Bamhart, (in 
partof$20,) . . .10 00 

Re?. Lewis Eichelberger, Lutheran 

Church, by Ladies, . . . 20 00 
TENN— BlountsvUle, Wm.Deery, 20 00 
Kingsport, Rev. Fred. A. Ross, by 

Ladies, 90 00 

~ Annual Member^. • 
CONN.-Middletown, Nath. Bacoo, 2 00 
West Haven, Mrs. Hannah Painter, 2 00 
Do. William Stebbins, 2 00 
N. YORK— New-York city, Mrs. 

Henry Barclay, . . . 2 00 
John D. Kirck, $2 ; E. Piatt, Jan. $2, 4 00 
N. JER.— Hanover, N. P. Thomas, 2 00 

Other Donations. 

R. iSL.><Providencc, John C. Cass, 2 00 

CONN. — Stonington, a Lady, . 2 00 



Albany, H. B. . . . .2 

J. D.MitcheU, . 
Blooming Grove, A. C. . .5 
Canandaigua, Ladies of Rev. Mr. 

Eddy's Ch. for Val. Miss. . 15 

D^osit, a Friend, 25 cts. Peter Pine, 
Esq. $1 ; Aaron Stiles, $1 ; James 

Stiles, $1 3 

N. York city, C. J. A. for Val. Miss. 5 
" First fruits of the practice of 
a young physician," . . 2 00 

^ Legh Richmond/' in part for 
perpetuating the " Young Cotta- 



50 
31 
00 

00 



25 
00 



ger, 



f» 



RensselaervUle, Mrs. P. Pratt, . 
Windsor, Broome Co. Jonas Wood- 
ruff, 

00 N. JER.— Newark, Miss Augusta 
Forman, for Val. Miss. . 
10 00; Old Frame, Rev. UoUoway Hunt, 
10 00: PENN.-M'Connel»burg,j8. Agnew, 
20 00 KEN— Paris, Wm. Alexander, 

The above list contains donations— 
For Val. of Miss. . 25 

In part for perpetuating the 
" Young Cottager,'* 50 

Whole amount of Donations, 1,195 
Received for Tracts sold, 3,029 



50 
3 



20 00 



00 
00 

75 

00 
00 
00 
00 



00 

00 

10 
93 



Total, $4,285 03 



H RECENT FnBi.iC4TiONS. [Jan. 

RECENT PUBLICATIONS. 

Occasional Tfoct No. 6. On Sailing yE88XZ.s out of Port on 
THE Sabbath. — pp. 12. This premium Tract, written by Mr. Ed* 
WARD £. FoRDi of Morristown, N. J. urges the strong claims of Sea- 
men on the whole community, founded on their usefuhiess, hardships, 
&c. presses upon Merchants and Ship-owners particularly, the motives 
for regardiof their moral welfare, and as a requisite thereto ceasing 
to cause their violation of the Sabbath by sailing out of port on that 
day ; and then refutes, at length, the various arguments by which the 
practice in question is vindicated. 

SERIES I.— 16 pages 48mo. Price ^ cent. - 

VOL. I. 11. Tom Steady ; a Pretty History. 

1. History of Ann Lively and her Bible. 12. The Cowslip Gatherers. 

2. LitUe Verses for Good Children. 13. llipe Cherries ; or William and Jane . 

3. Traveller's Wonders. 14. Little George and the Apple-Tree. 

4. A New Picture Book. 15. History of Beasts. - 

5. Th^ Shepherd Boy. 16. History of Harry Heedless. 

6. The Pleasing Instructor. VOL. U. 

7. A Pretty picture Book. 17. The Four Seasons. 

8. The Twelve Months of the Year. 18. Pretty Stories for Good Children. 

9. The Fourth Commandment. 19. Alphabet of Lessons for Children. 
10. Good Examples fi>r Good Children. SO. Good Child's Soliloquy. 



AWARD OF PREMIUM, 

For the best Tract to influence the Young to Abstinence from 

Ardent Spirit. 

The Publishing Committee of the American Tract Society an- 
nounce, that there were submitted to them by the Corresponding 
Secretary, as received by him previous to the first day of November 
last, 24 manuscript Tracts for the above premium, which were all 
carefully examined. On opening the sealed envelope which accom- 
panied the Tract on which the choice of the Committee fell, the au- 
thor was found to be Rev. Austin Dickinson, of New-York, to whom 
the premium of fifty dollars was awarded, and its reception generous- 
ly declined by him. The Tract will immediately be stereotyped and 
published. James Milnor, Chairman. 

New- York, December 10, J 829. 

TVact on the Character and Prospects of the Heathen. 

The Publishing Committee having made a full examination of the several Tracis 
submitted to them, on the Character and Prospects of the Heathen, have Resolved, 

1. That, although they consider many of the Tracts referred to them as possessed 
of very considerable merit, no one, in the opinion of the Committee, comprises all the 
requisites which a Tract on that interesting subject ought to embrace. Therefore 
resolved, ' ^ 

2. That the Committee feel themselves obliged to decline awarding the premium 
to either of the Tracts received ; and that the premium be placed at the disposal of 
the donor. Also, resolved, 

3. That the Chairman make public annunciation of the decision of the Committee. 

JAMES MILNOR, Chairman. 

ttT The attention of those interested in the Monthly Tract Distri- 
bution is invited to the statements relative to that salrject on the cover 
of this number of the Magazine. 



THE AMERICAN 



Tkta T/m ihnt bnwibt nnu him childnn, Hat ke duwld pot hli 1w»d> an Aem 



Noys, who bare been canrribaling of their aabBtBDce, aad offeriag 
ibeir prayen to God for tbe Aroericao Tract Society, can fail orn- 
gUNiiuf with ileep tnlireal the auccei* of the Society'* operatmn* 
among the 4,000,000, or 6,000,000 of our couotryiMa Wcit of Uw 
Alleghap]' Kioanlaina. While we mj thii, we do not orertook the 
Act, that mnaj tovni and >tita|:es of the Weal are ricbljr lupplied 
with the means ofGotpal grace; hut that the ipirUnal waDtiDfaver; 
large portion of all the pt^laiioo, particularly thatdlipenadlbrou|b- 
•at the alnoM boundlHi N«« SeltlemeDte, ere «ucb aa to eill upon 
every lincere folio wer of the LordJe^ii ChiiH to di Aiee •meag tb«D 
ibe Ooipel, in every form calcnlaled to gain acceta to the human loiBd, 
I* denied, we lappaae, hj po eDlishleBcd Cbrifliao. 

Vei.V. 2 [Wwa^Ko. SOi 



14 AOEITTS AT THE WEST. [Feb. 

This duty might be urged by a Tariety of motiires ; but the Divioe 
institution to save men from eternal death through the promulgation 
of the Gospel, and the command of the grei&t Head of the church to 
publish it to every creature, outweigh all other considerations; and 
leave no room for heutation or delay. The duty is plain. We know 
it. We roust meet it in the great Day ; and we can meet it with joy 
only aa we are faithful in its diicharge, now, *' while the day lasts, 
before the night cometh wherein no man can work." 

The following facts, communicated by the laborers in this wide 
field, will show, to some extent, what success has thus far crowned 
their efforts, and what are the encouragements to sustain them and 
still to send forth more laborers int« the whitened harvest. 

FROM THE SOCIETY'S GENERAL AGENT AT THE WEST. 

Facts are continually occurring v\ hich show the cordiality of ac- 
tive £v angelical Christians at the West in reflation to the Tract cause ; 
and that God is here opening before us a wide door and effectual, 
Notwithstanding the number of Agents now employed, I feel that the 
country is really suffering for the want of more. I have my eye this 
moment on three different states which gieatlv need the labors of a 
faithful persevering Agent in each for at least a year; and there are 
other portions of this wide field, some of them exceedingly destitute 
of the meHus of religious knowledge, where ten other Agents might 
be immediately and most usefully employed. God is manifestly bless- 
ing the Tracts ciii'ulated as the instrument of great good. Perhaps 
no Tracts have been more evidently useful than those on Intempe- 
rance. The effects of Kittreds;e^s Address, in towns and counties 
where it has been extensively circulated, are heard of in every direc- 
tion. A. number of men are known to have been influenced by it to 
quit the luc ofwhiskfy, and engage ip the cause of Temperance. One 
man was seen standing in the middle of the room in his own house, 
holding this Tract in one hand, and at the same time swinging his 
fist and uttering hard words against the man who had sent him the 
Tract, and against ministers — bur he quit drinking. At the raising of a 
building a few days aAer, it was observed that he drank nothing ; and 
he has since drunk no intoxicating liquors. One mercantile house, 
in the place where I am now writing, which has dealt largely in whis- 
key, has quit the trade altogether. 

I have already informed you of the spirited efforts made in various 
places, particularly in several counties of the Western Reserve, Ohio, 
to supply with a Tract, monthly, every family willing to receive Tracts. 
The Synod of Ohio and the Cincinnati Synod, at their late meetings, 
each adopted the following resolution, viz. 

** Resolved, That this Synod highly approve of the system adopted 
by several of the Branches and Auxiliaries of the American Tract So- 
ciety, of giving one Tract monthly to every family withm their limits ; 
and that we recommend to the churches within our bounds to adopt 
the same system." 



IBflO."! • AGENTS AT a-HE WEST. 15 

FEOM AN AGENT IN OHIO. 

The County where I am now Uboriog is very destitute of religious 
instruction. There are 6 or 7 small classes, or churches, of different 
denominations, who have preaching, on week days, about once a fort- 
night. In this and the adjoining County, I have given donations of 
15,<X)0 pages of Tracts; and the few who have taken an interest in 
the Tract Society have, in one of the Counties, resolved to attempt to 
supply every family with at least some Tracts. So far as I can learn, 
more than^half the families in those Counties are destitute of the Bible. 

A Circuit Judge, residing here, told me that, in trying a certain 
cause, two individuals wfere brought in as witness^s-^one 15, and the 
other 11 years of age. On questioning them respecting the nature of 
ah oath, he found that they had never seen a Bible, had never attend- 
ed any school, or religious meeting ; had never heard of future punish- 
ment, of God, or of the great Adversary of souls, or at least knew not 
the distinction between the two, or any of the attributes of either. The 
father of the children was confused at the questions asked, and upon 
inquiry, the Judge found htm to be a Justice of the Peace in the Coun- 
ty, who could neither read nor write. 

I could detail to you numerous other facts which would show, in a 
very striking manner, the need of a more general diffusion of know- 
ledge. I«am surprised, when I think how Christians in the older set^ 
tlements have neglected the moral and relic^ious inatruction of these 
new states. Infidelity is gaining a strong foothold, and soul-destroying 
errors are without sharaefacedness. 

It is gratifying to have confidence, that Christians at the East are 
praying for us, and for the cause for which we labor. Those prayers 
will prevail before the throne of God. The cause of Christ will yet 
prosper here. The harvest is ripe; let the reapers thrust in the sickle, 
and let many more laborers come into the harvest. 

The friends of Tracts have great reason for encouragement. I have 
organized, in the Mate of Ohio, 87 Auxiliary Societies, and visited 19 
others which were previously organized. These Societies are doing 
great good, and God is blessing their efibrts. 

An elder in a church where I formed an Auxiliary last winter, re- 
cently informed me that The Voung Cottager, which he sent to his 
daughter living at a distance, had been instrumental, he trusted, in 
bringing her to Christ. 

A minister in the Baptist Connexion informed me, that last spring 
he received, from an Agent of the American Tract Society, a donation 
of 1500 pages of Tracts, which he distributed in a very destitute place; 
where now much religious feeling was manifested, though no means 
had been used to call up the attention of the people to the subject of 
religion, except the Tracts and two sermons he had preached. 




cognised him as one whom I bad publicly addressed about half a year 
before. He reminded me of my discourse, and particularly my closing 
remarks on Intemperance. " I had then," said he, " taken my whis- 
fcBy barrel to. the distillery for my gummer's ase. Bat I went name- 



diftCely ftoit conntermuided the ofcUr. I hav« gathered my harrest 
vritbout a drop of intoxicating liquor ; and not only myself, but Jtx 
athersy bave entirely abstained, one of whom had been guilty of great 
excess in drinking." 

I must tell you also, that if I have met with some dark spots in this 
state, I hare met too with some l>right examples of Christian benevo- 
lence. I have visited one man, in ordinary circumstances, who works 
bard and dresses plain, and lives frugally, who has given $dOO daring 
the last year, to the Benevolent Institutions of the age^ ^76 of which 
was a donation to the Tract Society. He is such a Christian as is de- 
scribed by St. James, one who manifests his faith by his works. Sure- 
ly if aU professed Christians had such a spirit, it would not be long 
before the name of Jesus would be heard and praised far as the ruins- 
«^ the fall have spread. 

FROM AN AGENT IN ALABAMA AND TENNESSEE. 

In many Counties where I have labored, there is a great destitution 
of the privileges of the Gospel. Tracts are much needed, and seem to 
be almost the only means of grace which can be used with many in 
the sparse and destitute settlements. I have been repeatedly told by 
solicitors, appointed to obtain subscriptions for the Tract cause, that 
they have been asked by those to whom they applied. What i%a Triut ? 
They had never seen one;; but when Tracts were shown them they 
appeared pleased, and anxious to procure them. 

The following extract from the minutes of the Synod of Tennessee* 
at their meeting in October last, is some evidence of the interest felt 
by enlightened Christians here in the cause of Tracts. 

*' Whereas Synod are apprised that the Rxt. Francis H. Case, an 
Agent of the American Tract Society, is now in this section of country 
for the purpose of forming Auxiliary Societies, Resolved, that this 
Synod express the warmest approbation of this medium of distribu- 
ting Evangelical truth ; and earnestlj? recommend to all the lovers of 
the Lord Jesus Christ, and of their fellow-men, to give their efficient 
co-operation in this labor of love, by furthering the object of said 
Agent." 

I have succeeded in forming numerous Auxiliary Societies, the 
amount of the contributions to which has. in many instances, l>een 
very liberal ; and through the instrumentality of which, some hundredt 
of thousands of pages of Tracts have been already put into circulation. 
The evidence of the usefulness of these publications is abundant. We 
cannot expect to know, in this world, all thie good they are the means 
of accomplishing. Such a disclosure will be made only at the Great 
Day. Tet we are permitted to know enough of their effects to stimu- 
late us to activity in circulating them among our fellow-men. In addi•^ 
fion to the repeated instances I hsive already communicated, in which 
they have been blessed, I now give you the following, received from 
the most authentic sources. 

Sinking Sjffecta of Tracts, 

A pious man In Alabama informed me, that he brought a quantitv 
Qf Tracts frosi Sooth Car«BD« into (h# plaet where hetben cesided> 



V^SO.] At»£KTS AT TBE WEST. 17 

ftbeut ten years ago, whea the settlement was new and the people 
had no religious books, which es^erted a very happy influence ; and 
that he had known several persons who had been awakened, by the 
reading of Tracts, to a serious attention to the concerns of religion. 

Mrft. B., an intelligent and pious lady of Tennessee, informed me 
that Tracts were the principal means of awakening her attention to 
4he subject of religion. She is now a warm friend of the Tract cause. 

Mr. McM. of the county of W. said he had been in the habit of 
giving Tracts to his scholars. He gave the Retoardsof Drunkenness 
<o the daughter of an intemperate man. The father sent back the 
Tract by the little girl, telling her to say to Mr. McM. from him, '* If 
be could not give her a kietter book, to give her none." He also 
threatened to burn the Tract ff it were returned. Mr. McM. assured 
the girl it was a good book. She took it home again ; it was not burned ; 
but the man soon quit drinking whiskey. 

Mr, C, of the county of M.; gave Kitfredge^s Afldress to a Mr. H., 
an intemperate man, living in that vicinity. Mr. H. met him a few 
weclks afterwards and said, ** 1 did not know that you were so good a 
friend to me. Some wished me to take Dr. Channbers' medicine. 1 
<ould not stand that — but I like the little book you gave me very much, 
i have loaned it to my neighbors; I wish to have them read it, and 
wish to read it again myself. It contains the truth. The writer of it 
is a great man." 

Mrs. E.*, of the same county, was confined to a bed of lingering sick- 
ness. She had lived in igiiorance and utter neglect of religion. Two 
pious young ladies called to converse with her ; but she wished them 
not to converse on religious subjects, for she said she was gloomy 
enough already. They replied, ** We wish not to make you gloomy, 
but that you may be enabled to rejoice in God. They conversed with 
her, and afterwards furnished her with a Bible, and at another time, 
with the Dairyman's Daughter, a part of which they read to her. Her 
husband, aAer their departure, also read it to her repeatedly. She 
became very fond of hearing it; and about one hour before her death, 
said, ** I have been very much enlightened by hearing that Tract. I 
ftel something of the submission which is there described.*' 

After preaching on the subject of my agency at B , the Rev. 

Mr. R., previous to our proceeding to form an Auxiliary, made some 
remarks to the people, in the course of which he said, that he gave 
the Tract entitled the Well Conducted Farnit to aa intemperate man 
who was laboring for him, and asked him if he would read it. He 
« promised to do so. Mr. R. was absent from home for some time after 
this; but on his return, found that the man, to whom he had given 
the Tract; bad relinquished the use of whiskey ; become hopefully 
pious ; and united with the Methodist church. The Tract was the 
means of his awakening. 

FROM AN AGENT IN WESTERN PENNSYLVANIA. 
The Tract cause is going on here better and better. Clergymen 
and private individuals, of different denominations, give their cordial 
co-operation. Prejudices against the great plans of benevolence, for 
which our age is distinguished, are removed ; liberal contnbution$ are 
in m any instances made ; and much good is done. 

2* 



H AOJEHTf AT VBM VTSST* {Feb:. 

I olUn preach, ia behalf of the Tract cauee, to tuf €§ngrtgtdUm 
tath dojf, for many day$ in JuecMfion. . Doriof ooe week recently, I 
preached ten times, and attended eQmUmUjf to Tract budnem. I have 
great reason for thankfulness, that my health continues so good, in 
the midst of such arduona Uhors. The attention to preaching ha«- 
been great After preaching lately, on a Lord's Day evening, a num*- 
her of parsons expressed a desire to converse with me oa the concern^ 
of the soul — four of them, I found, were rejoicing in hope, and the 
others anxiously inquiring, " What must we do to be saved T* 

On the Sabbath, a week prerious, an unusual serioasness was very 
apparent. The bouse, which ordinarily holds the congregation, would 
hold but little more than half the Females ; aiifd the mates, old and 
young, sat around the house on seats prepared on the spur of the oc« 
casion, from rails, boards, be. Many were suffused in tears. Multi* 
tudes came and shook hands with me, with great cordiality. One man 
informed me that my first sermon on the lK>rd's day was the tevenih^ 
he had heard me preach. 

Thjaevening I have attended one of the most interesting meetings^ 
I ever attended. When I was here last, a number of individuals ex* 
pressed a desire to converse with me on the state of their souls; and 
as my pressing engagements rendered it then impracticable, I ap» 
pointed this evening to give all who wished the opportunity. The 
evening has been rainy-^l expected a few ; but the room and^tlic 
kitchen, and passage, as far as I could see, were crowded ; and almost 
all seemed deeply affected^ and anxious for their souls* salvation. I 
conversed with them till nine o'clock; and now, between 10 and 11, 
several are still conversing, while I am writing. My labor m sufficient 
to fill up every hour. I end the day fatigued, but rise in tha moruin*: 
refreshed for new efforts. 

I preach as if there were but two parties— God's and the Adver« 
sary's ; and in connexion with my efforts for the Tract cause, endea-^ 
vor to do all I can to bring those whom I address to give their owi| 
hearts to Christ—- to enlist themselves in the cause of Teraperanca— 
t9tal abttinenee from intoxicating drinks — and to consecrate them<. 
selves, without reserve, to the advancement of the eternal interests o|' 
their fellow-men, and the blessed cause of our Redeemer on the earth. 
In one place, the very men who argued agsiuat me, when I first went 
4o them and preached, ** Touch not, taete not, handle not," are now 
the leaders of the Temperance cause. In another place, where! found 
them all opposed to the Temperance Soeioty, having called with the 
aftinister on » merchant of the place, thji Bottle was brought for^ 
ward. 1 began a lecture on total abstinenee. The minister could not 
accord with my opinions ; but when I saw him afterwards, he told 
me he was convinced-— that *' Touch not, taste not handle not," should 
thenceforth be his motto.! He had conversed with his family on the 
subject, and had what was in the decsnter poured away— Ac could 
not have ii drunk about hU htmte — he ooutdnot gme ii a»ay — nor §eU 
fi. His son at first desired to sell it; but on hearing another discourse 
«n Temperance, he told his father he did not wish lb sell it. Three 
Temperance Societies are now formed in the county, and others are 
|g progress. 

SeTccal Tfiiy strflfci^g additiooal evidenses af the Messing of 6#d 



laaO.] ITAXrAfI ^ftACTS. 19 

on o«r IftbcMt, I would relate;; but I am now •xceodm^ly fWHgu^d, 
aad nrost briii|^ my letter to a cloie. I am weary in the work, but not 
of it, I find M many things to sweeten the labor in the evident bleat« 
ittf of God on Tracts* 1 trust I feel willing to labor wherever the Com^ 
mitteo think I can do the most good in this Messed cause ; and to cod- 
Itnna my labon (til Ifdi in ffte wwh. 



TESTOfONT CONCERNING ONE OF THE 80CIETT»S AGENTS 

AT "raE WEST. 

I have passed several days, says a cordial friend of the Tract cause, 
with Rev. Mr. , Agent of the American Tract Society. Last week 

hepreaeJwifmirteen times, usuaUjtf to crowded, and sometimes very so- 
Icmn Congregations. There is, in a number of places where he has 
preached, an unusual and apparently increasing attention to the sub- 
ject of religion. 

Not only the general interests of religion, but the cause of Tempe- 
nmce^ as well as that of Tracts, has evidently been promoted by his 
labors. His untiring seal, and the manner in which he proceeds, con* 
vince all, whose miods are open to conviction, that he, at least, is 
ftrmly persuaded, that the cause of Tracts is one of the best causes 
to which a maa> can devote bis life. ** Do you ask," said he to hif 
audience on a certain •occasion, after preaching a heart-searching difi*> 
course, ** Why i preach, when going about forming Tract Societies 2 
Many years ago, i resolved to give up a profitable employment, and 
go from place to place preaching the Gospel ; now, I believe I can do 
as much good preaching as I could then, and twice as much good in 
the cause of Tracts besides." 

To another audience he said, '' So long as there are Tracts to be 
distributed, from Maine to Florida, or from the Atlantic to the re- 
motest settlements of the West, I intend to go forward till I fall in the 
work. I wi»h to die at my post, and I consider being engaged in thsg 
work, being at my post."^ 

With such an example before me, yuu will naturally suppose, that^ 
if I possess any of the Christian spirit, it cannot but be aroused to ac 
fion. I hope I shall long profit by what 1 have seca-and heard from 
Ihis devoted servant of Christ. 



TItE SECOND COMMANDMENT IN AN ITALIAN TRACT. 

At the last anniversary of the American Tract Society, the Rev. 
^. Temple, Missionary from Malta, related Che following anecdote : 

My Teacher,, a native of Italy, came into my room one morning,, 
and took up a Tract then lying on my table, and immediately cast his 
«yes upon the Ten Commandments, which I had inserted at the end, 
Ae soon as he had read tMt second commandment, he expressed much 
astonishment, and asked whether this was a part of the Decalogue ? 
1 immediately showed him this commandment in Archbishop Mar«- 
Hni*s Italian translation of the Latin Vulgate. He could not suppress 
his feelings ef sorprjse e* reading ihi» in the Italian Bible, and in a 



%ii UOSTBLt SISTftlBUTIOff* [Feb.. 

version too •vthorued by the Pope. I have livedo i aid'he, fifty years ; 
have beea publicly educated in Italy ; have had the corainand of a 
regiment of men, and fought in many campaigns, but till this hour I 
never knew that such a commandment as this is written on the pages 
of the Bible!' 

This anecdote is sufficient to show bow studiously this command-' 
ment is kept from the knowledge of the people in Italy. So far as I 
am able to learn, it is not inserted in any of the Catechisms used by 
the Roman Catholics on the continent of Europe, and I believe the 
same is equally true in all other partsof the world where their religion 
prevails. 



THE MONTHLY DISTBIBtlTIOlT, 

Origin of this System of Effort. 

The inquiry has been frequently made, * How did this system 
originate ?'* We love the system better because we think we bav|^ 
seen how, in the Providence of God, it originated. Christians in 
New-York, when praying and laboring, and giving, that Tracts might 
be sent to every destUtUe family in the Valley of the Mississippi, were 
led to ask, *' Are there not multitudes of families in these older states, 
and even in our own city, who neglect all the means of Gospel grace^ 
who are perishing for lack of vision, and whom it is as truly our duty 
to supply with Tracts as any in the Valley of the West?" The sub- 
ject came up for consideration before the Board of the New- York City 
Tract Society — the obligation was felt — ^the duty was clear — and the 
system of giving one Tract monthly to every family willing to receive 
iif that none might be passed by, was commenced withoyut delay in 
that city, and has been vigorously prosecuted tiH the present hour. . 

Progress and Success of the System. 

Bridgeton West, N. J.—*' God has blessed the distribution of Tracts 
monthly in this town — there are from 15 to 20 souls, who are anxious-^ 
ly inquiring the way to Heaven, part of whom have been awakened 
by Tracts.'' 

Troy, JV. K— " The Distributors* reports for December are more 
interesting than any previously made. Several instances of hopeful 
conversion have occurred through the instru mentality of Tracts dis- 
tributed in the previous months." 

Poitghkeepsie, N. Y — *' In July last, about 30 females, with limited 
means, and many fears that they should not be able to continue the 
work, commenced the monthly distribution of Tracts. The good hand 
of the Lord has been with them to help them; and they now present 
their mi^e ($5,) to aid in the distribution oi Tracts at the West.'' 

Boston, Mass. — '* We have had notice, within the last six weeks, of 
as many as 12 or 15 places in this vicinity, wlfieh have commenced 
the monthly distribution." 

Philadelphia.'^ k Circular has been issued by a Joint Committee 
from the Pennsylvania Branch and Philad^phia City Tract Societies, 
explaining the system of inonthly distritmtion, containing a copy of 
all the Cards made use of in that city ; and presenting the principal 
considerations that urge to the adoption of this system of effort. Eight 
Auxiliaries in the vicinity of Philadelphia are pursuing the same sys- 
tem and present very interesting reports. 



ia80.] 



SOIfTBLr MiTEraUTIOir* dl 



Reading, Pa,-^*^ The town embraces about 1000 familieg, aii4 ii di- 
vided iato 16 districts, each assigned to one Distribotor. The first 
Tract selected was Tkt Day of Judgment' Only 7 families declined 
receiving- it. When the Distributors met to report to each other their 
success, they found thit; whilst they watered others, they themselves 
were watered by the Spirit of God*. They felt that God bad owned 
and smiled upon tbeir efibrts." 

Pittsburght Pa, — " A public meeting was called in November, when 
a considerable number of the most respectable Ladies and Gentlemen 
of the place came forward andi>ffered their services in the Monthly 
Tract IHstribuiion. Committees were appointed for each Ward, and 
the Distributors are now at work, going through this city in the length 
and breadth thereof. I do hppe, and pray, and believe, that this effort 
may be the tnorning star of brighter days for the churches in this city." 
Of three Tracts, 4,000 copies each are ordered. 

Washingtoiit Pa.-^** At the monthly concert, this evening, a Com- 
mittee reported that they had, efuring the day, collected funds enough 
to sustain the monthly distribution throughout this borough for one 
year, and a Committee is appointed to select 12 difierent Tracts, and 
order a supply of 300 copies of each. 

Lexington, Ken. — Of 12 Tracts, 1000 copies each are ordered for 
monthly distribution for one year. 

Danville, Ken. — ** The distribution of Tracts is regularly continued 
in this village monthly, and I may add, daily, by members of the Fe- 
male and Young Men's Auxiliary, and other individuals. The good 
result, in some degree, is certainly visible. Men who for years have 
indtt]|red in dissipation, and been very far from religion, have been* 
led, chiefly, there is reason to believe, through the instrumentaKty of 
Trfltcts, to read the Bible, to attend the house of God, to send thefr 
children to Sabbath Schools, ami some of them evfU to become teach- 
ers themselves. May Almighty Qod for ever biees |dl writers, distri- 
butors, and readers of Tracts. 

We had prepared other items for this number oflhe Magazine ; but are eompelled 
to emit them for want of room««~Thoae adopting the system of monthly distributioa 
sn referred to tite •ugffeatioas, aad particulariy the Cards, oa the inside pf the cover^ 



PREMltJltt OFFER EI>. 

• 
A benevolent individual has placed in the hands of the undersigned the sum of f 50, 
to be awarded by Rev, Gardiner Spring, D. D., Rev. Sami^I H. Cox, D. D., and 
Rev. Charles P. M'llvaine, to (he author of the best Tract addressed to " the ManU' 
fketwrtr* of Arient SpiriU, and to tkooe who fumith moterials for the manufaC" 
tery,*^ which shall be presented on or beftire April 1, 1830. The manuscripts shoald 
^mok be accorapaaied by a sealed envelope, contoining the name ci the writer, which 
wifl not t>e opened except in the case of the successlhi Tract, and should be address- 
ed (P99t paid) to WlLUAM A. HALLOCK,144 Nassau-street, New- York. 



A premium of $60, to be awarded by Rev. Gardiner Spring, D. D. 
and ReT. Thomas De Witt, D. D. of New-Tork, and Rct. Charles P. 
M*llvaioe, of Brooklyn, is offered for the best Tract on Duelling^ 
which shall be presented on or before March 1, 1890. The manu- 
seripts to be addressed to Mr> WUlimn 4. 9alh€k, W- 144 A'aimu- 
ttrect, NeW'Tork, 



BAIiTIMORB BRANCH. 

The Third Aoniversary of this Society was held Nov. 20, 1829, in 
St. Peter's Church, Sharp-street ; the president, Rev. J. P. K. Hen- 
shaw, in the chair. The Annual report was read by the Secretary, 
Rev. J. G. Morris, after the accepjtance of which, the following^ spirit- 
ed resolution was unanimously adopted, viz. 

Resolved, 7%cU this Society, with an humble reliance on Divine 
aid, will endeavor to form, toithin one year, a Tract Society in every 
District and eonfpregation which shall cheerfully co-overate with us in 
this cause, throughout the state of Maryland, with reference to supply^ 
ing with Tracts every family in the state which is witling to receive 
them.'' 

Receipts, during six months, since the preceding anniversary, 
$713 87. Circulated, during the same period, l»esides 62 bound vo- 
lumes of Tracts and 21 copies Rise and ProG^ress, 511,286 pages ; of 
which 183,809 pages were distributed gratuitously by the various 
Committees of the Board, &.c. Of the Christian Almanac lor 1830; 
5050 copies had been procured. Number of Auxiliaries recognised 33, 
of which only 26 have yet contributed to the funds of the Society. 

The adoption, by this Branch, of the above very important resolu- 
tion, iif reference to a State embracing about 450,000 inhabitants, calls 
for special gratitude to God ; and if such a work can be done in Ma- 
ryland, can it not be done throughout our whole country ? We hope 
every other Branch and Auxiliary of the American Tract Society will 
consider this example, and fail not to carry a similar resolution inte 
effect ia their own appropriate field of labor. 



PROPOSAI* FOR PERPETUATING BUNYAN'S PIL- 

GRIM'S PROCRESS. 

The following communication was recently received from a distin- 
guished individual, viz. '^ Feeling, that, as a means under. Providence, 
aided by the all-powerful influence of the Holy Spirit, the salvation of 
thousands may depend on stereotyping and perpetuating, by the Ame- 
rican Tract Society, Bunyun's Pilgrim's Progress, I hereby offer one 
hundred dollars toward defraying the. expense — provided nine others 
will each contribute the same sum, for the same object, on or before 
the Anniversary of the Society, to be held on the 12th d^^ of May 
ensuing." 

The Publishing Committee have unanimously approved this excel* 
lent work, to be published with the notes of Rev. Dr. Thomas Scott, 
somewhat abridged. The expense of stereotyping, printing and 
binding the first edition, is estimated by the Committee at ^I,000« 
The avails of the first edition, sold at cost will enable the Society to 
print a 2d edition ; the avails of the 2d. a 3d, Stc— -and thus the work 
wilt be perpetuated, and may be circulated, from year to year, with 
the other publications of the Society, to multitudes of our country- 
men, especially in the New Settlements, who otherwise would never 
have this help in their '< Progress through this world to that which is 
to come." 

It is confidently hoped, that other benevolent individaals will cheer> 
M\y upite in this excellent design. 



18d0.] 



RECEIPTS. 



2$ 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TEEASURY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 



During the monik euding Jammary 15» 1830. 

FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES 

VER.^— FHwlet, Rev. Fayelte S»iepherd,Sec. 
Shorehain, Levi O. Rirchard> Ap. • 

Do. Fem Miss Hand, Tr. 
MASS — Bostou, Am. Tract Soc. John Tappan, Esq. Tr. 
R. ISL. — Bri«t(J, Fem. Miss Hannah Church, Sec. 
East Greenwich, Mr Burdett, Tr. 
CONN. — Bozrah. Erin Gifibrd, Sec. 
Brooklyn, (Windham Co. Auz.) Edwin Newbury, Ag. 
Danhury, Horace Bull, Tr. 
DarifD, Lewiit Weed, Sec. . 
Grnenwtch, (St^mwich Soc.) Wm. Smith, Tr. 
Guilford, Henry E. Hodge«, A|r. 

Humphrey sville in Derby, Mrs. Hannah Thompson, Sec. 
New-Haven, A Townseud, Juu. Tr. 
Norwich, Fem. Misii Sarah Backus, Sec. . 
Saybrook, 2d Soc. Mrs. A..P. ChampUn, Ag. 
Sharon, David G<»uld, Ag. .... 
Watertown, Benjamin De Forest, Ag. 
N. YORK^^Aadover, Alleghany Co. Fem. Lydia Allen, Tr. 
Bethlehem, Robt. Denniston, Sec. 
Carmei, Red Mills, Fem. Pliebe Smith, Sec. 
Cherry Vjlley, Rev.- AlemMcCowan, Sec. 
Fisiikill, Fem. Mrs. S.irain*. Dewing, Sec- 
Fishkill Laiidiug, Fem. Miss M. W. Teller, Sec. 
Jamaica, L. . Marvin W. Fox, Sec. 
Middleiown, Del. Co. John Dixoii, Jun. Tr. 
New-Windsor, Orange Co. Silas Corwin, Tr. 
New-York City Tract Soc. Alfred Edwards, Tr. 

Do. by Fem Aux. Mr^. J. R. Hurd, Tr. 

Do. St« George's Ch. Fern. Miss Ann Dominick, Tr 
Pleasant Valley, J. Gabaudan, Tr. 
Sandy Hill, Washington Co. R. C. Gibson, Sec. . 
Shelter Island Fem. Mary C Gardiner, Sec. 
Troy, Abner Loveland, Tr. 
Utica, Edward Vernon, Sec. 
Virgil, Fem. .... 

N. JER,. — Amwell, JohnHageman, Sec. . 
Baskingridge, Horace Sheldon, Tr. 
Fleiningtoo, (New Soc.) Rev. John F. Clark, Sec. 
Middletown Point, Wm. H. Whitlock, Sec. 
New-Shannack, Nicholas Williamson, Tr. 
Princeton, Nassau-Hall, James C. Edwards, Sec. 
Ramapo, David C Chryxtie, Esq. Tr. 
Six Mile Run, J. G. Voorhees, Sec. . 
Somerville, Rev. Richard Van Kleek, Pres. 
Springfield. Abijah L. Dunneik A^. . • 

Stillwftter, Fem. Mrs. Sarah Wintermoot, Tr. 
PENN. — ^M'Connelsburg, M. Augustus Jewett, Sec. 
Philadelphia Branch, Rev. Joel T- Benedict. Gen. Ag. 
MD-— Worcester Co. Fem. Miss Maria E Bredell, Sec. 
DIS. COL. — Georgetown, James McVean, Sec. . 
VIR.— Buffalo, Fem. ..... 

Prince Edwark, Un. Theol. Sem. John S. McCutchan, Tr. 

Richmond, Win. F. Micou, Tr. 

N. CAR.— Oxlord, Lucy F. Lyne, Sec. . 

S. CAR. — Charleston, S. Car. Branch, Rev. JohH Dickson, Ag. 

GEO. — Savannah, W. W. Baker, Esq. Sec. 

ALA. — HunisvOle, Samuel Coltart, Ag. 

KEN.~DnviIle, M. G. Y«ace, Ag . 



as 

13 



For TV. 
17 OQ 
5 
4 

1001 00 
8 00 

8 00 
7 00 

6000 

1 60 
94 

2 40 

3 84 
6 00 

21 00 
3 00 

9 82 
63 
60 



6 
5 






3 00 

9 73 

82 

30 00 

15 63 

13 00 

2 80 

7 50 

6 12 

175 00 

34 56 

12 00 
750 
200 
900 

40 00 

13 00 

2 00 
1 59 
725 
9 32 

20 28 
20 00 

3 48 
6 88 

1 00 

4 12 
236 

10 03 
500 00 

2 00 
37 50 

29 88 
97 00 
10 00 
200 00 
20 00 
90 00 
50 00 



Ihn, 
10 50 
1 75 
1 37 



16 00 


700 


53 


60 


6 00 


6 18 


9 40 


10 00 
437 


93 


1 75 


250 
2 00 
300 



3 00 



3 10 
6 76 


620 


88 


3 34 


12 50 

4 68 

5 44 



24 



RECENT rUBLICATlOnSi 



[Feb. 



l,eziiH;toD,L4|tii«rSlfepheiis»Af. . 
LouiBville, WiTliam Mix, Tr. 
OHIO.^ChiUicothe, Rer. JohaP. Bunmiiii, Tr. 
Cinciifnati, Henry B. Funk, Tr. 
f ND. — ^IndiaqHpolif; Isaac Coe, Esq. Pres. . 
Madisoo; &ev. J. H. Johnston, Sec. 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXILURY. 
N. YORK.— Orange Co. S. School Union, 
N. JER.— Eliztdbefhtown, Un. Tr. Soc. J. J. Brjant, Tr. 
Tracts sold at the Depository to individuals. 



Direrjors for Life. 

N.YORK.— N.York City, Rev. Aus- 
tin Dickinson, . . . 50 00 

Jiichard T.Haines, . .300 00 

Rev. Henry White, by a member 
of his Congregation, . . 50 00 

N* JER. — New-Sfaannack, Somer- 
set Co. Rev. Gabriel Lndlow, by 
his Ch. and Congregatimi, i 50 00 

Readingtown, (North Branch,) Ref. 
Dutch Ch. R^. John Van Liew, . 
by he Ch. and Congregation, . 50 00 
Members for Life. 

N. HABIP — Lyme, Rev. Baxter Per- 
ry, by Ladies, . . .' 30 00 

CONN.- -Hanover, Capt. John Bing- 
ham, (in part of $20) . 5 00 
Dea. Barnabas Hiintington, do. 10 00 
Mrs. JttUa M. Huntington, do. . 8 00 
William Lee, do. . . 7 00 
Joshua Perkins, Esq. do. . .' 7 00 
Levi Perkins, Esq. do. . . 5 00 

Plainfield, Mrs. Eliza L. Witter, (in 
full of $30) . . .15 001 

N. YORK— Cherry Valley, Mrs. 
Elizabeth £. Taylor, . . 20 00 

Durham, Daniel B. Boothe, (in full 
of $:iO) 15 00 

N.York City, Rev. James V.Henry, 20 00 

Charles Walker Morse, by Sidney 
E.Morse. . . . 20 00 

Dr. Marinus Willett, Jun. (in full of 
$30) . . 10 00 

Scotchtown, Orange Co. Mrs. Doro- 
thea Milspaugh, . . 20 00 

N. JER.— Flemington, Rev. John F. 



196 00 

120 00 

35 00 

333 81 

38 59 

35 60 

t3 00 

35 60 

335 68 



Clark, by his Cong*a. in Fleming-' 
fionand Amwell, .90 00 

New- Shannack, Somerset Co< Mrsr 

Susan Ludlow, by sundry indiv. 39 00 
PENN.— Harford, Susq. Co. Rev. 

Adam Miller, by Laities, . ^ 30 00 
Washington, Rev. David Elliot, by 

Ladiesof Presb. Ch. .30 00 

VIR. — ^Farmville, Prince Edw. Co. 
Mrs. Mary C.Womack . .30 00 
Annued Members. 
CONN.— Westbrook, Bfrs. Jona- 
than Lay, .» . 3 00 
N.YORK.— Fisfakitl, Fan. H.Gary, 3 00 
N. York City, Dr. Luke Barker, |3 $ 

Mrs. James |p^. Bleecker, fS, . 4 00 
Mrs. Letty Hawkins, . 3 00 

Other Donations. 
VER.— Dorset, Mrs. Wm. Jackson, 1 00 
Manchester, individuals, . . 1 50 
MASS.— "N.» . . .50 00 
N.YORK.— Cow Neck, L. I. Hora- 
tio G. Onderdonk, . . . 5 00 
N. York City, Lockwood De For- 
est, 15 00 

H. Page, a juror's fee, ... 85 
Virgil, Mrs. Lydia Bouton, . . 1 QD 
VIR. — Richmond, Rev. Joseph E. 

Curtis, 3 00 

OHIO.— Lucius C. Rouse, Agent, 5 00 
Marietta, Rev. Luther G. Bingham, 
prem. foraTract, . .50 00 

Whole amount of Donations, 956 93 
Received for Tracts sold, 3,678 77 

Total, f4,63S30 



KECEICT PUBLICATIONS, 

No. 233. Appsal to Ahebican Touth, on Txmpbrance. A PrC' 
mium Tract, By Rev AtuHn Dickinson. — pp. 12. Persuading^ youtli, 
in a verjr forcible manner, to abtain entirel^r from ardent spirit ; by 
the consideration, that the use of it will do them no good — is a great 
and wicked wastes-is offensive to the Giver ofall mercies—- has a per- 
verting and debasing influence — forms a habit extremely difficult to 
correct — counteracts the influences of the Holy Spirit — prevails 
among the most despised and degraded — is not tolerated in the most 
refined circles — while strict temperance promotes the vigor of both 
mind and body, secures respect and confidence, and is imperioiislj 
urged by all true patriotism and philanthropy. 



THE AMERICAN 

0I<> v.] KAKOH, IMO. f"0 



udmother L«> snd HoUi« Eaiii^' 



NEW-VORK CITT TRACT BOCIETT. 

Ws have irreal plewurc in pretentiDg to our rcad<ri a brief notice 
«rthcTbinl Annud mediator (hii Socielr; not onlj bectuu it wa? 
•DeaftbeiiHntinteTeMiiig Tract BDni*etiBrin we haieeret attended. 
bot ipeciatly becauie the report givei ni the gntiiyiog laula orihi' 
S«ntkly Tratl Dutribulien ia NlteYork Cilg fir eleven mcceiiire 

The neeting wai held on Wedoeidaj evening-, February 3, in Ihp 
MMOnie Hall, Broadway, which, though Tery large, wu full lo OTer- 
lowing. In the lAsence otZ. Lawi?, Ei<i. Preiideat of the Sadetj. 
Hon. John Stearics, one of the Viee-Pretidenti, took the chair; 
prayer wn oKirad bj Ser. Mr. Maion, ol* tbe Cedar-ilrset church : 
and the AoBoal Repart wii read by the Correipondinf Secretary. 

Vo6. V. 3 CWkori Nft. 51 



fflf 9EW-T0KK CITT t%ACV SOGIETT. [Mardb|^ 

lifr. Sidney E. Morse ; whein three aUe, €T8ngelical and interesting 
addresses were aiade : the first by Rev. Dr. Brodbead, in reference 
to the general plans, operations and usefulness of the Society; the 
second by Rev. Dr. Spring, expressing thanks to €rod for the success 
of the monthly Tract Distribution,, and to the Distributors for their 
fidelity. It is beliered that nearly all the 500 Tract Distributors of the 
City were present, and being seated together in one end of the HalJ, 
they were addressed by Dr. S. very affectionately and impressively. 
Rev. Mr. Fatten made the closing address, urging the necessity of 
aiding and sustaining the Society in its operations, in which he stated 
that the Society had incurred a debt of $2,276 during the year, over 
and above their receipts. A subscription was then opened, and a colt- 
lection taken up, in aid of the funds of the Society, which fogethes 
amounted to $1,832 41. Measures were immediately adopted to 
cancel the whole sum due ;, and we feel assured that, under the bless-' 
ing of God, the nMothly Tract distribution will never be permitted tO' 
cease in New-York City for want of pecuniary means. 

Abstract of the Report. 

The report commenced with stating that the past year had been- 
distinguished for the invention and adoption of one of the happiest 
schemes devised in modern times for the extension of the Gospel, viz. 
the plan of presenting a Tract monthly to every family willing to re 
ceive it. The plan was first put in operation in this city in March last ; 
and during the eleven months which have since elapsed, has been sys- 
tematically and faithfully prosecuted. ^* The plan," says the report, 
" is simple, but it should not on that account be despised. God has 
ever chosen to bless the simplest means for the accomplishment of 
the greatest ends. Naaman, the Syrian^ verily thought that there 
would be much pomp and parade in curing him of his leprosy ; but the 
prophet said, simply, ' Wash and be clean.' Proud Pharisees would 
make their forms and ceremonies essential to salvation ; but God says, 
'* Believe, and ye shall be saved." The wit of man had been almost 
exhausted in devising remedies for intemperance, when it was dis- 
covered that simple water, and water only, could effect the cure. It is 
a aimple thing to give a Tract to a neighbor; but do it regularly, and 
do it every where, and you have the secret of a still greater reforma- 
tion. You have that which, with the blessing of God, will destroy 
every vice and nourish every virtue. A year has not elapsed since the 
plan of monthly distribution commenced in this city, and already the 
cases of good effected are so numerous, and the results so auspicious, 
that the limits of our report will allow us to notice scarcely half of 
those which have been reported. 

The following is a brief outline of the plan. The city is divided- into 
about 1500 districts, to each of which a distributor is assigned ; and it 
is the duty of each distributor personally to visit every dweUing in his 
district once a month, to present a Tract to each family willing to re- 
ceive it, and; as far as circumstances permit, to engage in religious 



tB80."J "OTW-YOUB: t?lTT TRACT SOCIETY. "It 

^nversation ; to recommend tiie reading of the Bible, attendance on 
public worship, the placing of children in Sabbath Schools ; and, in 
short, to " promote, by every practicable means, the best interests of 
the family for this world and the world to come.'* The population 
of the city is not far from 900,000; the number of families, report- 
ed in the month of December, 34,52i5, in 543 of which, or about one 
family in 60, the Tract was refused ; number xif distributors, 479, of 
whom 257 are males, and 222 females ; number tyf families who wish 
Tracts.in foreign languages, 264. The wjiole number of Tracts db* 
tributed, in the fourteen Wards, in the course of the eleven months, 
during which the plan has been in operation, is iirearly 370,000, or 
more than one Thousand Tracts everyday; and in addition to this, 
the shipping, and steam-boats, the markets, the criminal and humane 
institiftions, the suburbs of the city, the Sabbath schools, the islands 
in the harbor, and the navy-yard at Brooklyn, have been supplied 
as formerly by distinct committees. 

The whole number of pages of Tracts drawn from the Depository 
during the year, was 6^74,732, viz. 

City Conunittee, for Monthly Distributioo, 4,531,793 

Shipping and Steam-Boat Committee, 886,000 

Aaaociationa, , . 290,430 

New-York Female Branch, 300,275 

3f arket Committee, 125,000 

Hnmane wnd Crimind butitatioiu, 87,774 

Sunday Scheol Committee, 66,960 

Subiarbfl Committee, 54,500 

iBland Committee, 20,000 

£xecutive Committee and Subscribers 22,000 

Total, : , . 6,374,732 

JDIYINB BLBS8ING OIT THK MONTHLY DISTRIBUTION. 

All the facts of this kind embraced in the Report, would more than 
W our Magazine. We aelect-the following. 

From the Reports for 3eceni(ber. 
In tbe Fifth Ward, a seafaring man informed -one of the distributors, 
that a sailor belonging to his vessel was brought to rejoice in hope of 
having become reconciled to God through the instrumentality of 
Tracts given him by his wife, which Tracts, it is supposed, she re- 
ceived from one of the distributors of this society 

A femide distributor in the Ninth Ward, finding a poor colored 
woman who could not read, but was anxious to learn, sent her son 
once, a day to teach her, and the poor woman, to her great joy is 
now able to read her Tracts. ' 

^ Another lady in this Ward reports one case of conversion of a de- 
cided character, produced by ihe blessing of God on a conversation 
at the time of leavii^ tbe Tract, entitled, " Importance of Conside- 
ration." 

. Four persons, who are now distributors in the Ninth Ward, have 
been hopefully converted since the plan of monthly distribution com- 
menced ; one of whom was led to attend to his immortal interests in 
consequence of reading the Tract, «* Quench not the Spirit;" and an- 
other, no longer ago than last JUfcrch, was attached to the society oi 
f^ti^e Enquirers, 



A distributor u tbe Fourteenth Ward met with a poor but piouif 
old mao, who had ooce been wealthy » aad who received a Tract wUb 
maoy thanks. " You see, sir,*' he said, ** that I am poor, but I ba¥e 
seeu better days. I am 65 years of age. I once bad a large property, 
but it is gone. I had children, too» but they are all dead — aTwife, (and 
here the tears began to Aow,) but six months since she departed to 
her eternal rest, aqd on the eve of her departure sang, * Jesus can 
make a dying bed,' &c. Ah ! sir, there is no delusion here. Many 
would persuade me that faith in Christ is a delusion, but it is not so. 
Property is a delusion ; I had it, but it has vanished. My chiklre0 
have vanished — my dear wife is gone-^but faith in Jesus, that re- 
mains." 

Januory* 

In the First Ward, an old grey-headed man, who had always be- 
fore received the distributors with sneers and ridicule, and had 
c$specially avowed himself an enemy of the Sabbath, now showed 
himself heartily pleased with the visit. " The Tract which was left 
with me. entitled, ' A Persuasive to Public Worship,' ** said he, 
'' was exactly the thing I needed;" and then, placing bis hand on his 
heart, while his eye glistened with animation, he added, <* It toached 
me here ; it convinced me. I hope, sir, you will never forget me." 

A lady in the Third Ward informed one of the distributors, that a 
man recently came to her door, offering clams for sale, and at the 
same time using shockingly proiane language.' She called him in, 
and read to him the 9wearer*s Prayer. He was deeply affected while 
she was reading, and when she had fiaisiied^ thanked her heartily, 
and offered her half a dollar for the Tract. She presented it to himj, 
and afterwards gave bim a Bible also. 

The same lady statM, that another copy of the Swearer's Prayer, 
which she gave to a young man, had not only been blessed as the 
means of his reformation, but had also awakened a sister of the young 
man to serious reflection on her spiritual condition. 

A lady in the Seventh. Ward stated, that her husband had become 
a new man since he had read the Tract entitled, ** Do you want a 
Friend 7" " He was formerly," she said, *^ careless of the welfare of 
his soul, but now he makes it his chief concern, and has resolved to 
devote his life to God." 

A man in the Eleventh Ward stated, that the Tract distributed ia 
July, entitled, " Quench not the Spirit," first led hun to think serious* 
ly on the subject of religion, and that he valued it so highly that he 
had since carried it in his pocket, that he might often peruse it. 

One of the distributors of the Twelfth Ward states, that he has rea-: 
son to bless God for the day when he became a Tract distributor ; for 
his wife, who had recently died of consumption, during her last sick^ 
ness had read many of the Tracts which were left with him for distrl^ 
bution, and was thus brought to see her lost condition, and finally to 
experience joy and peace in believing on the Lord Jesus Christ Three 
weeks after t^is happy change, her spirit took its flight to the eternal 
world. 

In the Fourteenth Ward, a Catholic, to whom a Bible had been pre-, 
seated by one of the distributors m November last, expressed many 
thaoks for the gift, and stated that it was bts practice every evening 



tfeSO.] NlEW-YOBK CITY TKACTl' SOClETT. ^t) 

to require one of his sons to read from it to the family, while they 
tirere at their work. The Bible appeared to be much soiled by use ; 
and on inquiry, the distributor found that in the space of two months, 
during which the Tolnme had been in their possession, they had read 
nearly the whole of it. 

A distributor in the same Ward called on a family in very destitute 
circumstances, consisting of an old Iddy and two widowed daughters, 
one of whom had been very sick for several months, but was now able 
to sit by the fire. Two Tracts were l^ing by her side, one of which 
was that entitled ' *Ti8 all for the Best.' *' Wc had been complain- 
ing," she said, " of our hard lot, and the Tracts were exactly suited 
to our case. We received them yesterday, gnd though w€ had little 
tb eat, and no money, we retired to rest after reading them, with no 
- disposition to repine at the dealings of our Heavenly Father." The 
mother said, " I never spent a happier night." The thoughts of the 
sick daughter appeared intently occupied with the concerns of her soul, 

"Every district in this Ward,^' says the Superintendant, *'h€is 
heen faithfully occupied for eleven successive months, I have at all 
times had the names of more who were willins^ to engage as distribu- 
tors, than were^ sufficient to supply the 36 districts of the Ward. Of 
the 36 distributors who originally commenced in this Ward, 26 con- 
tinue till the present time, with apparently increasing interest, and 4 
h»ve removed from the city or the Ward. The distributors have met 
monthly to report to each other the success of their labors, and pray 
for the divine blessing ; and the most delightful harmony has bound 
our hearts together as servants of the same Lord, who were striving 
to advance his cause on earth, and benefit the souls of our dying fel- 
l.ow-men.'** 

Shipping and Steani'Boal Con^iitec 

The captain of a North-River sloop informed a distributor, that a 
Tract on Intemperance was given last spring to one of his neighbors, 
vho a few years since was the most influential man in the village, but 
who had become a drunkard and an out-cast from society, and that the 
perusal of the Tract produced such an impression on his mind, that he 
BOt only abandoned immediately the intoxicating bowl, but laid hold 
an the hope set before him in the Gospel. He is now gaining the re- 
putajtion be once lost, and appears like one raised from the dead. 

Island Commiilee. 

In August, the gentlemen engaged in distributing Tracts among 
ihe soldiers on Governor's Island, reported that since the commence- 
ment of their labors se\^n of the soldiers had established a prayer 
meeting, which was regularly attended twice a week, and there was 
evidently a change for .the better among the soldiers generally. Pro- 
fanity particularly, was less common than it had been formerly. 
Within a few^weeks one of the distributors reports that several indi- 
'viduals uponlthat island profess to have been converted to God, 

Three Argumenis for Monthly Bislrihution. 
1. Vie Effects upon the Distributors. — *♦ If no other results were t© 
follow this great enterprise," says one of the distributors, " than the 
nfiscipline it will give the distributors themselves, iospirin* devotiojaaj 



habiti and feeliogt, govemmeotof temper, humility, patience, ^ne^ 
verance and Christian boldnesi, the work would be worthy of per^ 
petuity." 

2. This plan is the most practitdbte method of speedily executing 
the command qfout Savior, *' Preach the Gospel to every creature "^^ 
The enterprise has at once created in this city a band of 500 dome^c 
missionaries, who, without encroaching upon the rights of the minis* 
try, are carrying some portion of the Gospel every month to every 
family within our limits. It enables 600 of our most active and warm* 
hearted Christians to deliver the message of their master twelve 
times every year, under the most favorable circumstances, to our en- 
tire population. 

3. The plan is calculated to promote the objects of other great bene* 
oolent instHutions^-^The dOO Tract distributors, in addition to their 
other labors, have reported, during the past year, nearly 1,400 famii' 
lies destitute of the Word of God, who have been supplied. They 
have been the means of bringing more than 600 children into Sab- 
bath and Infant schools, and have found many cases of temporal suf- 
fering which they have caused to be relieved. Their object, in the Ian* 
guage of their instructions, is, " to promote, by every practicable me- 
thod, the best interest of every family, for this world and the world t9 



CQme." 



progress cfthe PUm. 
The plan has been already adopted in moat of the large towns in 
the United States, an enumeration of between 90 and 40 of which i3 
embraced in the report, which thus beautifully concludes : 

Such are the results of the system commenced in this city only 
eleven months since. Who could have believed, at our last anniversary, 
that before one year elapsed, such a system would be extended to adl 
parts of our land, carrying the glad tidings of salvation once every 
month, on the printed page and by the living messenger, to the doors 
of one million of our population! 

And what has this mighty operation cost us ? From the report of 
the Treasurer, it seems that the expenditure for the past year has been 
$5,648, and the receipts, f3,372; leaving the Society in debt to the 
amount of $2,276— an expenditure and a debt, small indeed compared 
with the magnitude of the good effected ; but, small as it is, large 
enough to stop our wheels, unless it is speedily liquidated. It will be 
liquiaated, we trust, this night. New* York, which commenced the 
enterprise, and called upon her sister cities to imitate her example^ 
will not be the first to abandon it. The tree which we have planted, 
and which, like the tree in the revelation, bears twelve manner of 
fruits, and yields her fruit every month, must be watered here, that 
its branches may extend throughout the earth, and that its leaves may 
be for the healing of all nations. 

FBMAIS BEANCB OF THB KEW-TORK GITT TftAGT SOdETY. 

This Society held its Eighth Anniversary at the Masonic Hall, in 
connexion with the Hew-Tork City Tract Society, on Wadnesday 
eyeniitg, Fakrimry 3, vhsn i{l» prftcfifid|Dgs> ivr bctweon Dine and t^ 



months, since «U unioo wttb Ibut infUtutlQii, vers TS|»oTtad, dOrin^ 
which time it paid into the Treasury of that Society, ioclnding not 
far from $400, appropriated at the time of the unkm* the sum of 
91,098 31. 

VSEFULNfiSS OF TRACTS. 

A ctwse made a bksHng, by means of a Tract, 

Mr. B^— — , of H , informed me, says an Ag^ent of the Araertean 

Tract Society in Alabama, that ho some months since presented a 
number of Tracts to a gentleman, requesting him to circulate them in 
the neighborhood in which he Ured. One of those Tracts fell into 
the hands of a grossly intemperate num. He read it, and immediately 
abandoned his cups. Mr. B. was net long since near the place where 
he lives, and having known him well, when very intemperate, was 
happy to learn that he had not drunk any ardeat spnriis for three 
months which have passed since he read the Tract. Ffom a bruttp 
he has become a man ;«-^em m ewrse, a Messing. 

Punctuality ineukated; and a husband and wft converted by Tracts, 
[Coouuuucated by m AfMit c^ the American Traet Society.] 

Mrs. R., a very intelligent and pious lady of one of the principal 
towns in Alabama, gave a Traet on the subject of Lying to a mao 
who had often promised to come and repair her house, but had as 
oilen disregarded his word. The man was very profane and wicked, 
She handed the Tract to his wife, requesting her to give it to her hus^ 
band, and inform him who left it. She also gave one on a different 
subject to the woman. This was done on Saturday evening. Very 
early on Monday morning the man came to do the work he had so 
long neglected ; told Mrs. R. that he had read the Tract she left for 
bim, and was going to mend his ways, and meant to let her see it. He 
laid aside his habit of profaneness and falsehood. The next Sabbath 
Mrs. R. saw both him and his wife at church, wearing^the appear- 
ance of unusual solemnity. This was the first time she had ever seen 
them in the house of God, or manifesting an^ thing like seriousness on 
the subject of religion. In a abort time they gave evidence of piety; 
and made a public profession of their faith in Christ. The woman was 
in a few months laid on a bed of sickness, but was happy in the near 
prospect of death ; Ihe left the world rejoicing in hope. Her husband, 
when last heard from, was a devoted follower of Christ. They were 
both awakened and hopeJuU^ cawoerttd through the iwlrumefdality 
^twQ Tracts. 

A Retd Convert. 

A gentleman in the County of M-^— , in Tennessee, says an Agen^ 
was opposed to Tracts; but a Tract Society being formed in his 
neighborhood, his daughter became a member, and hsTiag received 
and carried home a quantity of Tracts, her father was induced to 
read them. Some days afterward, he met a friend of the Tract cause, 
who knew what bad been his pvejudices, and addressed him thus : 
^' I have b€«p«ie « onrnrt ^ %tw» dtcietiss^'' Th^n tnklnfr Jhe doh 



^fb 1}BE¥ULirE88 OF TBACI^S. [MaTCh^ 

iigrt fnym bis pocket, and imtting it into his haii<), be added : ^ I give 
you this in proof that my conversion » reoi." 

Ji Drunkard reelmimed, nnd a Buabcatd reHored, bg mtam of TraUi, 

Three Tracts, says a deroted friend of the Tract cause* one of them 
on Drunkenntu and another on Profant Swearing, were left bj a 
lady in the family of an intemperate man in PennsyWmiia, with whom 
a still more inlemperate neighbor was accustomed to spend the Sab> 
bath in drinking. The latter, in one of his visits, took up the Tracts 
und read them ; but without any visiUe effects at the time. He after- 
wards, howeTcr, came and requested a loan of the Tracts, saying that 
he wanted them for hie wtfe, who encouraged his children to swear. He 
received the Tracts, and again read them himself. Before this, he had 
been often away fipom home all night, because he was so inebriated 
Chat he could not walk; and his wife had been compelled, for some 
time, to leave him. But from the time when he last received the 
Tracts, which is more than a year, he has been a sober and respecta- 
ble neighbor, has lived happily ip the bosom of his family, and ha^ 
«iot been known to taste a drop of ardent spirits. 

KUtrcdge's Address criticised by a Cfittrch Member. 

A member of a church, says the Philadelphia Tract Magazine^ 
Vaded in spirituous liquors, and daily indulged himself in drinking 
to excess. He had resisted all attempts toward reformation, having 
determined in hts own mind to maintain his own ground against all 
•opposition. A neighbor handed him Kitlredge on Intemperance. He 
<H>mmenced reading with a determination to refute the arguments of 
the writer as he proceeded. After having proceeded about half way 
through, he suddenly paused, and exclaimed — " I am wrong — I have 
been entirely wrong ;" and from that hour he has wholly abstained 
from drinking, and opposes the iniquitous trade of spirituous liquors. 

A Husband and Wife reading the Tracts " Advantages of 

Drunkenness." 
A man catting at astore^ asked for Rum. A lady present answered 
that she had none, but could give him something better, and handed 
him 2%e wonderful advantages of Drunkenness, He declined accept- 
ing it, as he could not read : but adding that his wife could read, 
cheerfully accepted of it to carry home to her. They sat down to- 
gether to read the Tract: as the wife read over one and another of 
the specific ** advantc^ts,** the husband would reply, that his intoxi- 
cation had not brought this advantage; but his wife insisted on the 
case actually being as described in the Tract, and with so much feel- 
ing and demonstration, that the intemperate husband could no longer 
gainsay or resist. Since that time, he has entirely abstai7ied frofn 
spirituous liquors, 

CHARGE OF FICTION IN TRACTS. 
Those who call the effects of the Holy Spirit upon the heart en- 
thusiasm and fanaticism often represent the publications of the Ame- 
rican Tract So<;iety to be fiction ; and what is worthy of observation, 



18S0.] AVXILIARV OP TSOr. S$ 

bring the charge Qiost freqaentiy against the Dairyman's Daughter, 
and other Tracts, the evideuce of whos^ authenticity is spread before 
the public from the most creditaUe soareea. WeoUi to Gtod that his 
grace, entering erery family, as in the case we are about to mention, 
might be equally triumphant in its results. * 

Calling one day on a lady, says an Agent of the American Tract 
Society in Western Pennsylvania, she said she had been opposed to 
Tracts, considering them as misre^esenting the exercises of children 
and others^-«making them too marvellous to be believed. But, in the 
course of Divine Providence, one of her chiliireB was catted to a dy- 
ing bed, and became a more remarkable imitaoce of Divine grace 
than any she had ever seen mentioned. She had become the friend 
of Tracts, and of course cheerfully contributed of her earthly sub- 
HtaQoe to promote their cireulatien. 



AGENT AND GRANT OF TRACTS FQR N^W-ORt^EANS. 
The Committee of the American Tract Society, in answer to an ap- 
plication from tiia Society's Board of Agency in New-Orieans, have 
made a grant of five hnndred thousand pagts of Tracts, in English 
and French, for distribution by that Board, chiefly among the popu-* 
lation of that city. They have alao commissioned Mr. Mosks H. 
Wxx.D8« to labor in promoting Tract cIrculatioB there as long as the 
(laalthinefsof the seascii will permit. 



PILGBIM'S PROGIUSSS. 

We are happy to announce, that Jlfr. Wi&iam M, HalHtd, of New- 
York City, will be the second donor of $100, in part of f 1000, for 
perpetuating this work by the American Tract Society, provided 
eight other individuals shall agree to pay the same amount, on or be- 
fore the 12th day of May next. 



AUXILIARY OF TROY, If. Y. 

The Thirteenth Annual Report of this Society, presented January 
25, is a most interesting document, the whole of which we should be 
glad to insert in our pages, did our limits permit. Every word of it 
tells for the prosperity of the Tract cause. The Society has 13 life and 
140 annual members. Circulated during the year, 20,000 pages to 
Auxiliaries ; 32.000 pages to river craft and canal boats ; 22,000 paae» 
to Sabbath and common schools; more than 60,000 pages in tne 
fnofUMy distrUnUianf commenced in October; the vessels lying at the 
wharves have been visited and snpplied every Sabbath morning ; the 
Gaol and Hoase of Industry have received their usual annual appro* 
prtatjoas; 19,000 copies of Kittredge's Address on the Effects of Ar- 
dent Spirits kave been circulated ; making the total circulated 342,868 
P«gC9; besidee lUOO Chrlstiftii AlmaiiftCj. Keceipts, during the year, 



d4 A'DxiLiiBT S0CIETIE9. [Mafcfa;, 

$306 48, exclusive of about $400, subscribed at the auiiiyersary 
meeting, January, 1829, in donations to the American Tract Society. 
Our recent AnniTonary, says the Secretary, was truly deligbtful. 
When the wants of the Society for the coming year were known, es- 
pecially ^^^ sustaining the monthly distribution, 22 persons made 
themselves life members, and 17, annual members. The success of 
the MONTHLT DISTRIBUTION is very great. Out of 1600 families, only 
from 31 to 36 refuse the Tracts. The Lord it with us of a trvih. 
Some instancet of eotiverrion are already the result, and another, as 
conspicuous and very gratifying is, that every church in the city feeU 
the influence, by catuing people to flock there for irutruction. The 
language of the Tract is not, ' Go to this, or go to that place of wor> 
ship ; but simply * Go to the house qf God, and the Bible, and see 
whether these things are so,^ We are very cautious in selecting dis- 
tributors, who meet once a month with the Board 6f Managers ; and 
these meetings leave the savour of their influence for hours, days, 
and weeks afterward. Jerkmiah Chichsster, Pres. Db, Thomas 
W. Blatchford, Sec. Charles Lthav, Treas. 



AUXILIARY OF WASHINGTON CITY. 
T^nth annual meeting, December 21, 1829. Rsv. Jambs Laurie, 
D. D. President of the Society, presided and opened the meeting by 
prayer. The Secretary, Mr. John Cotle, Jun. read the Annual Re- 
port. Resolutions were moved by Mr. Lowrie, and Rev. Messrs. 
Hewit, Colton, Danforth and Post, in favor oi supplying with Tracts 
the four adjacent counties of the state of Maryland, and of com- 
mencing the systematic monthly Tract Distribution in Washington ; 
all of which were adopted. Receipts, during the year, $236 67. Cir^ 
culated, during the year, 192,109 pages, making a total of 973,161 
pages circulated since the formation of the Society. 

Female Auxiiiary of St. George's Church, JVew-York. 
This Society, during its third year, has paid into the Treasury of 
ihe American Tract Society Six Hundred and Twenty-five Dollars 
as a donation, besides $118 60 paid for Tracts. A v«ry happy in- 
fluence has also been exerted beyond the limits of their own congre- 
gation in faror of the Tract cause. Number of pages distributed, 
145,840. — " One instance,'* says the report, " of decided conversion, 
by means of the Tract entitled The Shepherd of Salisbury Plain, we 
have in our power to relate. This Tract wbls given by one of our 
Managers to a young female who professed a disbelief in the divinity 
of the Savior, and utterly disregarded the salvation of her soul ; she 
read it, became convinced of her lost state as a sinner, and fled for 
refuge to that Savior whose ofiers of salvation she had previously 
slighted. She has puUidy professed her faith in Christ, and we be- 
lieve adorns her profession. 

Young MenU AuxiUary of Cincinnati. First Annual Meeting No- 
vember IL Receipts during the year, $104 24. Circulated 61,1 16 
pages. Addresses were delivered by Rev. Messrs. Blanchard, Howell, 
Shinn, Beckwith and Eastman. The prominent subject of the rer 
port is the system of monthly distribution, which has been succesS" 
/ully adopted by this and other Tract Societies ia Cincinnati* 



1 ddO.J 



ftECEl»T5< 



9^ 



The Vliea Brmch Tract Society has issued a Circular, urging its 
Ausuliaries to spirited efforts, and recommending the adoption of the 
Monthly Distribution. 

2%e Philadelphia City Tract Society, Auxiliary to the Pennsylvania 
Branch, during the second year of its operations, circulated l,006,p95 
pages of Tracts; and their receipts amounted to $700. Special Com- 
mittees are appointed by this Society for each of the following ob- 
jects; yiz. supplying the Shipping, he. on the Delaware ; Canal Iwats, 
he. on the Schuylkill ; Prisons and Humane Institutions ; Sabbath 
and Public Schools ; Markets and Hucksters ; Taverns and Dram- 
shops ; Livery Stables, Wagoners and Carters ; the Colored popular 
tion ; and the Brick-yards. A man in the Pennsylvania Hospital wa» 
evidently led to Jesus Christ through the labors of this Society, an4 
a woman of the City was hopefully converted through the Divine 
blessing on the Tract " To Day:' 



The friends of the monthly Tract distribiUion will find much fov 
their encouragement in the present Number of this work. 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OP THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

During th« month ending February 15, 1830. 

FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 

MASS.^Bo6toii, American Tract Society, John Tappan, Esq. Tr 

CONN — Darien, Charles Whitney, Tr. . 

Guilford, Henry E. Hodges, Ag. 

Hartford, Conn. Branch, Charles Hosmer, Sec. 

Madison, Jonathan T. Lee, Tr. 

New Fairfield, Seelye Bamum, Tr. 

Norwich, Fem. Miss Sarah Backus, Sec. . 

Trumbull, Fem. Mis. Lucretia S. Edwards, Sec. .. 

West Greenwich, William B. Sherwood, Tr. 

N. YORK — Albany, Central Branch, D. M'Kercher, Sec 

Brooklyn, L. I. Joseph Howard, Tr. 

Cherry Valley, Rev. Alexander M'Cowau, Sec. . 

Florida, Orange County, Dr. H. K. Chapman, Sec. 

Hempstead, L. I. Rev. Charles Webster, Sec. 

UUp and Huntington South, Henry Brewster, Sec. 

New-York City Tract Society, Alfred Edwards, Tr. 
Do. African Fem. Mrs. R. Maynard, Directress, 
Do. St. George's Church Fem. Miss Ann Dominick, Tr» 

Troy, Abner Loveland, Tr. 

Utica, Edward Vernon, Sec. 

N. JERSEY.— Baskingridge, Horace Shelda0, Sec* 

Elizabethtown, J. J. Bryant, Tr. . 

Kingston, Fem. Miss Jane K. Comfort, Tr. 

Springfield, Abijah L. Dunnell, Tr. 

PENN — Brownsville, (Aux. to Pittsburgh Aux.) 

Centre Township, do. 

Dunbar, do. 

Forks of Cheat, do. 

Jacob's Creek, do. 

Philadelphia Branch, Rev. Joel T. Benedict, Gen. Ag. 

Pittsburgh, Rev. Robert Patterson, Ag. . 

Rich Hill, (Aux. to Pittsburgh Aux ) 

Ruff's Creek, do. 

Salt Lick, . do. . 

Tyrone, "^ do. 

Wheatfield To^Miship, do. 



ForTr. 


Don. 


1 61 




254 


■ 


2 88 




137 00 




31 50 


10 50 


4 88 


1 ^ 


300 




413 


1 87 


10 32 


2 3-2 


150 00 




45 00 




25 




^ 11 10 


11 00 


7 52 




19 




465 00 




300 




13 80 




50 00 




57 00 




300 


1 CO 


160 




340 




300 




14 90 




400 




1 50 


- 


1 00 




10 63 




500 00 




43 74 




10 10 




4 12 




13 39 




7 76 




22 28 





da 



llECEtVTS. 



MD^BtltkM«iBraacli»€.A.8rfl»Tt>. . 

HsfentowB, Fem. Mrs. Rebecca L. Hartio, Stc. • 

DIS. COL.— WasUDgton Cicjr, John Kennedy, Tr. 

YIR— Charlottetille, (Albemarle Co. Aiiz) Rev. P ftowmn, Tr. 

Nocfolk, Robert Rettertson, Af. .... 

N. CAR.— Raleigh, Rev. P. W. Dewd, S«e. 

Sa^m, WiUtam L. BeasieD, See. .... 

€1. CAR.— Charleston, S. Citr. Branch, Rev John Diekscai, Af. 

flnSS. — NatCheSB, Tliomas Henderson, Tr. 

^[ffnO— Cincinnati, Hemy B. Fimk, Tr. . 

€h«nf ille, Rer. Jacob Little, Pres. 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXIUARY. 
eONN.— Litchfield, Temperance Society, 
N. CAR.— N. Carolina Book Co. by Samuel Paisley, Cao. N. t, 
'Practs sold at the Deposftory to individuals, including $17 50 for ) 
tneofroom, and $11 67 from Agents, . . > 



F«f1V. 


400 09 


0B«a 


30 <» 


do 09 


500 


85 00 


37 50 


100 00 


165 00 


B79 50 


10 00 


540 


33 63 


196 12 



Aft. 
10 50 



Directors for Life. 

CONN.— Bristol, Rev. Abner J. Lea- 
yenworth, by Ladies, . . $53 

Mt>. — Frederickstown, Rev. John S. 
Stone, by " an Episcopalian of the 
Diocese of Connectieot," . . 100 
Members for Life, 

UASS.— Dighton, Bristol Co. Miss 
Mary Emeline Perry, by her an- 
cle, Jesse Talbot, of New-York, 90 

CONN — ^Hartford, John Dilling- 
ham, (in part or$30,) . . 1,0 

Do. David F. Robinson, (in part of 
$90,) • 10 

Do. Mrs. George Putnam, . 20 

Jewett City, Nathaniel Coit, Esq. 
(in part of $20,) ... 2 

Do. Joel Hyde, (in part of $20,) 10 

Do. John Johnson, Esq. do. . .8 

Do. Captain John Wilson, do. . 5 

Middletown, Jonathan Barnes, by 
Mrs. Eliza A. Ward, . . .25 

New-Haven, Dr. Eli Ives, (in part 
of $20,) . . . . . 5 

Do. Titus Street, (in full of $20,) . 15 

Do. Mrs. Henrietta F. Whitney, . 25 

Trumbull, Mrs. Rebecca B. Burtem, 
(in fuU of $20.) . . .10 

Do. Rev. James Kant, by Ladies, . 20 

Weathersfield, Rocky Hill, Israel 
WilUams, . . . . .25 

N. YORK — ^Lansingburgh, Rev 
Isaac M'llvaine, by Ladies of 
Presbyterian Church, . . 34 

New-York City, Miss Margaret 
Beers, by her father, Mr- C. Beers, 20 

Do. Mrs. lisabella Buloid, by a Fe- 
male Friend, .20 

Do. Jesse Talbot, by a Friend, (in 
fhUof$20,) . . . . 5 

Owego. Tiogtt Co. Susan W. Pum- 
pelly, by her mother, Mrs. M. H. 
W. Pumpelly, (ts part of $20,) . 7 



West Bk>omiield, Rev. Silas C 
Brown, by Ladies Sewing Soc. . 20 00 

Do. Rev. Ebenezer, Fitch, D. D. 
by Ladies Sewing Society, . 20 00 

PENN.— West Alexandria, Rev. 
John M'Clvskey, by Ins Church 
and Congregation, . . . 20 00 

Annual Director, 

N. YORK.^New-York City, Sle- 
j^en Reed, . . . 5 00 

Other Donations, 
MAIBVE.— Lebanon, Individuals, by 

James Weston, . ■ 5 OO 

CONN.— Hattford, LadiM for Val- 
ley of Mississippi, . . . 7 79 
Madison,Jonathan T. Lee, . . 1 00 
N. YORK.— Candor, Tioga County, 

Ebenezer Woodbridge, . . 50 
Tioga, Tioga County, ErastUs Good- 
rich, 1 00 

Troy, A Friend, for Tracts for 

Greece, 10 00 

Westford, David WUUalns, . . 2 50 
00 Youngstown, S. Thompson, . d 00 

00|N. JER.— Princeton, F. S. Mines, 
50 cts. do. avails of jewelry, re- 
ceived whUe Agent of the Society, 
$1 50, . . . . . 9 00 

PENN.— Pittsburgh, J. D. Davis, 8 00 
VIRw— Lexington, J. F. Canithere, 

Etq. . . . . 3 50 

Ohio, received by Rev. C. W. Co- 

nant, for preaching a sermon^ . & 00 
ILL.— Palestine, Edw. H. Piper, . 5 00 
The above list contains Donatioii» 
For Vall. Miss. . . $7 79 
For Greece, . . 10 00 



00 



00 



00 

00 

00 
00 

00 
00 
00 
00 

00 

00 



00 
00 

00 



50 
00 



00 
00 



00 



Whole amount of Donations, 603 47 
Receive* for Tracts sold, 2,967 91 

Total, $3,591 38 



THE AMEHICAN 

OL. T.] AVKZX., 1030. {"O 



Chritt UachlDg hii diiciplci u> pny. 

USEFULNESS OF TRACTS. 

No derout friend of Ihe Tract caiue, we are iiersuaded, nill read 
the following limple ilatemenlB, from different and very dutani pnrlF 
of the cODnlry, without having hia heart swell with joy and thanhe 

SiiiBgloGod. 

TEACTS IS THE MOUNTAINS OF EAST TENNESSEE. 
[paMBUrakatcd loUu Silem. N. C. Aoiiliuy Tract Society by a taranr aifoibtt 
WW, w< boUen, ■ niBioDU7 to tin Wntern Indiaiu.) 
On the banks of the wild Walaaga, embasamed in Ihe froirning 
mountain! of Carter Counl; , (Tenneuee.) In a eitualion truly romnn- 
lic and lovely, we stopped for refreihmenH at ahouse wlioBc mneiei 
was the oMett letllrr in this regioD. He sonn made his appearance, 
and prelented the spectacle so grating to a philanlliropiit — a drunken 

VoB- V. 4 [Whom Wo. 62. 



98 vsiervjJXKMB of tbacts* [Apri^ 

sot— who glories, as it were, in his fatal fusopentitif , and who has a 
joke in store for etvtf thiofp, even tor man'-s auiat sacred feelings. As 
a natural consequence of the bad example of the parent, his numerous 
family had imbibed no fixed habits or correct' principles, and his' out* 
ward concerns sesmed to be as delapidated as tba tottering gray- 
haired son of Intemperance. It was a sad scene ! But merit the cheer* 
ing contrast !— a few weeks after I again called at his house, finery 
tkSag pieocnted a<iew app a affan c e ; tte old amn faiasseif was so accom* 
modating, so kind, so respectable, so entirely the counterpart of what 
he had iMten a short time befere, that 1 had almost failed to identify 
him with his former puerile and brutish conduct. But he himself ex.- 
ptaioed the blessed- change. ** ft was the Missionary's Tract thai you 
presented to me/* said he, " which has efiected it. 1 will no longer in- 
dulge^ in a propensity so pfegnant with deplorable effects. / truit 
God wiU he my siay und n^ortf and not the ^pM a/ t^etth^i** The 
three-stringed viol was likewise banished £rom its favorite spot, near 
the fire- side; as the zealous and reclaimed man pretested, that ftolics 
and all amusements that lead to sin should no more take place in his- 
house or with hig connivance. I parted in friendship with him, affected 
with the vivid contrast 1 had witnessed, and practically convinced of 
the great efficacy uf an excellent Tract, judiciously distribnted. I shall 
ever with pleasure recall Mr. D. of the Watauga. 

In another part of East Tennessee my friend and myself entered 
the house of a respectable lady, and in the conversation (hat ensued 
we insensibly entered upon the spirit of the tines, and the great at- 
tempts made to evangelise so many parts of the world, a#home.and 
abroad. She lamentcKi the benighted state of the neighboring regions, 
and their great need of spiritual guides and instructors. She was 
greatly pleased with the charitable object of Traet Societies, which we 
explained to her ; and when we presented her with some of their pub* 
lications, she thankefd us with eloquent tears, and implored heaven to 
bless us and all those who were instrumental in the sweet task of distri- 
buting these *' flying messengers of Christianity." Her gratitude was 
unbounded, and she forced us to accept apples ahd other little gifts, 
which are real delicacies on a long and fatiguing journey . Her prayers 
for the perfect success of all missionaries accompanied us when we 
took an a|rectk>nate farewell. I never prised a Tract so highly as at ihii 
very moment, when it was productive of such unalloyed and virtuous 
pleasure. 

The morning was cold, the roads stubborn, and the mountain en- 
virons gloomy. I walked in advance of our caravan, indulging in men- 
tal soliloquies, when my attention was attracted to i| figure at the edge 
of the wood. The man had a remarkable appearance ; sternness of 
mind and inflexibility of temper formed the predominant traits of his 
countenance. I addressed him, and soon became aware that he was 
one of those unfortunate beings who deny the positive good in all 
Christian denominations, because abuses and irregularities are to be 
detected in all sects ; and who therefore forswear all communion with 
Christian churches, and lead a hermit life in the wilderness and moun- 
tains. He was truly a separatist; and I was curious to know whether 
he would likewise refuse a Tract. But, to my great joy , he grasped the 
precious paper with sparking eyes, and promified to peruse and re» 



-i 



iS^O.] tBEFTTLlTEftS OF tlUCTS. 99 

penise the pamphlet. Even a hermit, a dissenter fiom all deaomioar 
tions of Christians, acknowledges the beneficial operations of Tracts. 
** Man of the woods, may you too be reclaimed by imbibing the true 
spirit of Chrutlanity !* * 

TRACT BLESenSD TO A CLE&6YMAN*S ONLY tolf. 

While at G , in Tennessee, says an Agent of the American Tract 

Society, I heard the Rev. Dr. and his Lady, who I knew were 

eminent for piety, speaking much in favor of the Tract cause. The 
Doctor at length said, " We have good reasons for being the friends 
of Tracts. Our son reeeived his first serious impressions in reading 
one.'^ On inquiry, I found the Tract was Little Henry and hit Bearer, 
The youth who read the Tract and was awakened by it is their only 
child. 

TRACTS BLESSED TO A FERRYMAN ON THE TENNESSEE. 

1 was informed by the Rev. Mr. C ■ ■ , of F r, says an Agent of 

the Amerifcan Tract Society in Alabama, that Tracts bad b^n the 
inaaiiB of gteat good to a Ferryman on the Tennessee River. He was 
vary proteie, and so violent and passionate, that Kev. Ml'. C. thought 
it impredetK to address him on the subject of religion, or even to pre* 
tent him with a Tract. Whenever Mr. C. had occasion, however, to 
«roes the river, he left some Tfacis in the cabin of the boat. After a 
wliile he discovered a ehangd in the de|iortment of the Ferryman. He 
had become more mHd, and was less profane. At length lie desired 
Mr. C. to lend him religious books, espedaUy Tracts ; spying that he 
was much interesMd in reading them. Hn reading of Tracts has 
proved a rich blessing to him ; for he has become a osefut member of 
society, and an exemplary and useful member of the church of Christ. 

Another man in the same boat has been much reformed in his ez- 
teraal charaeter by the reading of Tracts ; apd bis language now Is^ 
** I do not intend to ttte a»y longer soch a wicked life as I have done." 

THE TRACT ** AN ADDRESS TO VOtTTH," BLESSED TO A 

YOUNG LADY. 



Miw M ■ , of Indiaiia, writes an Agent of (he American Tract 
Society, became a member of an Auailiaiy Society, and received and 
read the Tract An Address to Youth. She had been amiaUe in her 
deportment, bat the Tract convinced her that her heart was not right 
with Qod ; shewed her her sinfitinesa, and opened to her view, for the 
first time, the narrow way to heaven. S4ie was led to prostrate herself 
before Ood, with a broken and penitent heart, in prayer ; and tn give 
lieffself to Him, to be his for ever. She is now a professor of religion, 
smd gives bright a«d increaski^ evidence of having experienced a 
great change. 

USEFULNESS OF TRACTS IN GEORGU. 

(CoBUBUBkiited by Mr. AlbMt Hale, Agent ef the Anwriesn Tract Society.] 

An tndlvidnal la A*-— related to me the following fact : While en- 
|raged in visiting some poor families, for a benevolent purpose, and 
distriboting Tracts as his custom was, he gave some to one family, the 
.membett of which were not io the ^abtt of attending on any of the 



4Q USEfULNESS OF T&isCXfl.. L^J^y 

means of gcace. Soon thejr were seen in Ood*s house on the SabbftUi^ 
and both are now members of the Methodist church. 

Another man in the same place told me that he had, within a fewt 
d^ys, visited a person living about 16 miles distant, who was undec 
deep concern for her soul. He asked her how she was awakened. 
She told hhn it was by reading the Tract Sixteen Short SermoM — a 
clause in the last part of the first sermon came home to her heart, and 
she has had no peace since. She appeared like one on the threshold 
of the kingdom of God. She belongs to a very worldly family, anct 
until she read the Tract, had been herself as worldly as any of them« 
What will be the result eternity will disclose. 

A female member of the Tract Society in ]|f— -» received her por« 
tion of Tracts, among which was the Swearer*8 Prayer. She imme<» 
diately resolved to give it to a very profane man, who, I think, was a 
member of her family. He read the Tract, and from that time broke 
off from this degrading vice, and has since made a public profession 
of religion, and hopes he is walking by faith to hb home in the heavens. 

On my arrival at 8 I called on a man and told him I was en- 
gaged in the Tract cause. He appeared much gratified in the thooghfe 
of having a Sract Society in his neighborJiood, and told me he had 
long been in the habit of buying and distributing Tracts, and believed 
they were the means of great good. " I some time since," he added, 
*' distributed some Tracts in a neighborhood a few miles from this 
place, and the result was that three families, not an individual of 
which had been known to attend on the preaching of the Qospel be- 
fore, began to frequent the places of public worship ; and now eight 
persons from, those families are professors of religion, and give pleasa 
iflg evidence that they are the tsue worshippers of God." 

EXCELLENT FEUITS FROW THE BEADINQ OF A TRACT. 

I have frequently, says a devoted friend of Tracts in Virginia, con* 
versed with the individual mentioned on page 38 of your 4th very in* 
teresting Annual Report, as having been benefited by hearing the 
Tract lAttU Henry and his Bearer read. He has, since that account 
was given, entered into full communion with the church, and gives 
evidence of grace in the heart, though he cannot read. Tke poektt 
Bible I ordered in my laat was for him, to be preaemUd to the young 
Lcdy who read Uu Tract to him. 

On receiving a late number of the Tract Magaaine, I read it at a 
prayer meeting-, at which the person alluded to above waa present. 
After the meeting he told me, with the big tear bursting from his eyes, 
that the hearing of that Magaaine had led him to determine to give 
$5 to aid your Society in its good work. He has. since given $15 
more, which, added to. the 96, will constitute him a member for Ufe» 

KnTREDGE*S ADDRESS. 

it gentleman of wealth and influence in -<— , N. J. says an Agent 
of the American Tract Society, who had' a number of men in his em* 
ploy, was accustomed to treat them daily with ardent spirits. I left in 
his family Kittre4ge*s AddreUf which, the family being called together, 
was read to them by a pious Liady. The mind of the Gentleman was 
4)eeplj^ impre^seid by it. That night he could, not rest. In t||ie niortts^ 



JBf iM resolt«d to use ii^ tUMte twdeMt S}»iH#i hiWft^f or in hit fAttfly, 
tfxc^pt M a ttiedtcine. He called Ms irorkihrMn fo^cfthei- ; toM Xhtm 
that, from a consci^tttfous regitfd to duty, he could give them no more 
9rdent s|»irlts. If they would work for wages and good treatment, he 
would be glad ;• otherwise he eouM not employ them. 



TflERSE TEACT0 BLESBBD tN WESTSRK P£KNSTti^ANtA. 

tCottmaaioaAed hf te A^e&t 6r(h» Amei'icaii Tract Society .j 

A young Lady having received from her pastor a copy of the' 
Swearer's Prayer, carried it home and presented it to het brother.- 
He received it from her hand.; but on fHeeing its title said, with con- 
siderable warmth, ** Why do ye«i give this to me ? I don't swear." 
She replied that, if he did not, the reading of the Tract might be use- 
lal to him. Me read it ; and though he was not a profane swearer, yet 
the presentation to his mind Qfme.tnormUy •fone «m, led him to see 
that he was gvAUyo/Qihtr tint, on aeoount of which) if be did not ob- 
tain pardon, he must be miserable, both in time and eternity. With' 
these feelings, deep and pungent a» they were, he sovglit relief at the 
foot of the cress, and found that " the btood of Jesus Christ cleanseth 
from' all sin." He is now an exemplary member of an Evangelicai 
ehurch. 

A Lady, who had been for ten years a professor of reUgkm, was 
brought to the enjoyment af the Savior through the reftdiog of the 
Dairyman** Daughter. 

A young Lady, whohad been uadier deep coovictlonefor some time 
and could find no relief, was at last brougiit to enjoy peace of mnNl 
by reading the Tract on tlu ChrisH&n Jltenemeni* 

TRACT PRESENTED BY A YOUNG LADY TO UE& FATHER. 

A Lady in Massachusetts, after stating thirt, iA seteral instances, 
persona had expressed to her gi«at gramude for Ti^ts, which they 
trusted' God had blessed to their eoUversioU, addih the foHotVlng nar- 
nUive: 

I had a father who had entereBtihed il hope ftve yelKftf, but Had' not 
made a prbfesakm of religiott— ^ tremblhig hoj^ It was— ^t could not 
vcast while he waa thaa^ituatted; One day, While he irah busily beru^- 
inga History, I plaoed ott his deak a TractOri fhH nkhxte 6T §Aviiig 
Faith. He perused it again and again, ^ntl w^tf 6bon t±€tt\^iA with 
Ike rmmH poni^t eu p vfc l toii^ for sin^ whtcft ^t» foHowed l^ trthis- 
ports of joy. Ho truiy found pe«ee iii bdi^vlhg; anited hiifiiM>ff ttith 
the church; lived a devout lifo; and a Psw monrhs sittoe died Ih the 
triunsphs of faith. Alt<er ki» decease li« fOuhd tha^ l^^act ear&ntily 
preserved among kispapow^ aiid a piisstfgc) iil hi^ diaty giving at^ ac- 
count of the iiltpressfoiift«hc? baid rooaived fl^didr readili|f it. 

OTHER GOOD EFFECTS OF TRACTS.^ 

OrtHe UMfolnesk of Traets,. say^ f hO Secrefaty of an Auxiliary in- 
^ew-York, there ik no -doubt. The Tract ^dy to he Sahtd has been 
)»eAeficiai in dfreethig an iihrqOlrlOg add doubting mM to Christ. 

The salutary iiiilnenetf of Tttfctaf h<^t6, iays the^ Secreia.ry of an Aux. 
iljary in Kentucky, -Is very f^tfii^tlbld. ^on&e who were formerTj^ 

4? 



pro£uie have ceased swearing, others hate been hopefiilly raciatmed 
from Intemperance, and aome Christians have been stimulated, en- 
couraged, and. comforted bj the perusal of Tracts. 



PROGRESS OF THS MONTHLY DISTRIBUTION. 

The following items, relative to >the progress and success of the sys^ 
tematic monthly Tract distribution in. various parts of the oountry,. 
are principally extracted from the correspondence of the. American< 
Tract Society, under different dates. 

KnoxvilUt Ten. — <' The Female Auxiliary is still actively engaged 
in the monthly distribution. They have thoroughly prosecuted their 
work for 3 successive months. One of the Distributors informed me, 
this evening, that she felt a growing interest in the distribution. She 
had found in her district two families destitute of the Bible ; and two 
persons, who have rarely attended public worship, that were anxious- 
ly inquiring what they must do to be saved. The Ladies have thus 
far received nearly money enough to pay for the TVacts distributed;, 
and there is evidently an increased interest felt in the Tract cause in 
this town, in consequence of the systematic distribution/' 

J^OLshvilUi Ten> — One thousand copies of 13 Tracts ordered. 

Wood CourUy, Ohio. — Two hundred copies of 13 Tracts ordered. 

In Ashtabuia CourUi^t Ohio, an effort is commenced to put a Tracts 
monthly, during the year 1830, into every family. 

Natchez, Hw.— *' The manner in which the Tracts are received is- 
often truly gratifying, and the Distributors generally appear much 
pleased with the work. One active Female Distributor, upon hearing 
that some of her female coac^utors were growing weary, of the distri- 
butioHj expressed' much surprise, saying that she thought it would be 
the means^of doing great goodf and if. others could not be found to 
discharge the duty, she would take it upon herself to occupy any nttiif 
ber of Districts, that should bt nccssscary" 

Middletown, Con, — ** Our Society have distributed over 1000 Tracts 
this month— only. 3. families have refused to.Tcceive them." 

Brooklyn, Con, — During the last month every family in this town 
willing to receive a.Tract was supplied with ** The Sanctuary.** But 
one family, is reported as having refused the Tract. The Distributors- 
are delighted with the duty. 

Rochester, Monroe Co, JV,^ Y. — " We are making our monthly dis- 
tributions, and. thus far are much pleased with the system.'' 

Nevo-Brunsvoick, J>r. /.^400 copies ordered. 

Newport, R. /.—The Tract Worth of the Soul was distributed to 
1276 families the present month, and was refused in four instancee 
only — 1300 ^copies of two additional Tracts are ordered. 

Charleston, 5.. C— 3500 of 4 Tracts are ordered. for four months' 
distribution. 

Darien, Geo. — Copies of 7 Tracts ordered for 7 successive months. 

Louismlle, Ken, — 1000 copies of 7 Tracts ordered. 

Cherry Valley, JV. F.— " We cannot but think good will be tha 
nesult of the monthly distribution.' Our distributors appear to Dc 
fftitfafid; sod the Tracts are well received. '.' 



1830.] ttONTBtt DiStlfttBUTIOI^. 46 

Oeiisfshwrg, Pa,^^** We have recently introduced the'moBtiily di^ 
tribatUm here, and expect the most blessed results." 

Utieat AT. F.^-The Reports of tbe Distributors for January* as cori* 
densed^ occupy nearly thvee coUinms of the Western Recorder. In 
one district two individuals inforaied the distributor that the Pertua- 
sive to Public Worship, distributed the preceding month, had been 
Messed to themselves ; and another; that her husband, who had. for 
•eome time absented himself from the house of God, now attends on- 
. the means of grace. — ** Formerly," said a man in another district^ 
*^*l never atteiHled church ; but since 1 read the last month^s Tract, I 
have attended every Sabbath." Another who was induced, merely 
by curiosity, to read the Tract,, wa» taught by it that she had' a sinful 
heart.— In the district at Deer£eld Corners, a Temperance Society 
has been formed, a Prayer Meeting established, and four persons 
found whoare willing to engage as Tract distributors. —A very happy 
influence has been exerted, noionly in inducing an attendance on 
public worship, but in. behalf of tbe Bible and Sabbath School cause ; 
and the temporal wants of the poor and destitute have, by np meana, 
been oveslooked. 

The Branch Tract Society At Philadelphia- bttv^ recently issued 
a Circular to their Auxiliaries, recommending, to them the adoption 
0( the monthly distribution^ 

l>a»6ttry,C<mn.~-dOO'Copies ordered for several successive months. 

Savamiah, Geo. — 1,060 copies of 5 Tracts ordered. . 

Elmira, JST, K— -" Our monthly distribution goes on welh We 
distribute about 1^ Tracts, and not one is refused." 

For Hartfordy Alexandria^ and HuntmlUf see pages 44, 45. 

Remarks,. 

1. No friend of the Tract cause should make this system of effort 
an excuse for the neglect of promiscuous distribution, wherever Pro- 
vidence opens before him the opportunity of usefulness*. 

2. Early provision should be made for procuring the Tracts.. We 
think the course adopted by the Branch Society at.Pittsburgh deserv- 
ing the attention of Branches and Auxiliaries owning Depositories^ 
from which minor Auxiliaries are supplied ; vin. ordering a large sup- 
ply of a number of select Tracts, perhaps from 10 to 20, and theu 
giving notice to their Auxiliaries, that of those particular Tracts they. 
have a supply for the monthly distribution. 



CONNECTICtTT BRANCH, HARTFORD. 

The Fourteenth Anniversary was. held January 6, 1830. Rev. X 
H. LiNSLBT, the President, opened the meeting by prayer. Addresses 
were delivered by Rev. €k A. Davis, Rev. T. H. Gallaudet, Rev. W. 
C. Woodbridge, Rev. Joel Hawes, and Rev. Mr. Stearns, of Bedford^ 
Mass. Among the resolutions adopted was the following : 

. ReMhiedi That this meeting view, with pleasure, th<e plan of knonihly Tract di^ 
tribution, adopted with so much sueceaa by the Ladies of tlus city ; . and that it ia 
desirable that systematic efforta should be made in each county, to extend its bene- 
fftB to the entire population of the State. 

Receipts,,during. the year, in donatioos, $386 i27; fen Tracts and 



AbQWiMf wM, 9066 «l; tctil f l,fift) «9. Ctrettlated, 4mtlkg tb« 
year, 95»oa6 Tracts, iodudisf 5^340 HandMlli, and 24 copies of t)m 
Bise md Pn>gfeM> 9afiit»^ lEitt, tnid Chrittiaa Reader. Gfvtnitous 
distritetioB ia Ohio, MiMouri, Alabania, MUsissippi, and New-York^. 
7»707 Tracti. T«l«l dfcalatedy wnce «be Ibrnation 6f the Society, 
<d9,776 Tracts. 

The report gW«s a brief and intertstiiif history of tlie Mwifhly. 
Tract Distribotioa in Hertfiird, vHiicii was comf&eiioed iti JMelttM by 
Irbc Ladies' Tract Society. A< largfe number of Ladies chewftilly an- 
dertook tiie task of didtribating, without eompiainiog of the labor lt= 
imposed; aad their nnited testimony is, theft the difleulrieB have been' 
fewer, and the pleasures greater, than they had ejected. Several' 
fiimilies found destitute of the Bible have been supplied, patents hare 
been induced to send their clnldren to Sabbath Schools, aaad new 
, BMrabers of the Tract Society have been obtained. The sick hare- 
been conversed with ; instruction has been ghen to the i^orant, and 
consolation to the desponding and afflicted,. About H2U0 Tracts are^ 
eircolated in each month's distribution. 

After stating that the exercises of the preceding Annua! Meeting re-- 
suhed in the raising of $1,100, in the City of Hartford, to aid the Ame- 
sican Traet Society in its operations, particularly m the Talley of the 
Mississippi, the report proceeds to urge the inconoeirable importance^ 
of supplying the population ofthat portion oTour lahd- and the des- 
titute of all other lands, with religious Tracts. Obaruls HosbIer^ , 
Corresponding Secretaiy and Agcnt» . 



F£]llAIi E AUXILIARY OF ALEXANDRIA, D. C* 

Receipts, durin^^ the year, being the first yearof their operations,. 
f^ldO for a Depository, of tvhich $75 was from one. individual ;'— 
$187 22 other donations; $26 38 for the sale of Tracts ;— total, 
$361^60. The town has been divided into 12 districts, allotted to 
the difierent Managers, to be visited at least once a month, for the 
purpose of loaning Tracts, reading them,. or any other wav promoting 
the spiritual interests of those within the sphere of their influence. 
About 240 families have been visited and supplied with Tra^^ts ; the 
spiritual wants of many destitute of the means of grace have been 
ascertained; some who were destitute of the Bible have been sup- 
plied ; some children brought to Sabbath Schools ; many who neg. 
lected public worship have been persuaded to attend ; and one indi- 
vidual has been hopefully rsdaimedfim»^J0ruTbkennt9shy the reading- 
q£ the Tracts. 



AUXILIARY OF EAST TENNESSEE,. 

Tenth Annlversaiy, held in Knoxvl!le,!>e«embcf^7. futhe absence 
jofRev. Charles Coffin, D. D; President, Rev. T. H. N^bon presided. 
The Treasurer^a Report was> presented by JameeParie, £<({. aad the 
Annual Report read by Rev. Stephen Foster, Secretary. 

Ileeeipts,diiring the year, $916 24, of whfch $2<ltf were donations 

£pr the Depository . Circulated , 333,610 pages. Number of AuxUia- 

las 2& Tile location^ IhU S^Qt^x being so for intirior, the expense 



ItSO,] AUXIIUUUSS. 45' 

of trttasportatioB are necetnrily great, which the report urges as a 
reason for liberal contributioos to sustain the Depository. The month 
ly distribution is successfully prosecuted by the Female Atuciliary of 
KnozTille. 

The YotMg CoUager was presented by the Treasurer to a gentle* 
man, who received it with apparent reluctance, but carried it home. 
Returning to his family, after a few hours absence, he found his wife 
reading the Tract, with tears flowing from her eyes^ This induced 
him to read the Tract himself, which he also did with tears, and im- 
mediately addressed a letter to the donor, expressing his gratitude for 
what he at first received as of little value* 



AUXILIARY OF HUNTSTILLE, ALABAMA. 

Third Anniversary, January 19. After prayer, an appropriate ih^ 
troductory address was delivered by the President, James G. Bir- 
NET, Esq. ; and after the reading of the Report, an interesting ad^ 
dress was delivered by the Rev. John Allan. 

Receipts during the year, ^1,176 89, including donations of $302 
for the Depository ; $59 11 from Auxiliaries ; $36 25 from Annual 
subscribers. Circulated, during the year, 578,858 pages of 12 mo. 
Tracts, 513Chi!dren'8 Tracts, 130 Broadsheets, 1,800 Handbills, 363 
Tract volumes, 140 <'Rlse and Progress'' and -^ Saints' Rest," 23 
'^Boatswain's Mate," and 2,000 Christian Almanacs. 

The Report mentions with gratitude the labors of Rev. 0: East- 
man and Rev. Francis H. Case, Agents of the Parent Society, in 
Huntsville and the vicinity ; also that, in two instances, famiiy wor* 
9hip has been established in consequence of reading the Tract on 
that subject i. and that a donation has been received from a gentlemaa 
of four five franc pieces, which he had formerly used to keep his game 
when playing at cards. The Society has resolved to commence the 
monthly distribution, which is already prosecuted in seven villages in 
the vicinity, in which two men have pledged themselves for the an- 
onal sum of $6 each, which has. been their j^arfy tax for tobacco. 

The Report is accompanied by a list of the Society's Auxiliaries, 1^ 
in number, with the officers of each, and the sum by each contri^ 
buted. Mr. Isaac WiLLiAifs, Sec. Mr. Samuel Coltart, Agenfn 

TKACT ]II£ETIirG AT PTEW-ORLEANS. 

A public meeting was held in JNew-Orleans, Feb. 21, for the puv* 
pose of aiding the Board of Agency of the American Tract Society 
in that City. Gen. Stephen Van Rensselaer, of Albany, presided 
and headed the subscription at the close of the meeting with ^100, 
Whole amount subscribed $681. The audience was large and re- 
spectable $ saylOOOor 1900 persons present. Addresses were delist 
vered by Rev. O. Eastman, Agent of the American Tract Society ; I^^ 
C. Duncan, Esq. Gen. E. W. Ripley, and J. A. Maybin, Esq. 

The Rev. Dr. Milnor, who sailed from New- York on the 16th of> 
March, in the Liverpool packet, is commissioned as a Delegate to 
the London Anniversaries, by the American Tract Society, and also 
the AmericaD 9ible Society, wit^QUt charge to either Institution^ 



40 



ttcEtrt^. 



tAppa, 



Eight subscriptions of f lOOeach, in addition to $200 already pven, 
are requisite to complete the perpetuation of Bunyan*s ** Pilgrim's 
Progress/' 

The Beligious Tract Society in London, in their Tract Magasine 
for February, notice the Monthly IVact JHslribulien.'m this country 
as a very important advance in the system of Tract operations, anil 
kindred in character with the Loam Sytiem,vf hich has been adopted in 
Eagland. — _ 

BAPTIST GENERAL TRACT SOCIETY. 

The Sixth Annual Meeting was held at Philadelphia, January 6. 
Beceipts, during the year, ^,536 98^ of which $2,114 80 were do- 
nations. Printed durinf the year 446,750 Tracts, embracing 4,941«000 
pages. Remittances nave been received, during the year, from 16S 
Auxiliaries. The number of Tracts in the series is 88. The Report 
contains numerous gratifying evidences of the usefulness of Tracts ; 
among others to whom they have been blessed* are two converts to 
Christianity in Burmah. The following resolution was adopted at the 
meeting, viz. 

" Ruohoedj That while the Society solicits the f eneral co-operattba of the Bap* 
tist churches of oar country, in its own labors, it regards with lively satisbctioa th« 
^prosperity and extending usefulness of the American Tract Society." 



sec. 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREiMU&T OF TH£ AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETr, 

DwiHg tkt ftumik ending Mitteh 19, 1830. 

FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 
R. SSL. — Newport, B. S. Cahoone, Sec. . 
Providence, Isrmel H. Bay, Sec. ... 
CONN^Beonhr Erin Giffoidr See. 
Brofrfdyn, (Windham Co. Aoz.) Edwin Newbury, Af . 
Danbory, Horace Bull, Tr. 
Greenwich, (Stanwich Soc.) Wm. Smith, Tr. 
Guilford, Henry E. Hodges, Ag. . 
Hartford, Conn. Branch, C. Homer, See. 
New-Haven, Fern. Mrs. Henrietta F. Whitney, Tr. 
Norwich, Fem. Miss Sarah Backus, Sec. . 
Stafford, Fem. Mrs. Arua S. Smith, Sec. . 
Stratlord, Asa Curtis, Tr. .... 
Waterbury, Horace Hotchkiss, Tr, 
fi. TORR.-*.Aubarn, C. B. Hotchkiss, Ag. 

Do>. by their Auz. at Aurora, 

Do. by thnr Fom. Anx. East Geooa* 
Brooklyn, L. I. Joaeph Howard, Tr. 
CatskiU, Wm. H. Coit, Tr. 
Chenango, Broome Co. Silas West, Tr. . 
Efanira, (Tioga Co. Anx.) W. Jury Dist. Rav. G. Bartan, 
Oosban,J. 8. Crane,Tr. .... 
Hunter, Greene Co. E. J. Stimson, Sec 
Jamaica, L. 1. Marvin W. Fox, Sec. 
New-York City Tract Society, Alfred Edwards, Tr. 

St. Geo, Ch. Fem. Miss Ann Romtanck, Ti 
PkiUipMown, Fem. Miss Ann E. Horlan, Sec 
Rhinebeck, Fem. C. Davidson, Sec. 
Rochester, Monroe Co. Levi A. Ward, Tr. 
t^yrnn, Fem. Mrs. Ascosth Avery, Af. . 



farTr. 


Dn, 


40 00 




105 SO 






100 


25 00 




900 




S40 


m 


705 




413 (M 




30 00 


10 00 


28 70 






300 


13 34 


6 76 


1 74 




27 65 






1 04 




r 12 


18 50 




75 00 




17 00 




14 00 




888 




10 00 




396 


1 08 


1991 35 




700 




300 






90 00 


76 00 






4® 



ISdO*] 



KECEIFTSr. 



« 



Troy, Charles L]pHflB,Tr. . . 

Vtica, Edward Venpcni, fiee. 
If. JER — Newark, ieaiisott CoQger, Sec. . 
Priaceton, Fem. Miae F. W. Maribrd, Sec. 
Somendne, Fen. llss. S<iphia Ttinnget Tr. 
Stillwater, Fem. Ik's. Sarak WinteoiHiot, Tr. 
PENN— BkirsviUe, (Aiix. to Fittaburf h,) 
Bull Creek, do. 

New-Bedford, do. 

Ore^iville, do. 

Pittsburgk, Rev. Robeft PatCerM», Ae* 
MD.— BaHimore Branch. C. A. Hall, Tr. . 
VIE — WiBcbeBter, Daniel Gold, Tr. 

do. by tbeir Aiuc. M artiiisbiHTh, 
N. CAR.-.Saii8bary, Midiael Brown, IV. 
6£0.~Bryan Co. John B. Harden, Sec. . 
Darien, Qi^ard £. Hand) Eaq. Ag. 
Macon, James C. Patterson, Sec. . 
Savannah, W. W. Baker, Esq. Tr. 
ALA. — ^Huntsvilie, Samu^ Coltart, Ag. 
Tuscaloosa, J. B. Cook, Esq. Tr. . 
TENN.— Knoxville, James Park, Tr. 
Nashville, Samuel B. Snowden, Tr. 
OHIO.*— Cincinnati, Henry B. Funk, Tr. 
HO.—St. Louis, W. S. Olmsted, Tr. 

SOCIETIES NOT AOXILURY. 
CONN.—Esaex in Saybrook, Un. Tr. Soc. Joseph H. Hayden, Ag, 
N. JER.--Elizabethtown, Un. J. J. Bryant, Tr. 
Peterson, Ref. Dutch Ch.Ralfrii Doremns, Tr. 
PENN.— HonesdalB. Teinp. Soc. S. Torrey, Tr. 
Tracts sold at the Depository to individuals. 



Directon for L^t, 

N. YORK —New-York City, John 
Murray Ogden, by Misses Mary 
and Hann^ L. Murray, . . $50 

Rensselaer Co. Rev. John A. Mur- 
ray, 90 

Rochester Monroe Co. Rev. Joseph 
Penoey, by Ladies, (in full of > 
$50,) 24 

N. JER.^Lebenon, Rev. Jacob J. 
Schultz, by Ladies of Lebanon 
andWhitehoase,(in{Martof9502) 29 

VIR — ^Winchester, Rev. David H. 
Riddle, !iy Ladies, . 50 

S. CAR.--CharleBtoB, Rev. W. A. 
M'DowellyD. D. by Juv. Aa. in S^ 
School, 3d Presb. Ch. in addit. to 
$25, (in part of $50,) . 

Do. Rev. B. M. Pataner, D. D. by 
Ladies, 

l40U.-.New-0vh)ans, Rev. Theo- 
dore Clapp, by toadies of Presb. 
Church, . • . . . 

Mfiwhtn for Life. 

HASS. — Dedham, Mrs. Rebecca 
Fates, by Ladies of Rev. Mr. Bur- 
gess' Soc. . . . , * 

R. ISL.— Bristol, Mrs. Maria Ro- 
gers, .••••. SO 

CPNN..-^aFlf«rd, Mrs. ChwlM 
SliVi(i)BA]Il9f$aD0 . .10 



For TV. 

90 00 

17100 

57 83 

10 00 
80O 
557 

24 21 

200 

1 00 

946 34 

100 001 

88 12 

61 00 

7S35 

161 78 
80 00 
35 00 
90 OO 

110 00 
05 00 

230 00 
60 00 

11 00 
6 80 

4 00 

5 40 
227 35 



Dn^, 



60O 



350 



375 

6 37 
25 00 



pel 
VIR. 



20 00 



50 



50 00 



Warren, Tertius Reynolds, by his 
&ther, (inpartof$20,) 10 OO 

N. YORK.— Genoa, Rev. S. Smith, 
by Ladies of 1st Presb. Ch. . 20 00 

Owego, Tioga Co. Susan W. Pum- 
peUy, by Mrs. M. H. W. Pun- 
—illy, (in fuU of $20,) . .13 00 
— .—Winchester, Mrs. Elizabeth 
Bamfaart, by Mr. Geo. Bambi^, 
(infollofOao,) . . . .5 00 

ALA.— Wesley, Rev. Alexander A. 
Campbell, D. D. by Ladies of 
Florence, (in ftill of $20,) . . 10 00 

TENN.— ReadyviHe, Rutherford 
Co. Charles Rea4y, Esq.. . . 20 00 

Atrniud Diredera. 
N. YORK.— New-York City, Tho- 
mas M. M'Clean, . . 5 00 
^ Do. Dr. J. R. B. Rodgers, . . 5 00 
OOJThe fbllowhig for 1829 and 1830. 

Joseph Foulke, . . 10 00 

Hairy James, . . . . 10 00 
J. M'Gregor, . . . 10 00 

Martin E. llroiBpson, . 10 00 



00 
00 

00 

37 
00 



20 



00 
00 



jinnual Memberg. 
N.YORK.— New-York City: The 
followiog $2 each.~43eo. Betts, 
Mrs. Ann Bostwick, Archtbaid C. 
Brady, Wm Braan, John Brem* 
ner, E. A. Brinkerhoof, Ifars. Eli- 
a»F. GHbbwB, TbMMi 



48 



RECBNT VUSLICATIOHS. 



[April. 



SI. Dsveaport, Dr. J. W. Dnryee, 
Francis Gram, Wm. W. Jack- 
son, Tarbel Je»ap, James Kdao, 
Aaibony Lamb, Peter Morris, 
John Piatt, Stmhen A. Kich. E. 
ISmith, James M. TulhiU, Hiss E. 
Van Noetraod, . . tt 00 

The foUoTMring for 18S9 and 1830. 
-fi eacd^—Thomak Addison, Hofl^ 
A*l(nian, David Andrews, Cra- 
Iwiel A. Amouz, Rer. Wm. C. 
Brownlee, D. D. Dr. ThomAs 
Cock. Mrs. Elizli Evertson, Na- 
dianiel Gardiner, David Gra- 
liam, Esq. Stephen Hoh, Jun. Si- 
meon Hyde, Matthew Keeler, 8. 
W. Lowerre, Peter Luiilow, Esq. 
Teter M*Cartee, Alex. M'Clure, 
Rev. Benj. Mortimer, John Mor- 
timer, Jun. John Perrot, Rev. A. 
Peters, John Phyfe,SamaeI Pier- 
mo, John Redfield, H. H. Schief- 
felin, . . . 96 00 



Other DonaHont, 

N. HAMP^— Jeffrey, Congrega- 

tional SocieQr, . 4 94 

OONN.~€oventi7,J. H. . .100 
N. YORK.— New-Yoik City, Ano- 
nymous, $10— B. C. D. $5 18->A 
Friend, $1— Fem. Friend, $&— A 
Merdiant $3 — ^A Touog Man, $5 
A. Tappan, $3 37, - . . 32 55 

Smyrna, Charies E. Aveiy, . . 1 00 
Sotfthport, Wm. Wells, . 1 00 

PENN^— Porzatowney, Dr. J. W. 

Jenks, .9 SO 

Vni.^Martin8b«rgh,Geo. Tabb, . 125 
S. CAR^— Charleston, Mrs. Brough- 

Con, 10 00 

TENN^-Carter Co. Gen. Carter, 1 00 

Whole amount of Donations, $795 00 
Received for Tracts sold, 4,909 39 

Total, $5,764 39 



RECENT PUBUCATIONS. 

No. 2S4.— The ADyANTAOss of Prayer, pp. 12. This Tract is 
from the pen of the Rev. iThomas H. Skinner, D. D., of Philadel- 
phia : showing that Prayer is calculated to improve all the powers of 
the human soul ; to counteract whatever tends to its injury ; to give 
«fficacy to the Word of God, read or heard ; to make providential 
Aispensattons a blessing; and that it has an influence upon God 
bimseif 

Occasional T^acU. 

Occasional 7. — The City of Refuge : a Dialogue between a leam- 
ed Rabbi and a sick Penitent, pp. 2U. In which the sick youth be- 
wails his violations of the law of God, and his desert of punishment; 
and finding in himself no hope of deliverance, is led to feel the need 
of pardon through a Redeemer, the coming of whom is foretold in the 
Hebrew Scriptures in such a manner as very definitely to describe 
the Lord Jesus Christ. Adapted for circulation among Jews. 

Occasional 8. — Scriptitre compared with Scripture, pp. 12. 
Showing the correspondence between the most important truths in the 
Hebrew Scriptures, especially the predictions of a Messiah, and the 
truths of the New Testament, with the fulfilmentof predictions therein 
recorded. Adapted for circulation among Jews. 

Occasional 9. — Cecil's Friendly Adtice to the Servants or 
HIS Parish, pp. 8. A brief directory founded on the plain instruc- 
tions of the New Testament. 



French Series, 



No. 

n. 

16. 
19. 

20. 



Pag^es, 
Great Effects from Little 

Canaes, 12 

Common Errors, .... 12 

The Two Old Men, ... 16 

Villaf e in the Hountains, 24 

XK> yoa want a Fdend ? . ^ 4 



Ho, 

22. 

23. 

24. 

25. 



Pagtt. 
History of Amelia Gale, . . P 
Traveller's Farewell, ... 4 
Great doeetion Answered, . SO 
EjdKMtation agaiOBt the fea> 

pfDeaO^ I'll 



THE AMERICAN 



8» ■■ Jlinory of ThDOiu Manii^" Tncl No. a3S, psgc 11. 

TRACT CAUSE IN CEYLON, INDIA. 

It bu oftsD been to nt a painftil reflection, that the AnieTion 
Tract Sociel; hat been able (o do no more for tbe circnialion of 
Tracu amoog the Healhen. The rollowin; ezlracta of a commoDi- 
oalion fnim the AmericBin miiiioniriei in ihe liland of Cey Iob 
ihow that Tract operatioai are ai importaol in caotieiion with mig- 
aionar; effiirti in Pagan land*, a* perhapi in anj other drcumalancei 
whatever. 

The eflorti andiucceia ortfae Ameriran Tract Society, Eaja one of 
the MiuionaTiet, have given to all Ihe membera of our miition mucl> 
sleaiure, and much occHiion for gretilnde i ejid 1 may add alfo of 
Aope, ai it regard* lonie auiilince for the people around u>. We are 
in grtat Want qfaid in publMing Traeli for (tae Healbea, for Soman 
Calholia, for Mahometaiu, and for lome Domioall}' Proiulaal Chiis- 
tiani. Tou will hare learned, from our lail communicalian. that wc 

Vol, V. fi [WaoLB No. 63. 



do TEACT CAUSE I!f CETXiOfT, IlfDIA. [Majy 

bftTe published fereral Trad* for the Heatheo, nostljr original, ae 
tnuislationa leem less adapted to the state of the people here, and our 
limited means have made it important for us to publish such as seemed 
most likelj to do good, though at more expense of labor in the pre- 

K ration. Our Tracts, though few, have cost us a good deal of time, 
tng prepared with much care, and on that account, we think, bet- 
ter worth the expense of printing. We know of some instances in 
iHiich they have been made useful. 

Intercourse with the people around afibrds abundant proof that 
light is spreading, and that Heathenism is in proportion losing its 
hold on the mind. We have reason to believe thiat many aie con» 
▼inced of the folly of their superstitions, though from custom, regard 
to family connexions, fear of perseeution, be. they still continue to 
practise them ; and that a favorable impression of the excellence of 
the Christian religion is widening and deepening It is asserted, bjr 
many credible persons, that the contributicms made to the temples, 
and to Bramins, have been for some time on the decrease ; and we 
trust the way is preparing for the more or leas genenUlownfall of tha 
strong holds of Satan. The favorable change which we trust is gra- 
dually taking place in the views of the people, roust be ascribed, in a 
good degree, to the distribution of Tracts. Circumstances have come 
to our knowledge where a single Tract has excited so much interest 
in a village, as to be lent from house to house ; and it hfM often proved 
exceedingly gratifying, after distributions made at the Heathen pro- 
cessions, to witness little groups, seated here and tl^ereon the ground, 
after their custom, attentively listening to the readmg of a Religious 
Tract. We cannot but cherish the hope, that however the Heathens 
are fortified to resist Christianity, while such measures are employed, 
the Spirit of Ood may open the mind to conviction, and bring home 
divine truth with power in the heart. 

Formerly it was with reluctance that Tracts were received by a 
few, while great numbers absolutely refused to take them. Now« it ia 
often cheering to observe, that they are eagerly sought for and atten- 
tively read. But the interest thus excited must be kept up. The Tracts 
already distributed must be followed by others, or the good impres- 
sions made will, it is feared, be soon erased, and the advanUge lost. 
The Tracu hitherto published have done little more than prepare 
the way for further efforts. A much greater variety is needed, adapt- 
ed to the different dasses of whidi the population is composed, whe- 
ther Heathens, Mahometans, Catholics, or Protestants : each class 
requires a distinct series of Tracts, suited to their peculiar views , 
practices and prejudices. 

^ The increase of the reading population in consequence of the mis- 
sion schools, in which between "MKX) and 6000 children are taught, 
among whom are nearly 1000 girls, calls for prompt and strenuous 
exertions, that the youthful mind, prepared to derive incalculable ad- 
vantages from the privileges enjoyed, be not supplied with poison 
instead of food ; and thus the objects of instruction be defeated. The 
rising generation requires a distinct series of Tracts, with which they 
must be supplied, or it may well be feared that the hopes of the bene- 
volent in other lands, whose energies and whose prayers have been 
ekdted for the promotion of their best interests^ will be disappointed^ 



13S0.] BRITISH CORRESPONDENCE. . 51 

and that these youths will become established in Heathenism, and 
more determined enemies to Christianity than those unacquainted 
with it. We have had too much cause to lament that instances are not 
wanting^ to confirm these remarks, and to convince us of the great 
necessity of supplying the rising generation, as they have the benefit 
of the schools, with such books and Tracts as may store the mind with 
real knowledge, and prove a safeguard against the baneful contami- 
oation of Heathenism. 

Appended to this communication is a statement of extensive Tract 
distributions, made by members of the Mission, in towns in difierenC 
directions; the readiness with which Tracts were received and read; 
and an appeal to the Committee for all the aid which the Society's 
means will enable them to affords 

English translations of two Tamul Tracts ; vix. '^ A Friendly Epistle 
to Roman Catholic Priests," and an ** Aecoont of the Snfierings of 
Poly carp," have also been received, that, being approved by the Pub- 
lishing Committee, donations from the Society may be appropriated 
to their circulation. , 



BRITI8H CORRESPONDEICCE. 

FrMi ikt Reliffi$ut Tract Soeuiy of London, dated February 18, 1830. 

The Committee of this Institution feel much satisfaction in noticing, 
from time to time, the growing prosperity and increasing efficiency 
of the Americnn Religious Tract Society. We congratulate you ob 
the very many proofs that the Divine Messing attends your labors in 
an eminent degree, and we pray that, under the influence of the Holy 
Spirit, your past prosperity may be increased an hundred fold. 

We have abundant cause for gratitude in knowing that our humble 
ldx>rs have not been altogelher in vain. Our circulation continues to 
increase, and we are frequenUy favored with good tidings from dis- 
tant lands, as well as being assured that the home operations of the 
Society are greasy blessed. The cireulatian of our publicatioriM on 
loan is beeomtng general throughout the kingdom, and is frequently 
attended by the happiest results. 

The Committee of this Society, anxious to perpetuate the friendly 
intercourse which so happily subsists between the two Societies, and 
which is so agreeable t«> us, have directed a supply of all cur publica- 
tions since we last had occasion to furnish you with a complete set, 
to be forwarded to you, down to the close of the past year ; they are 
•hipped on board the OrWt, Capt. Fish, and it will afford us pleasure 
to know that they have reached you in safety. 



From tts lAoorpool MoHgiofio IVset Society, mndor daio tf Oct. IS, 1898. 

Mt Dear Sir— By this opportuaity I forward to your address 6 co- 
bles of our Fifteenth Annual Report, presented September 1, by which 
jou will perceive that we are not insensible to the feelings that ac- 
iaate ytnnr deroted and socoeisfiil Committee, both in respect to the 



£ FORSieN C0MUB8F0NDEKCE. [Msj* 

uneTang^ellzed part of jour own community, and to those who, like 
ouTfelves, are laboring, though in comparative obscurity, in the same 
cause, and in the service of the same Master. 

I expect grtat results from your plan ofdittribiUing Tracts monthly 
through the city, one to every family. I hope, ere long, to see the 
same plan in active operation here. With a population not very ma- 
terially less than yours, and with probably quite as large a propor- 
tioD given up to habits, the natural accompaniment of gross ignorance 
of Him ** whom to know aright is life eternal,'* we have the same call 
lor exertion, aad shall be inexcusable if we do not effectually an- 
swer it. 

Your plan is well explained in your Cards, and it is a very simple^ 
feasible, and effectual one. 

Abstract of the Report. 

Receipts* during the year, including balance doe the Treasurer, 
$1 ,340. Distributed, during the year, 235,645 Tracts, making a total 
of 4,193,020 Tracts distributed since the formation of the Society. 
Number of new Tracts published during the year 19. The distribu- 
tion, to different humane and charitable Institutions, market people, 
persons going to and returning from races, loiterers at the pier heads, 
the shipping generally, &c. &c. has been actively maintained. during 
the year; and numerous very gratifying instances are given of good 
effected. The report refers to the friendly relations sustained with the 
Glasgow, London, and American Tract Societies ; and urges all the 
followers of Christ to greater personal activity in Tr^ct distribution* 

" Christians," says the report, " your duty is to begin this day ; to 
begin with earnest prayer for the Divine direction and blessing ; to 
begin your operations of Christian philanthropy with enlarged views ; 
to begin at home, in your family, amongst your neighbors, amidst the 
daily avocations of business 7 to make it a leading object in journey- 
ing from home, for business or for pleasure ; to occupy yourselves 
therein in your leisure hours ; and in proportion to your ability, to let 
every individual under the sun, to whom you can gain access, hear 
and read the message of salvation, which holy men, acting in the fear 
of God, and with a view to his glory, have thus prepared and put into 
your bands/' 

From one of the Secretaries of the Dublin City JiGssion, dated 

October 7. 1829. 

As one of the Secretaries of the Dublin City Mission, instituted June 
18, 1828, an opportunity has been Afforded mo of serving our Divine 
Master. We had many difliculties to contend with, but a plain path 
has been made for our feet, and we. at the end of sixteen months, can, 
and do say, with adoring gratitude, ** What hath €rod wrought !" O, 
Sir, we cannot expect too much from God. We receive little, because 
we ask little. The Lord has so prospered the City Mission, that we 
have lately formed a Society for the purpose of promoting the same 
system throughout the island, in all its cities, towns, and villages, be- 
lieving that theie is nothing more likely, under God, to raise Ireland 
than the system of taking the Gospel to the people in their own houses. 
As one of the Secretaries of the Local Missionary Society for Ireland, 



ItSO.] WAAL Dl»0X.ATI0ir9. 58 

I paypofe vifltiiig the principal dties^ towng, moA villages in the 
bland, for the purpose of soggesting to the Lord's people the pro- 
priety of seeking the good of their neighbors, and of rendering them 
way assistance iia my power in organising local missions. 

In reference to America, I hare had much the same feeling as to 
Ireland, to wit, that the Lord has blessings in store for it infinitely 
beyond what it enjoys at present. Great things are going forward in 
America, which lurnishes ground of praise and thanksgiving. 

The first report of tlus Society ie afaw received, from which it ap- 
pears, that 13 Agents, or Missionaries, have been employed (besides 
40 others who devote part of their leisure) in personally communica- 
ting spiritual instruction to the poor, and in the distribution of the 
Scriptures, Tracts, and other books. The Appendix to the report 
contams very numerous interesting facts, showing that great igno- 
rance, wickedness, and prejudice prevails, and that asany have been 
spiritnalljr benefitted by the labors of the Society. 



MORAL DESOLATIONS. 

We frequently refrain from publishing facts, commmiicated from 
the most authentic sources, showing the moral desolations existing in 
many parts of our beloved country, lest we should thereby wound the 
fcelings of some ; and yet we are constrained to feel that such facti 
•nght to be known to all who love the Lord Jesus Christ. How shdl 
we justly appreciate the obligations devolving upon us, unless we 
know the wants of our fellow-men } The following iacts are comma 
nicated by men worthy of the most entire confidence, from parts of 
the country where they have, for some time, been laboring, or from 
places where they permanently reside. 

i^Vofii an hUeUigeni OtntUman in oae i(ftke CouniUt of ike U. SiiOei, 

This is a very rich, fertile, populous, and I may add irreligious 
county. The deadly sin of Intemperance is horribly prievalent, even 
among many who profess to be followers of the meek and lowly Je- 
sus. The destitution of the faithful preaching of the Gospel and of 
the Bible is almost equally great. At the same time you can scarcely 
imagine the ignorance which generally prevails respecting the na- 
ture and design of all our principal Benevolent Institutions. They are 
looked upon as great, speculating, money-making establishments ; and 
the very name of an ** American Society" is often enough to awaken 
the bitterest opposition. 

I am daily more and more convinced of the importance of placing 
Tracts in every family. They would, in my opinion, be incomparably 
t>etter than all the means of grace now enjoyed by this people. Had 
I a hundred lives to live, I feel that I could spend them all profitably 
in laboring for the cause of religion within dO miles of the place where 
I am now writing. 

6* 



54 MOBAXi DE80LAT10II8. [May, 

JPVom a GaUUman in oMtfur and very ditUmi part of the CovMky. 

In some portioiu of the interior where I have travelled ezten- 
sively, the use of whiskey and other ardent spiritt pievaib to a lamt 
alarmiDg extent. I have called on multitudes of families who were 
miserably poor, and talked with them freely on this most destructive 
cause of their ruin. Sometimes I charge home upon them the crime 
of using whiskey, and feeding their families with whiskey, instead of 
providing them with schools and the means of instruction. I think 
that in a place where I recently formed a Society, there was not an 
eye but was rolling in the gushing tears, when I told them bow they 
had robbed their children of what would be demanded of them in the 
day of judgment. The man who piloted me to the road after the meet- 
ing said: To tell the truth, I have just taken my barrel to the distil- 
lery to have it filled with whiskey; but I will go directly there and 
.eountennand my orders. 



From a Gentleman at the 1Ve$ly detained from labors for the American 

Tract Society by declining health. 

So far as I know my own feelings, my heart is with the Tract So- 
ciety ; and I more desire the restoration of health, that, by promoting 
its interests, I may be able to do something for the advancement of 
the cause of Christ, than from any other motive. I have seen enough 
of the West to know that, in a spiritual sense, large portions of it are 
growing up with briars and thorns : I have travelled a good deal, and 
been extensively acquainted, and speak fVom personal observation. 
And what shall be done ? Shall the tide of moral desolation be per- 
mitted to roll on till thousands afrer thousands are hurri(>d by its tur- 
bid and desolating stream into the gulf of perdition 7 Can nothing be 
done to stay its baneful progress ? Yes^ much, very much can be done. 
Beside all that can be done to promote the preaching of the Gospel, 
let Sabbath schools, with well selected libraries, be established in 
every neighborhood ; let the word of God be placed in every family ; 
and Tracts in the hands of every individual who can read them, and 
who can calculate the blessed results? We must go to the judgment 
seat of Christ, and into the eternal world, before we can make the 
calculation. And why is this not done? Let Christians feel as they 
vfitl feel on the bed of death, and at the judgment seat of Christ, and 
place that estimate on earthly good and earthly treasures, which they 
then will do, and let them know the value of the immortal soul as they 
then will know it, and the work would be done. The truth is, Chris- 
tians are pleading excuses for not engaging more earnestly in the 
cause of Christ, and for not giving more for the spread of the Gospel, 
which they will not dare to plead at the bar of God. 

And now, dear Brother, let me ask an interest in your prayers, that 
God would make plain before me the path of duty, and if he has any 
thing more for me to do in this pilgrimage, that he would give me 
strength and grace to perform it ; or if I am soon to go down to the 
grave, that I may be prepared to glorify him in death. 



IftaO*] XONTBIiT DISTRIBUTION. 55 

9i01fTHI.T TRACT BISTmBUTION. 

We have receiTed, and read whb deep interest, the Report of the 
SQCcesff of this system of effort in Albany for the months of October, 
November, December, and January. The Distributors, except in the 
parts of the city near the river, are chiefly Female members of the re* 
spective churches. Nambe'r of Distributors in the 5 Wards of the 
City, 189; No- of Tracts distributed, 9889; No of families refusing 
Tracts, 106 ; whole number of families reported , 281 1 . "In general,'' 
says the Committee, ** among every class of our citizens, the recep- 
tion of the Distributors has been kind, and in many cases they are 
welcomed as the messengers of glad tidings by parents and children. 
Many of the Distributors also are thankful to the Lord that He ever 
induced them to enter this field of labor. They have found it refresh- 
ing to their own souls. 

** The work has led to a more extensive conversation with indivi- 
- duals OB the subject of religion than any thing which has ever occur- 
red here. It has resulted, the Committee are induced to believe, in a 
more general reading of the Scriptures ; has brought many families to 
church, and a great number of children to the ^abbath schools ; and 
the temporal well-being of some poor families has been manifestly 
promoted." 

To the question that the effort inyolves a toatte of money , it is re- 
plied, that the same objection may be urged against the universal and 
stated preaching of the Gospel. But if any part of the population 
must be abandoned in this distribution who will dare assume the re- 
sponsibility of deciding what part? Perhaps some might advise to 
omit toealthy Christian fctmiliet. " In one such family, where a Tract 
was left, there were perhaps a hundred Tracts in the house, but the 
fact that this was left in the monthly distribution induced th^ eldest 
daughter to read it. Her mind had before been seriously impressed 
with Divine truth ; but she says this Tract very much deepened those 
impressions — she is now exercising faith and hope in Christ. Is it not 
better to present a Tract even where the prospect of usefulness is 
small, than to pass by the door where one might be the messenger qf 
eternal life? Is it not the command of Christ to preach the Gospel 
'to every creature?* Is not the redemption of every immortal soiil 
precious? 

** We trust in God, in whose cause we labor, that when tnore time 
shall have elapsed for developing the results of this operation, they 
will be seen abundantly to compensate for all the labor, self-denial 
and expense incurred, and to justify more than all the interest which 
has been felt in it." 

Uliea, NetD'Tork, 

The last monthly Report of the distribution is fall of encourage- 
ment, detailing very numerous conversations and incidents, which 
cannot fail to affect the heart of every reader who loves the souls of 
men. The report from one district says, '* Evident traces of the foot- 
steps of the mighty One of Israel are here to be seen. Hard hearts 
Hare become softeaedi A geaeral serioasnegs pervades the District,*' 



■OVTSIiT 0I8TftIBUtIOir. [MbJ% 

" What shall I dot" cried one with reference to the Tract Seri^itM 
Thoughts on Eternity; ** I am not prepared to die." *' J found in my 
district/' says one Distributor, ** considerable feeling on the subject 
of religion— some rejoicing in the hope of salvation. One individmid 
supposing the Tract left last month would be rei|nired, had eommtl* 
ted it to memory.** 

" In lYard No. 3, each report has come in, fraught with the love 
of souls, bearing the precious news that awakened sinneiv are im|uir- 
ing the way toZion. * My visits/ says one, ' have been made, not 
only with increasing delight, but with a solemn conviction that this if 
work over which ministering spirits watch with intense interest. lo 
some instances the Holy Spirit condescends to bless these efforts to 
the conviction of sin. The hearts of the widow and the orphan have 
been gladdened, and we believe the blessings of many ready to pe> 
rish, both in soul and body, will come on those engaged in this work. 
Another says, * Never have' I witnessed such scrfenmity on the ninda 
of the people. Never was my soul more cheeied with the presence of 
my Savior than in this month's distriiwtion.' 

" * O !' exclaimed a prostrated being in Ward No. 6, who had seat for 
rae in the dead of night, when supposed to be in the agonies of death, 
' 1 thought I should never see yon again in thia world. I felt nvpre* 
pared to die ; and I remembered the Tract which I refused to receive 
from the hands of the Distributor!* " 

Reporti flwn vmious pideet. 

NateheZf Btist, — " The system of monthly distribution has been 
sustained here, and is adopted in Washington, in this state. We are 
now distributing the prize Tracts on the Divine Origin of the Bible." 

Brooklyn, Con. — Another Auxiliary has just adopted the monthly 
distribution, making, in all, 1778 families in this county to whom this 
system uf effort is now extended. 

Coxsackie, N. F. — ^200 copies of 6 Tracts ordered. 

Elmiray iV. Y — Our monthly distribution goes on well. The Dis- 
tributors, I think, are becoming more interested eveiy month. We dis» 
tributed 140 Tracts — not one was refused. 

Stilwater, N* J. — " We commenced the monthly distribution in 
August, and have distributed 11,700 pages of Tracts. The plan has 
been found to be entirely practicable. The distributors have increased 
in energy and zeaHn the good cause. Number of families regularly 
supplied, 230." 

TVoy, N Y.~~** Our monthly distribution goes on finely. The Dis- 
tributors are in good spirits, and persevere in the work as if they loved 
to labor for Christ and the souls of men. Two very interesting cases 
of conversion were reported at the last meeting of Distributors— and 
this is sufficient to encourage any Christian heart.*' " Please send 
1800 copies of the WatehmakeTf for the next month's distribution.'* 
• Hunisville, Ala. — *' We are now distributing Tracts monthly. 
Whole number of families 222, in 9 of which the Tract was refused." 

Paritf Ken» — The distribution has been for 3 months successfully 
prosecuted by the Female Tract Society ; and Tracts are ordered for 
12 months ensuing. 

Bt4lfal», J>r. F.-*'< For the last 6 months the Ladies' AuxUiaiy have. 



1830.] USEFULITEIS OF TRACTS. 57 

been prosecuting the monthly distribotion. So far as we have beeii 
able to carry it into effect, it has succeeded well. It brings some to 
church that did not go ; augments Sabbath Schools; and promotes the 
Temperance cause." 

' Augutta, Qtc^mne hundred copies of three Tracts are ordered 
for monthly distribution. 

VSEFUI^NESS OF TRACTS. 

Condensed from the Rrporl of fhe Female Auxr of Normchf Con. 

One poor aged skeptic was greatly alarmed by hearing the La$t 
Sburt of Francis Neteport read to him.— An aged female, now de- 
ceased, repeatedly expressed great gratitude for the spiritual aid she 
had derived from Tracts.— X poor woman, who, in the midst of great 
trials, received the Tract, lb the Afflicted^ called, some weeks after- 
ward, on the Distributor, and thanked her, with flowing tearu, for that 
** preciouf Tract" which she had read again and again. — A young, 
man who had been previously awakened- received the Tract, Pause 
and think t Am la Christian ? and was enabled afterward to say, ** I 
did pause— 1 did think*— and from the bottom of ifty heart offered up 
the, prayer, * God be merciful to me a sinner.' Now I trust I have 
learned something of* the height, and depth, and length, and breadth, 
ofthe love of Christ*" 

One member of the Society says she loved all the Benevolent Soci* 
eties. but especially the Tract Society, from which she had derived 
much personal benefit; but she was destitute of employment, and had 
nothing to give but her feeble prayers. These she directed to her 
Heavenly Father, who sent her employment for her needle, from the 
proceeds of which she, besides giving something as a donation, pro- 
cured a supply of Tracts for gratuitous distribution ; took them to her 
closet, spread them out before her heavenly Father, and begged his 
special blessing on each one of them. " I suppose,** she adds. ** no 
individual destitute of religion, however rich or great, ever enjoyed 
what I did at that sweet moment Some of the Tracts thus procured 
and circulated I have every assurance Bave been blessed to the souls 
of those who received them.*' \ 

About 900 families are supplickl in the monthly distrilnUion ; two 
have declined receiving Tracts. The Distributors are impressed with 
the importance of this work to themselves and others. The proud 
dtepHc may smiU at the powerlessness of the efforts of a humble female 
^aet Distributor ; but the widow and the fat}\trless, and the sons and 
daua^hlers of poverty and eviction, and the Father of her spirit too, will 
bless her ! Depending on Him, she is made strong in his strength, 
and mighty in hit might, to the accomplishment of his own gracious 
purposes.— One poor old man, whose earthly hopes had been all 
Mighted by the lapse of time, on receiving the Tract, Do you want a 
Fnend ? and looking at it, burst into tears and said, " This is just 
such a Friend as I need."-*A man, who was doing all in his power to 
undermine Christianity, received the Tract on the hutUutton and 
Observance of the Sabbath, and the next Lord's day was seen, with 
his (hmHy, in the saQctnaiy, ftom which, for years, they had absented 



58 A17XIX.IARIES. [May, 

themselres. Several persoos in obscure situations, who were nttdf, 
in despondency, to adopt the language, *' No man careth for my 
soul/' have been led, by the Distributors, to the enjoyment of the 
means of Gospel grace, and are now rejoicing in hope. A number of 
children have been brought from abodes of wretchedness and immo- 
rality, under the instruction of the Sabbath School. ** Three rejecters 
of Divine revelation have been brought as humble suppliants at the 
foot of the cross, through the instrumentality (as is believed) of these 
silent preachers ; and several who have obtained hope'in Christ da- 
ring the recent outpouring of the Holy Spirit, impute the change €o 
the Divine blessing on the perusal of the Tract Do you want a JFHend ? 
circulated in the month of October." 



ANNfTERSARIES OF AUXILIARIES. 

AuxiUetry of MobilCf JUabama. — ^The first annual meeting was held 
in the Gk)vernment-street Church. After prayer and the introductory 
remarks of the Fresidetit, H. Hitchcock, Esq. the Annual Report was 
read by Rev. J. B. Warren, the Corresponding Secretary, and Ad- 
dresses were delivered by Rev. Mr, £astman. Agent of the American 
Tract Society ; Rev Mr. Walker, Rev. Mr. Shaw, and H. Hitchcock, 
Esq. A contribution of upwards of $60 was taken up. Mr. Alanson 
Knapp is appointed Agent of the Depository, in place of Mr. Erwin, 
resigned. 

. JiuxiUary of MtddUbwryt Ver, — Third annual meeting March 9, 
when Addresses were delivered, and it was resolved to adopt the Sys* 
tem of Monthly Distribution. Receipts during the year $31 60. 

TRACT MEETING IS FHILAPELP^IA. 

A public meeting was held in Philadelphia, March 22, with special 
reference to obtaining funds to sustain the Monthly Distribution in 
City. Joseph Montgomery, Esq. presided, and aAer prayer by 
Rev. B. B. Smith, rcHolutions were offered, accompanied by Addresses 
from Rev. Joel T. Benedict, Corresponding Secretary of the Penn- 
sylvania Branch TracfSociety ; Rev. Noah Davis, Agent of the Bap- 
tist General Tract Society ; Rev. S. H. Tyng, and Rev. Thomas 
M'AuIey, D. D. a member of the Publishing Committee of the Ame- 
rican Tract Society. Of the address of the last speaker, the Phila- 
delphia Recorder says, " The facts he developed, and the passing, 
but delicate touches of simple eloquence with which they were in- 
terspersed, held the attention of a large congregation perfectly en* 
chained." A subscription was taken up amounting to about $^00. 

Pilgrim*9 Progre$»^~A Clergyman of Mawwchuaetta, and a Layman of Provi- 
dence, R. I. have each agreed to pay $100, in part for perpetuating this work s 
■taking $400 now aubscrlbed. The condition of the orifinal subacription was that 
tlie whole man of $1000 be pledged on or before the Society's anniversary. May IS. 

A premium of $50 to be awarded by Rev. W. C. Brownlee, D. D. Rev. William 
Berrian, and Rev. W. D. Snodgrass, is ofitered for die best Tract on the " Dnltes ^ 
JD&wuBtie Sermmfs,*' which shall be presented before the 90th of 4uly next. Tlie 
moiiu-oripto to be oommitted to Mr. Mosea AUen, or Ifr. Jonathan D. Steele, of 
New-Yon* 



Tr. 



FarTr, 


M06 00 


SO 00 


5 76 


11 00 


> S 00 


15 00 


300 


700 


3 75 


1 80 


7 61 


S50 


456 


3 63 


100 00 


568 


S50 


66 60 


50 00 


8 82 


13 80 


96 


538 


390 


5S5 


100 00 


901 38 


400 


10 00 


19 00 


850 


17 00 


12 83 


60 00 


109 00 


155 


700 


1 74 


10 50 


900 



300 
1 00 
500 

19 00 



RlfiCENT PUBUCATIOHS. 

No. 236. The Honest Waterman, or History or Thomas MAinr, 
DiSTiif eoisBBD f OR H19 REi^iGio^s CHARITIES.— tpp. 20. The subject 
of this history was an obscuie Waterman of Jjondon, who pursued his 
business through a long life, with no special pecaniary advantages ; 
and who jet, through the lesults of his unceasing labors and great 
economy, after having been very charitable in a most unassuming' 
manner during his life, gave, at his death, by legacy, one hundred 
pounds sterling (444 dollars) to each of ten benevolent Institutions 
in London, and fifty pounds sterling to each of five other kindred In* 
stitutiona. Few individuals have so happily exemplified the Christian 
character. A vein of piety runs through the Tract, which is full of 
instruction for persons in every department of life. 

No. 296. Memoir of Ltdia W. — pp. 4. A brief and w^lUwritten 
Memoir of a pious female who, in the midst of affliction, was, to ad* 
vanced years, a pattern of Christian humility, submission and confi* 
denoe in God. Extracted from the London Christian Observer. 

RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TKEASUEY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 
Dmrmg ik* tumMk tmdu^ Aprii 15, 1830. 
FROM AUXILURY TRACT SdCIETIES 
VER^— BrookfleU, John Smitb J^. 
Marlbonnif h. Fern Huldali C. Newtoo, Ag. 
Ptttaford, Abal Pealield, Tw, 

MAflS^^Boatoo, AoMrican Tract Society, J* Tappaa, Tr. 
Ftttaileld, Fem. Mrs. H. F. Tappan, Fnt, 
%>riiif IMd, SdoBun Warrioer, Jun. Tr. • 

Stockbridga, Moms FaircUld, Tr. 
Wetlfiald, Fem. Mrs. Sally G. Foet, Sec. 
R.ISLv~East Greenwich, Rev. Michael Bnrdett, Ag. 
CON?f .— Brooidyii, (WiodhaiB Co. Aux ) Edwin Nawboiy, Ag 
Cheaterfield, Motatville, F. O. WUliam Thatcher, Sec 
Colebrook, SetbMarshall, Sec. 
KilUagworth, John S. Hull, Sec. 
New-fiaven. Samuel P. Davis, Af . • 

New-London, Robert .Coit. Tr. 
New-MilToid, Ezra Noble, Tr. 
Sharon, Charles F. Sedawick; Sec 
Westbrook, Fem. Mrs. Lucy Selden, Sec. 
N. YORIL— AHwny, Central Brauch, D. VKercher, Sec 
Bedford, Fem. Mrs. Susan 8. Nichols, Sec. . 

Brideehaanaton, Rot. Amsi Francis, Sec. . 
BrofMdyo, L. I. Joseph Howard, Tr. ■ . 
BoflUo, Fem. Mim Harriet W. Russd, Sec 
Cairo, Greene Co. D. Johnson, Tr. 
Goxaackie, A. Van Dyek, Esq. Ag, 
Oodien, John S.Crane, Tr. • 

Hempstead, Rev. Charles Webster, Tr. . 
Jsmaica, Marvin ^V. Fox, flee. ... 
Monlicelio. Sullivan Co. Rev William M*Jimsey, Ag. 
New-York City Aux. Alfred Edwards, Tr. 
Do. by Fem. Aux. Mrs. J. R. Hurd, Tr. . 
Do. Seventh Preb. Church, X. Alexander, Sec 
Do St. George's Ch. Fem. Miss Ann Dominick, Tr. 
Owefo, (Tioga Co. Aqx.) E. Jury Oist. CoL C. B. Fixley, 
Pou^keepsie, Fem. Mrs. Tabitha Tioe, Tr. 
Sag Harbor, Samuel Phillips, Tr. 
Springfield, Otsego Co. Rev. Mr. How, Free. 
Troy, Charles Lyman, Tr. . . • 

Utica, Edward Vernon, Sec . 

West Farms, Juv John Butler, Sec. 
N. JER.--Bloonifie1d, Juv. John H. Morrison, Sec 
Littleton, Silas B. Condict, Tr. , 

MansAeU, Fem. Hetty H. Sherrerd, Tr. 
Xoaroe, aear MorrisUmB, Edwia Ford, Tr. 



5 25 
1 83 

8i;» 



3 62 



S93 



90 
75 



3 90 



51 



50 

SOO 



60 



HECEIPTS. 



New-Bninswiek, Peter DajrtoB, Tr. ■* 

Pennington, Fern. Bin. Eliza A. Rue, Sec. 

Springfield, Abijah L. Diumeli, Tr. . * ^ * 

PENN^Dundaff, Susqh. Co. Dr. WiUiam TerbeD, Sec . 

PhiUuielphia Branch, Rev. Joel T. Benedict, Gen. Af . 

Pittsburgh, Rev. Robert PatterBon, Ag. 

MD— Baltimore Branch, Charles R. Colenian, See. 

Buckingham Academy, Worcester Ca Jut. Wra. H. Riley, Sec. 

DI8. COL.— Alexandria, Fem. Mrs. E. S Ladd, Sec 

VIR. — Fredericksburg, John P. Little, Sec 

Petersburg /Thomas u. Boswell, Sec 

Richmom]^ Wm. F. Micou, Tr. .... 

SturgeouTille, Fern. Rev. Francis Bertlett, Ag. • 

N. CAR.— Milton, M. P. Huntington, Sec. 

Washington, Richard H. Mastin, Sec. 

S. CAR.— Charleston, S. Car. Branch, Rer. John DickMm, Ag. 

MISS.— Natchez, Thomas Henderson, Tr. 

LOU.— New-Orleans Board of Agency, J. A. Maybin, £8<|. Sec 

TENN'— Nashville, Samuel B. Snowden, Tr. 

OHIO.— CMUicothe, Rev. J. P. Bauaman, Tr. . ^ 

Cincinnati, Henry B. Funk, Tr. . . . 

Salem, Ashtabula Co. Dep. Rev. Luther Humphrey, Ag. 

IND. — Indianapolis, Dr. Isaac Coe,Pre6. . 

Madison, Rev. J. H. Johnston, Sec. . • • 

MO«— St. Louis, W.S.Olmsted, Tr. . . • 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 

N. YORK Orange Co. Sabbath Union, Robert DennisoB, Sec. 

N. JER.— Elizabethtown Un. J. J. Bryant, Tr. . 
PENN.— Damascus,- Wayne Co. Loran ParaoBS, Pres. • 
Tracts sold at the Depository to individuals, 

{CONN.— Greenwich, 



18* 
00 
00 



t 



1 

3 

46 08 
90 00 



00 
60 



oa 

50 
37 
30 
57 
00 



3 

13 

31 

13 

1 

10 

S3 00 

500 

50 00 

100 00 

100 00 

150 00 

87 40 

308 50 

30 00 

635 

44 66 

300 



Doit' 



lOO 

87 50 



Directors for Life, 

MASS.— South Boston, Rev. Joy 
H. FairchUd, by Ladies, (in fuU 
of 150,) 18 00 

N. YORK.— New-York City, WU 
liam Couch, . . 800 00 

Col. Richard Varick, 



N. JER.— Morristown, Rev. Albert 
Barnes, by Ladies, (in full of 150,) 30 00 



100 00 Chenango Forks, a Lady, 



Members for Life, 

CONN.— Middletown, Mrs. Henry 

S. Ward, 35 00 

New London, Robert Coit, . : 80 00 
N. YORK.— New-York City, Mrs. 
Ann Mathews, by few Ladies of 
South Dutch Church, . . 30 00 
Benjamin Tytler, . . . 30 00 
Walton, Del. Co. Miss Mary Baa 
sett, 80 00 



GEO.— Macon, James CPatteraon', 30 00 GEO.— Harries Co. Mr. Wilboni 



St. Mary's, Rev 
by Ladies, 



Horace S. Pratt, 



Annual Members, 



N. YORK —New-York CiQr, Mrs. 

D. A. Frost, . . 3 00 

Mrs. Mary Wilkes, for 1829 & 1830» 4 00 

Olker Donations* 

" A Father,** thank offering on tlie 
birth-day of a Sim, . • 

N. H AMP— Hopkinton, Miss Sarah 
Greely, (decoMod) • Legacy, . 60 00 



31 70 

396 

950 

388 15 

Rev. Isaac 
Lewis, D.D. 

Milford Scholars, . . . . 

Preston, a Friend, 

N. YORK — An Agent for Societies 
for prmnotion of the Gospel, ba- 
lance of his compensation, 



30 00 



New York City, Almerin Loorais, 

** Legh Richmond," in addition to 
$50, and in part for perpetuating 
the ** Young Cottager,** 

N. JER. Littleton, Silas B. Con- 
diet, 

PENN.— Shippensburg, Rev.H.R. 
Wilson, .... 

N: car — Granville Co. Yoang*s 
Store, Ladies Working Com- 
pany . . - . 

S. CAR.— New Columbia, C. D. 
Mallary, 



1 
35 



11 
1 



13 
00 



00 
00 
50 



50 00 
100 
500 



1 00 
1 37 



Hamilton, . . '. . . 1 08 



. 30 00 KENN — Miss Eliza Puckett, 

IND.— Danlapsville, Jas. Mickals, 1 
ENGLAND— Liverpool, Mr. Lin- 
don, . . . . - . .4 



50 
00 

75 



The above list contain? donation->- 
Inpartfor perpetuating the " Young 
Cottager,** . . . . $50 0^ 

Whole amount of Donatiojn 9763 80 
9 OOiReceived fiv Tracta aold, 4,134 64 



Totd, .H898 44 



I THE AMEHICAN 



JUXm, 1830. 



FIFTH ANNUAL MEETING 



AlKB&IOAir TRAOZ »OCI3BST. 

The Fifth Anaunl Meetlngof rhe American Trncl Society nas helil 
in the Middle Dulcli Church, Plew-YorU, on IVedneida;, Ma; ]2iii. 
al len o'clock, A. M, The Presidem of ihe Sociei_», 

S. V. S. WILDER, Esq. 
(ook the chair, Bupported by Coi. Richard Vsrick and Hon. Steplier 
Van R«iti9elaer. 

ThemeetinE »ai opened with prayer by ftev. Leonard Woods, D.D. 
Pfofenor ioihe Theological SeminaTy, Andover, Maiuchuseits. 

The Preiident delivered an appropriate introduclory Addreis. 

The Treaium, Mr. Moses Ajvleu, then reul Ihe Report of (he 
Cammillee vrho auriited hia aceounli; and the Anaual Report was 
read by Mr. yta,tiv* A. BAhhoCK, the CDrreapondlnf Secrelaiy. 

VoiA V. 6 [Whole No. M. 



G2 FIFTH ANKUAI* HEXTII7G. [JuDC, 

The following^ resolutioiis were then - presented and unanimously 
adopted: y'iz. 

On motion of Rev. William M. Stilwell, of the Melhodist Church, 
New-York ; soconded by Rev. Moses Hallock, of the Evangelical 
Congregational Church, Plninfield. Massachusetts, 
Resolved, 

That the Reports now read be adopted, and published under the 
direction of the Executive Committee. 

On motion of thp Rev. John Todd, of the Evangelical Congrega- 
tional Church, Groton, Ma'ssachusetts ; seconded by Rev. John Rey- 
nolds, of the Protestant Episcopal Church, Harrisburg, Pennsyl- 
vania, 

Resolved, 

That we render praise and thanksgiving to God for the co-operation 
of Christians throughout our country in this glorious cause, and for 
the success with which the Holy Spirit has been )[)leased to crown 
their labors ; and that we humbly implore his future guidance and 
benediction. 

On motion of Rev. JaredB. Waterbury, of the Evangelical Congre- 
gational Church, Portsmouth, New-Hampshire ; seconded by Rev. 
Gilbert R. Livingston, D. D. of the Reformed Dutch Church, Phila- 
delphia. 

Resolved, 

That this meeting rejoice in the systematic and successful efibrfs 
which have been made in this city, and in various parts of the land, 
during the past year, to supply statedly with Tracts every family wil- 
ling to receive them ; and in the aid w hich such efforts have inci- 
dentally afforded to other philanthropic and benevolent institutions ; 
and that it is desirable this plan of monthly distribution should be per- 
severed in with humble dependence on God for its success. 

On motion of Rev. James M'Aboy, of the Baptist Church, one of 
the Society's Agents in the Valley of the Mississippi; seconded by 
Thomas Bradford, Jun. Esq. of Philadelphia, 
Resolved, 

That this meeting highly approve of that feature of this Society's 
Constitution, which unites in its labors of love so many different 
EvangelicaKdenominations ; and that we rejoice in the success which 
has attended these fabors, especially in the great Valley of the 
Mississippi ; and that there is encouragement vigorously to prosecute 
the work. 

On motion of Rev. Gardner Spring, D. D. of the Presbyterian 
Church, New-York ; seconded by the Rev. Cornelius C. Cuyler, D. D. 
of the Reformed Dutch Church, Poughkeepsie, New- York, 
Resolved, 

That it is our duty, as a Society, to extend our operations to the 
heathen who sit in darkness, as well as to supply the destitute por- 
tions of our own country. 

On motion of Rev. William Hague, of the Baptist Church, Uiica, 
New- York ; seconded by the Rev. Elijah Slack, President of the 
Cincinnati Branch Tract Society > 
Resolved, 

That this meeting have learned with pi^sufo that the Rev, Dr. 



1850.] 



ABSTRACT OF THE EBPOET. 



6S 



Milnor, Chairman of the Executive Committee, will appear as a de- 
legate to represent this Society, at the anniversary of the Religious 
Tract Society of London, the present month ; and that we rejoice in 
the friendly relations which subsist between this and all kindred 
institutions at home and abroad. 

On motion of the Rev. Thomas M^Auley, D. D. of Philadelphia; 
seconded by the Rev. Professor J. C. Rostan, of the Baptist Cliurch, 
recently from France, 

The Constitution was so amended that " any Tract Society, an- 
nually contributing a donation from its funds to the Treasury of this 
Society, may be considered an Auxiliary.'' 

On motion of Dr. John Stearns, of New- York, seconded by Rev. 
Samuel Shepard, D. D. of Lenox, Massachusetts, the Officers of the 
Society for the ensuing year were then elected, and the Meeting was 
closed with the apostolic benediction pronounced by the Rev. Ben- 
jamin Mortimer, of the Moravian Church, New- York. 

The Meeting.was addressed in an interesting manner by the Rev. 
Mr. Stiiwell, Rev. Mr. Todd, Rev. Mr. Reynolds, Rev. Mr. Water- 
bury, Rev. Mr. M^Aboy, Thomas Bradford, Esq. and Rev. Dr. 
M'Auley. The facts communicated by the Rev. Mr. M'Aboy, fron> 
the Valley of the Mississippi, as having occurred under his own eye, 
and in connexion with his own laUcM's, were highly encouraging ; the 
whole exercises breathed a spirit of piety and Christian love, and 
were calculated to animate every friend of the Society to redoubled 
efforts in behalf of this important branch of Christian benevolence, 

EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE. 

PUBI^ISHINO COKAIITTEE. 



Rev. James Milnor, D. D. of the 
Episcopal Church. 

Rev Thos. McAule^,?D. D. LL.D. 
of the Presbyterian Church. 

Rev. John Knox, D. D. of the Re- 
formed Dutch Church. 

" DISTRIBUTING COtfUITTEK. 

Thomas Stokes, 

Dr. James C. Bliss, 

Timothy Dwight Williams, 

Marcus Wilbur, 

Dr. Marinus Willett,Jun. 



Rev. Samuel Green, Boston, Mas- 
sachusetts, of the Congrega- 
tional Church. 

Rev. Charles G. Sommers, of the 
Baptist Church. 

FINANCE C01IMITT££. 

Arthur Tappan, 
Dr. John Stearns^ 
Moses Alien, 
Elijah Pierson, 
Richard T. Haines. 



Ijjir. Wm. A. Hallock, General Agent. Mr. Jesse Talbqt, Assistant, 

Mr. Harlan Page, Depofitari/. 

ABSTRACT OF THE FIFTH ANNUAL REPORT. 

The Publishing Committee have proceeded with entire unanimity 
in their labors during the year, and have sanctioned Sixty-Tioo dif- 
ferent publications, in six diflerent languages, vie. English, French, 
Spanishy Oerman. RcUian, and Welsh Among the Tracts in English 
are No. 26, The Effects of Ardent Spirits on the human body and 
mind, by Dr. Rush; No. 237, Spiritual Religion; No. 238, Disap- 
f7oinied nojpe ; No. K), occasional, Testimonies of Rabbinical Writers, 



64 PUBLISHING COttEMlTTEE. [Juue, 

intended for circulation amon; Jews ; Broadsheets — ^No. 6, IJfft of 

Philip P , of Birmingham ; No. 6, Death of AUamont ; 'i^pelve 

Sermons to the Aged, by Rev. George Burder ; and Mem>o%rs of Rev. 
fohn Newtorif ArcKbiihop Leighton, and Stoartz. 

The addition of these publications to those previously issued, ren- 
ders the total number of the Society's publications, all of which/ ex- 
cept the six broadsheets, are stereotyped, four hundred and ninety- 
eight. 

The Committee have also printed, under the supervision of the 
Rev. T. S. Harris, missionary among the Senua Indians, an edition 
of a Tract of 110 pages, consisting of Our Lord's Sermon on the 
Mount and a collection of devotional Hymns, both in Indian and 
English ; the entire edition being presented for use at the missionary 
stations among those Indians. A correspondence has also been com- 
menced with reference to the preparation of Tracts in the language 
of the Chippewa^ Indians, which, with its kindred dialects, is spoken 
very extensively by tribes of Indians northward of Detroit, and of the 
Upper Settlements on the Mississippi. 

Four Tracts, viz. The Heavenly Way, Source of Blifts, Sufferings 
of Polycarp, and a Tract addressed to Roman Catholic Priests, have 
been approved by the Committee in Tamul; to the publication of 
which TractSf the appropriations made by this Society to aid the 
American missionaries in Ceylon in their Tract operations will be in 
part, or wholly, devoted. 

At the mission station at Malta, in the Mediterranean, ten of this 
Society's publications have been translated into Modern Greek; 
twelve into Italian ; and eUvtn into Arn^no-Turkish. 

A proposition having been made by an active friend of the Society 
to bear a part of the expense of stereotyping and perpetuating JBun* 
2/an'5 Pilgrim's Progress, {torn a belief, to use his own language, that 
<< the salvation of thousands may depend upon it," the Committee 
have unanimously approved that excellent work, which will be stereo- 
typed as soon as the requisite funds for perpetuating it shall be ob'* 
tained. The Committee feel that the acceptableness and usefulness 
of the two kindred works, Doddridge's Rise and Progress and Bax- 
ter's Saints' Refllt, already issued by the Society, parUcularly in the 
more recent settlements of our country, afford special oaooiirage- 
raent to add to them also the Pilgrim's Progress ; anU they confi- 
dently hope the Biographies of the devout Newton^ Leig^UoB, and 
Swartz, as well as Sermons to the Aged, by Burdejr, wiU exert a cor- 
responding influence wherever they shall be read, in Aivor of Bvan- 
gelical piety. 

Tiie American Tract Magazine is regularly published in the form 
of a half sheet monthly. The Christian Almanac for 1830 was pub- 
lished in 21 distinct editions. 

Whole number of Tracts printed during the year, 6,23SK00O 

Whole number printed since the formation of the 

Society, ..... 20,341,000 

Whole number of pages of duodecimo Tracts printed 

during the year^ .... &1,440,0Q0 

Whole number of pages of do. printed since the for- 
mation of the Society, . . . 166,l0^iOQO 



l«30.] StAfE OF THE FU&^)iS. 6i> 

Whole number of pages of English liuodecimo Tracts 

tiradated during the year 64,169,900 

; Do. do. of Foreign duodecimo Tracts 1,600,688 

Total amount of pages circulated during the year 63,360,444 

Total, circulated since the formation of the Society 186,967,222 

It appears from the above that the amount of duodecimo Tracts 
circulated during the year exceeds the whole amount printed during 
the year by more than 4.000,000 pages ; and the whole amount of pub- 
lications circulated during tlie yeai now closing, exceeds the amount 
circulated in the preceding year, by more than 13,000,000 pages. 

There have been circulated during'the year of the Tract of 60 pages 
on Univeriialism 24,900 ; of the Tracts on Female Influence and The 
Sanctuary 74,000 copies each; of the Importance of Considera- 
tion 99,000 ; of Ktttredge*s Address and Quench not the Spirit 
123,000 each ; of Do you want a Friend ? 144,000. Of the Premium 
Tract to American Vouth on Temperance 122,000 copies have been 
circulated within the last four months. 'The whole of the Society's 
Tracts on the subject -of Temperance which have been circulated 
during the year is 329,824. 

The OratuUotu Ditlributioiu daring the year have amoimted to 
3,883,128 pages; of which 2,666,067 pages have been distributed 
West and South of the Alleghany, and 211,880 have consisted of 
Tracts in Foreign languages. 

The Committee earnestly hope, that donations will l>e made to the 
Society which will enable it fully to sastain this important branch 
of its operations in the destitute parts of our own country ; and 
greatly to enlarge its grants and appropriations for other portions of 
the world, especially the American missionary stations among the 
heathen. 

STATE OF THE FUNDS. 
Received, during the year ending May 1, 

For Tracts sold nearly at cost, $48,454,69 

Donations, ..... 11,766,66 

Total receipts during the year $60,310,24 
Paid, during the year, 

For paper, ..... 26,997,26 

For printing, stereotyping, engraving, folding, stitch- 
ing and binding, .... 22,396,39 
AH other expenses, as by items in the Treasurer's 

Report . . . . . 10,817.69 



Total paid during the year $60,^0,24 
On closing the accounts for the year, the whole aipount in the 
Treasury was drawn and paid over to meet, in part, the bills due; 
leaving the sum of $700 07, then due, still unpaid. There was also 
due from the Society, on notes given by members of the Committee 
for paper, all payable previous to the 26th day of November, 
$8,918 68. 

It is much to be desired, that the Society should have means to pro- 
cure paper and printing without resorting continually to the indivi- 

6* 



6G STAX£ OF THE FUNDS. [JunCf 

dual responsibiiUy ol memli^is of the Gomroktee. Bu^tlMicelus^at 
no time duf ip^ the year, been funds enough in the^ Tr ecuMugr to meet 
the citrrent expenses of the Socki^ for ten dcn^a ; aft more tlutn hulf 
the weekly meetings the biil9 sa«£tioned by them have ciKceeded tbe 
whole amount of funds at their disi^osal, and at one period near tiie 
close of the autumn, it became necessary to raise $ 5,000 from the 
banks to meet existing demands. 

The Committee would further remark, that immediately ailer the 
first day of January last, they appointed special Committees to ex- 
amine minutely into all the Society's expenses, for paper, printing, 
folding and binding, agency, and all other items necessary to the 
transaction of its concerns ; with a view to ascertaining whether any 
diminution could be made in anv of its expenses, or whether any al- 
terations should be made in toe prices of its publications. Those 
special Committees entered with energy on the duties, assigned them ; 
and after laborious and faithful examination, arrived at results, of the 
essential accuracy of which there can be no question ; and which the 
Committee desire fully to 8pre*ad out before the Christian community, 
by whose prayers, and alms, and efforts, the Institution is sustained. 

[The Report contains numerous detailed statements relative to the 
pecuniary concerns of the Society^ which are here omitted for want 
of room.] 

Principles onjphich the Society^ s Pecuniary Concerns are Transacted^ 

These concerns are under the sole direction of the ConmittQe^ who 
themselves receive no pecuniary compensation in any form whatever. 
They endeavor to procure good materials* and to secure the perform- 
ance of the mechanical part of the Society's operatiOBs, in such 
a. manner that the publications issued shall be substantial and dura- 
ble ; and at the same time to obtain the whole on the lowest practica- 
ble terms. 

The paper is procured by a special Committee, on the most favora 
ble terms which the state of the market will allow. 

The printing, and folding and binding, are done in the Society's 
house) by men who use their own type, presses, £ic. at no risk of the 
Society, and are paid only for the amount of work actually done and 
delivered in a fit state for circulation. All their proceedings are con- 
tinually open to the inspection of the Committee and the General 
Agent; and they are obligated, at all times, to enlarge their opera- 
tions or diminish them, as the interests of the Society shall require. 
The Committee have, during the past year^ made a careful investiga- 
tion as to the prices paid in each of these departments ; have obtained 
a small reduction in each ; and are convinced that, at present, the 
Society can make no contracts more favorable to the best interests of 
the Tra# cause, than those now existing. 

The Comipttee have made similar investigations in regard to the 
amount of agency required in the Tract House, and are satisfied that 
the compensations given are reasonable, and that the individuals em- 
ployed, while they are not less devoted to the best interests of the So- 
ciety than your Committee themselves, are pressed with duty to the 
full measure of their ability to discharge it — all of them being entirely 
separated fh>m any other worldly business whatever— and giving 
themselves wholly to this work. 



18d<K] JtfO'9Tai;i BI97ftIBlIT»)il!7. 67 

The enipUying of TroMUihg Agentt^ the Gommtltee consider to 
be annoogthe meat refiponsiU« o( Iheir dutieer. Were all Christians 
as active ao tlie clums of Hie Crospel vequire, the Committee believe a 
great peition of the labors of such> Agents migiit be tllspensed with. 
Bduut oMiltitiides, who apparently know their diity, need to be excited 
t^aetien; man; are ignorant of the character and ugefalnessof the 
Society, and need to be informed ; and there are very large por- 
tions of the countfy destitute, in a great degree, of all other means of 
grace, which probably would never be supplied With the Society's 
publications, except through the presence and labors of the Society's 
Agents. It is the object of tbe Committee to employ in this service 
only faithful,, devoted men, who will exert an influence Iav4}rabte to 
aU the interests of Evangriicai piety, and who will labor no!t for the 
sake of obtaining the smalt compensation allowed them, but for the 
honor of Christ in the salvation of perishing men. 

BRANCHES ANB AUXiriA RIES. 
The number of new Aaxiltaries recognized during the year is 119, 
making the whole number of Brandies and Auxiliaries now immediw 
ately connectpd with the Parent Society 826. 

Besides these, the American Tract Society at Boston, at the time 
of its last Anniversary, had 610 Auxiliaries ; the Pennsylvania Branch 
at Philadelphia. 373; and there are in connexion with other large 
Branches or Auxiliaries, 800 to which the American Tract Magazine 
is regularly sent gratis; making 1,783; which, added to 825 above, 
gives a total of 2,(K^ Societies which have been reported as Auxiliary 
to this Society, either directly, or through the medium of larger 
Branches and Auxiliaries. 

These various Societies constitute the life of the Parent Institution, 
and on their persevering activity in the prosecution of their labors 
depends^in a very high degree, under God, the extent and success of 
the Tract operations of our country. 

SYSTEMATIC MOI^TTHIiY DISTRIBUTION. 

The hand of Providence has been so apparent in the origin, pro- 
gress and success of this system of effort as4o render it an interesting 
item in the history of the Tract cause. It has arrested the attention 
of the active friends of Tracts in our country generally, and of our 
fellow-laborers in the same cause on the other side of the Atlantic 
. The Committee are aware that there are some serious obstacles to 
the continuance and progress of this work. It requires in those enr 
gaged in it the exercise of a living faith in the great realities of eter- 
nity ; a high sense of obligation to Christ and the souls of men, kad 
an amount of labor, and a degree of Christian activity .and perseve- 
rance, which the gprace of God in the heart alone can sustain ; and, as 
it tenders the message of the Gospel to aU — high and low, rich and 
poor— »in^>lying that all are sinners, and must be saved through that 
atoning blood which is set forth in the humble pages of a Tract, or 
perish for ever, it must of course encounter some opposition, thougli 
it bears, on its very front the aspect of pure and universal benevo* 
lence. 

But, on the other band, moiives are not wasting in favor of this 
system of eifiwt, which are of all-abjorbing interest, and are drawn 



68 VALLfir OF rtHE KIS9IS5IPFI. [/une, 

from the very genius of the Gospel, and from the prominent princi; 
pies of action which chnracteriEe the era of Christian benevolence in 
which we live. What one principle more distinctly characterises 
this era, Uian that Christians are beginning to view the Gospel, not 
as a blessing to be treasured up and enjoyed by themselves alone, or 
merely to be< preserved, where o^ers who feel its importance may 
come and share its blessings ; but which is to be CARRIED AND 
TENDERED to every individual of all our race, who must be saved 
through the Redemption it makes known, or sink into perdition. On 
this principle is based the effort that is making, or should be made, to 
place the Holy Scriptures in every family ; to send forth the living 
Teacher to proclaim to all the tidings of the Gospel ; to* gather all the 
young into Sabbath and Infant Schools; and in every way to oom< 
municate to all the knowledge of Him, whom to know aright is life 
eternal. « 

While the Committee will regard with deep interest the unfolding S 
of Divine Proridence respecting this system of effort during another 
year, they would express their earnest desire, that it may by no 
Christian be perverted as an apology for the neglect of promiscuous 
Tiact distribution wherever the opportunity of usefulness may be 
presented. 

OPERATIONS IN THE VALLEY OF THE 

MISSISSIPPI. 

In the history of the Society's operations during the year, no item 
is more prominent than its efforts for the population in the great Val- 
ley watered by the Mississippi and its tributaries 

la all other parts of the country, the Society has had but /bur 
Travelling Agents employed for any considerable portion of the 
year, only one of whom now continues in this service. They arc 
IEIev. Amos Buinchard, who labored a part of the year in the vicinity 
of Utica, N. Y. ; Rev. Joseph Wood, who labored some months in 
the South-Westem portion of the same State ; Rev. Andrew H. 
Reed, who has been laboring in Maryland!; and Mr. Albert Hale, 
who labored all the former part of the year in Georgia. 

Of the six Agents who were laboring in the Valley of the Missis- 
sippi at the time of the Society's last Anniversary, two have left the 
service of the Society, and another, Mr. Alfred Hamilton, who 
commenced his labors about one year since, has felt himself compelled 
to suspend them for some months ; but six others have, during the 
year, engaged in this service, making the whole number now labor- 
ing in that interesting field nine : viz. Rev. Ornan Eastman, the So- 
ciety's General Agent, who has personally visited a great number of 
the principal towns, and who exercises a supervision over the entire 
operations of the Society West of the Alleghany ; Rev. James M'A- 
BOT, who has been laboring chiefly in Western Pennsylvania and 
Western Virginhi; Rev. Francis H. Case, whose field of labor has 
been Alabama and Tennessee; Rev. Ctrus W. Allen, who is labor- 
ing in Missouri and Illinois ; Rev Ctrus W. Conant, who is labor- 
ing in Indiana; Rkv. William Eastman and Rev. James SETMOURf 
who have for some months been laboring in Western Pennsylvania, 
chiefly in connection with the efforts of the Rev. Mr. M'Aboy ; Mr. 



1&30.1 VALLEt OF THJ3 AUSSISSIPPI. 69 

Lucius C. Rovsb, who has been laboring in Ohio ; and Rev. A. Lo- 
gan, who has recently commenced efforts for the Society in tlie State 
of Mississippi. 

The correspondence and reports of these brethren^ as they have 
come to hand from week to week, during the year, have been read by 
the Committee with intense interest ; and have inspired them, they 
hope, with a regard to the Spiritual welfare of our country, which 
will not cease to animate their highest and noblest efforts. If ever 
Christians had a work spread before them, at once of magnitude be- 
yond all that the mind can grasp, and full of promise, in such a work 
are Christians of these United States now called to engage, and among 
4he rising, forming, giant people within the limits of their own terri- 
tory. Unbelief, indeed, may sing her dulcet song that "all is 
weU ]" but the Committee believe that all active, enlightened, £van> 
gelical Christians, of every name, fully agree in the conviction, that 
sin is making alarming progress in our land, and that the Gospel must 
have a greater prevalence, or millions of souls will be left to perish in 
the native darkness of their minds ; and our free and happy iiutitu- 
tions, in the absence of moral principle, to fall under the just judg' 
ment of God, and the weight of our nation's i^iquitiea. There is no 
patriotism nor piety in crying, '^ peace, peace, when there is no 
peace." The Committee woiild wish the moral state of our country 
to he seen as it really is; that motives, furnished b^ appalling facta, 
may press upon the hearts of the real children ot God, and impel 
them to discharge the duties they owe to their fellow^men, to the caaise 
they love, and to the Master they serve. 

Ii) this view they would spread before the Society and the Chril« 
tiau community, a portion of the communications of our Brethren 
fvho have been laboring in the wide West; already embosoming its 
population of 5,000,000 ; which, to all human view, is soon to swell to 
10,000,000; 20,000,000; 50,000,000, and onward; and to embrace 
the mass of the inhabitants of one of the greatest and most powerful 
nations that shall dwell on the foce of the earth These covimymea<* 
tioQS pertain to, the charactar, extent, and wants of the fieUI to be oc- 
cupied ; the aid there given hf the friends of the cause *, and the isi- 
dnoements which urge the followers of Christ, without delay, to 
spread throughout the length and breadth of it the saving influences 
qC the Qospfil, 

The ainount of Tracts we have g^aimUtu$ly distnbuUd in this ooub« 
tjry, says one of the Socie^ 'a Agents M the West, may seem large to 
you and the Committee, but had yon been with us, and seen what we 
ha.ve seen—had yon seen the people in this emphatically dettitnle re- 
gion, wandering like sheep without a shepherd-^^we are eertain. yen 
could not have withheld these means of graee. Oh, it is enongh. tn 
make the heart ach with aJbnoil deepest pain, to see such nmkitudes 
of immortal beings hastening on ta the gvave and eternal death, with 
scarcely any one to warn them oi the daf k abysa, er entreat them to 
flee from the wrath to eome. While we have been thns iowiofr* b» It 
were, the seeds of spiritual liS^, wei have been praying the. Lor4ef the 
harvest to distil upon it the dews of his be^wenly giaee* And, my 
dour biother, I do look upon our e§o«t&. the past woath in tfaif coup- 



70 VALLEY OF THE tflSSlSSIPPl. [JUQC, 

try, as the harbinger of better days to this moral waste, embraciog^ 
not far from 20,000 souls. 

In traTelling 250 miles in the interior of this state, says another 
Agent in the South- Western part of the Valley, my whole travelling 
expemes have been leu than one shilling. The gentleman at whose 
house I am now writing furnished me with a horse and letters of in- 
troduction to friends, and the people are very hospitable. Withal I 
have seen the wants of another portion of our country, and found 
some new arguments for renewed zeal in the Tract cause. Most of 
the persons to whom I presented a Tract, said they ?iad never seen 
one before^ and many did not know the meaning of the term Tract 
as applied to a book. Many expressed great surprise that I should 
give them little books. We are truly engaged in a great work. You 
talk about the great country West of the Alleghany, but could you 
travel through its length and breadth, and see it as it is, you would 
be convinced that all your anticipations of the future growth and ex- 
tent of its population will be more than realized. 

Among the most prominent obstacles to be here encountered in 
this cause, says an Agent laboring in one of the darkest parts of our 
whole land, I would mention the following : First, sectarian partialis 
ties : while all the friends of Christ are so (ew, I cannot bear to see 
any thing like a dividing of our forces. The next thing to be men- 
tioned is a deplorable ignorance among the people. Many cannot 
read. Next a want of devoted Christians : in one county town I 
could find but one professing Christian and she was a visitor in the 
place. And to these may be added the difficulty, in this newly set- 
lied and scattered country, of getting the people together in order 
that they may be informed on the subject. But in the midst of alf 
these obstacles, I have hourly encouragement tu labor for the Society. 
I thank the Committee, and I trust I thank God for putting me into 
this service. I trust that no consideration will be suffered to appal 
the hearts of the conductors of the Society, or to unnerve their arm : 
they will see in eternity most blessed fruits of their labors. 

It will be gratifying to the friends of the Society to be informed, 
that, in connexion with the grant of 600,000 pages of Tracts for the 
City of New-Orleans and the vicinity, alluded to in a former part of 
this report, the Committee have commissioned an Agent, exclusive of 
those mentioned above, Mr. Moses H. Wilder, to engage in the per- 
sonal distribution of Tracts in New-Orleans, and in superintending 
the Depository of the Board of Agency in that City. These pro- 
ceedings on the part of this Society have been very gratefully ac- 
knowledged by that Board ; and the Agent is successfully prosecut- 
ing his work. More definite results, the Committee hope to be able 
to communicate to the Society in their next Annual Report. 

The whole amount of Tracts sent into the country West and South 
of the Alleghany, during the past year, is 24.099,800 pages, of which ' 
2^666,067 pages have been granted by the Society for gratuitous dls- 
tribntions. The total receipts from the same portion of country during 
the year, have been §14,927 13, of which $941 64 were donations, 
and the remainder in payment for Tracts. 

The Committee subjoin a few additional testimonies from vorioiu 



1850.] FOftEiaN OrXHATIOSd. 71 

sources, but of unquestionable cre<|ibi]ity, in corroboration of the 
aboTe from the Society's Agents. 

** The day is evidently hastening,'* says a most excellent clergy* 
man, who has resided for many years west of the Alleghany, *' that is to 
draw a visible line of separation between the friends and the enemies 
of truth and holiness. Could your Committee and wealthy friends of 
your Society see the progress of error and vice at the West — the wide 
West — ^which is soon to give character and laws to the nation, they 
would tremble as they have neVer yet trembled for our country. The 
progress of Romanitmt together with open and disguised infideKti/, 
in the great Valley of the Mississippi, will require, according to pre- 
'seot appearances, but a few years to prepare from youi^ presses a 
Tract, which you may entitle, ' The last Hope of the World fallen' — 
* America Ruined :'— and shajl it be 7 Shall this progress not be 
checked ? I know that you are doing much. But, dear Sir, while the 
thanksgivings of many, very many sonls ascend to God for the abun- 
dant liberality of your Society, and of Bible and Missionary Societies, 
be assured that, in your department, and in all the departments of 
benevolence, efforts altogether unprecedented must be made, and made 
soon, or our country is lost — our civil and religious institutions — all the 
blessings of a free government ^ill be swallowed up as with a flood, 
and Wo ,' Wo ! will be written in tears and blood all over this once 
fair and happy land." 

OPERATIONS BXTOND THE BOUNDARIES OF OUR OWN COUNTRY. 

The Committee consider the Tract system adapted to be eminently 
useful in extending a knowledge of the Gospel in unevangeliEed* por- 
tions of the earth ; and believe that there are sacred and imperious 
claims upon the Society to make greater efforts for those who are 
sitting in darkness and the shadow of death. The moral desolations 
of a large portion of our own continent, of Greece, and other coun- 
tries on the Mediterranean, and the wants of five or six hundred mil- 
lions of our race still shrouded in the midnight gloom of Paganism, 
all appeal to the Christian sympathies of thia Society. God, in his 
providence, is preparing the way before us ; languages most exten- 
sively spoken are already conquered ; printing presses are in opera- 
tion ; and laborers scattered atri'oad in the wide field urge us to efforts 
worthy of the age in which we live, and the light and privileges, and 
means God has bestowed on us. 

Numerous communications received during the year from foreign 
lands, show that the providence of God is now greatly in advance of 
tbe movements of the Society. 

mVINE BLESSING ON THE SOCIETY'S 

PUBLICATIONS. 

The most striking of the multiplied evidences of the usefulness of 
Tracts, which are communicated to the Committee, they feel bound 
to condense into their Annual Report, as a monument to the praise of 
Pivine grace, and for tbe encouragement of all who labor in this 
cause. The past year has been as fruitful in these tokens of mercy as 
any that have preceded it, bearing a precious evidence of ibe con- 
tinued smiles and blessing of God upon the Society. As God alone 



7^ t'SEFULirstfs OF tHacts. pane, 

knowethtbe heart, which U " de^^HM t^ifcfte tifl things aMd^lspe- 
rately wicked," the Committee claim not to decide who, of those that 
have been apparently bro^ht into the kingdom of Christ through 
the instmmentality of these puUieations, will he found in the day of 
judgment to have been truly bom again. They would, however, in 
respect to the facts which they are about to record, explicitly state 
the following particulars. 

1. They are all circumstances which have occurred in our own 
country, and s^most all of them have been communicated direct^ to 
this Society or some of its fo'anches or Auxiliaries during the year 
past. 

2. They^iave, almost without exception, been communicated by de- 
cidedly Evangelical Christians, who have, beyond question, endea- 
vored to communicate what they eonsidered to be the simple matters 
of fact. 

3. Though these communicationa have been generally very much 
abridged, and in numerous instances inaccuracies of language cor- 
rected, the substance of them is retained with the ^ost scrupulous and 
conscientious accuracy. The honor of religion requires no exag* 
gerated statements of its triumphs. 

4. A part of the followtng facts have been published, during the 
year, in the Society *8 Tract Magazine, the Annual R^orts of 
Branches or Auxiliaries, and some of the religious journals of the 
day. The remainder are now for the first time made public. 

6. The surprising variety of sources firom which these facts have 
been communicated, from persons of difierent religious denominations 
in every portion pf the country ; and the diversity of ctrcnmstances 
in which the publications have been blessed, at once corroborate the 
reality of the narrations, and afford an argument for using this means 
of grace in every way that may occur to the thoiTght of a Christian— 
" In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thine 
hand, lor thou knowest not which shall prosper, this or tliat." 

6. It is a delightful fact, 'that as the Institution is sustained by the 
united eflhrts of Christians of dHTerent names, so the accessions 
made to the church of Christ by the divine blessing on its publica- 
tions are through all the various Rvatigelical denominations. The 
object of the Tract is to dh-ect the sinfier, not to one denomination of 
Christians or an'other ; but to the Bible and the Savior — ^to pluck his 
soul as a brand from the burning, and save him from the perdition of 
the ungodly. Churches who have done little in promotion of this So- 
ciety have received accessions through its instrumentality ; and but 
for the fulfilment of the promise that it is more blessed to give than 
to receive, may have been more richly blessed than many of those by 
whose alms and efforts the Society has been sustained. 

[The interesting facts contained in the report, which have never 
been published, are very numerous; our limits permit us to insert 
only the following instance:] 

POWERFUL PREACHING ON A DEATH-BED. 

A man, who had been residing in a truly pious evangelical fami]|y 
in Massachusetts; left them on account of the failure of his health, and 



tSSO.] USJErOI.NEflS OF TRACTS. 73 

returned to his native town, where the preaching was Unitarian ; and 
being anxious for the welfare of his soul, took with him a large quan» 
tity of Tracts, hoping to learn from them the way of salvation. His 
health continued rapidly to decline, and his attention to the concerns 
of religion became very deep and eamestn-he read his Tracts conti- 
nually, and was enabled to repose his eternal all on Christ, whose 
atoning blood he found was sufficient to cleanse from all sin. He then 
became anxious for the souls of those around him, with whom he had 
long been acquainted, and who he had reason to believe had no just 
views of the evil of sin or the way of salvation : and while he lay on 
his dying-bed would select for one and another as they came to visit 
him, such Tracts as he thought Aiost appropriate to their spiritual 
e6nditton. At length finding his lungs had become so oppressed that 
be could speak only in a whisper, though be retained the full energy 
of his mind, and was able to be supported in his bed where he could 
use his arms, and fearing that soon he should be unable longer to 
speak at all, he made known his apprehensions to the nurse, saying to 
her that he wished to do something to warn his acquaintances who 
might come to see him to be prepared for death ; and that when he 
gave any of them a Tract, he wished her to say that he had selected 
it as his dying counsel, in view of that eternity on which he was just 
«ntering. His voice departed : but he continued to present his mes- 
sages of mercy, selecting a Tract for one and another, with surprising 
appropriateness to their spiritual condition. Even after he was no 
longer able to raise his arm, he used his hands, balancing them upon 
his wrists, and signifying which Tract he designed for each person ; 
and thus he continued his work of mercy till his feeble hands fell in 
death, and his spirit took its flight. He may have thus, by Tracts, in 
the hours of his dissolution, been the means of bringing more souls to 
Christ than many professed Christians during their whole life.* 

CONCLUSION. 

Thus have the Committee presented an imperfect view dT what God 
has done for this Society,' and by its instrumentality, during another 
year— the harmony that has prevailed ; the means that have been af- 
forded ; the labors performed ; and the conquests made in the king- 
dom of darkness. God's omniscient eye has doubtless seen ten thou- 
sand influences exerted which are unknown to the Committee, and 
are reserved for the revelations of the final Judgment. He sees this 
work in all its magnitude ; and the Committee entreat ail who have 
an interest at the throne of his grace, to plead with him in devout and 
unceasing supplication for wisdom to guide the future operations of 
the Society, and the influences of his Holy Spirit to render them 
effectual in sa?ing immortal men, and advancing the cause of his own 
dear Son, to whom " be glory in the church'' " for ever." 

* On the cover of this Number of the Magazine Will be (bund several very inte- 
restiof anecdotea of the ttseAilaem of Tracttt 



74 B£T. JOHN TODD. [JuilC, 

ADDRESSES 

At the Anniversary of the Atneriean I^aet Society, May 12, 1890** 



From the Addrxss of Ret. Johit Todd, of GROToir, Mass. 

Ton have doubtlegg, Mr. President, noticed and admired that na- 
tural love of country which a wise ProTidenoe has planted in the bo- 
som of man. Whether bom among the spicy groves of the' East, or 
cradled on the snows of the P^orth, or on the burning sands of the de- 
sert, the spot where you lisped the language of infancy is dear. The 
Arab amid his caravan of camels, and the child of Africa shrinking 
from the footsteps of the tyger and the lion, knows no country like 
his. Our Pilgrim-fathers gave to their cottages and rivers here, tl^e 
names of the homes and the rivers which they had left across the 
great waters, because associations tender and delightful were excited 
by these names. It was not romance, but this principle of our nature, 
which led the poor man, in the French revolution, when forbidden to 
set foot on land, to anchor his family off in a little boat in the middle 
of the Rhine, there to console himself that, when he inhaled the even • 
ing breese, he was breathing the air which had just passed over his 
country. All have felt something of this, and the Christian knows, 
that piety does not lessen this feeling. The prophet of tears wept as 
9. patriot, as well as a prophet, when the gold had become dim, and 
the most fine gold changed. So wept Elisha over the blushing Ha- 
zael; and so wept Christ Jesus over that city whose name is associa- 
ted with all that is tender. And I trust, Sir, that this deep love of 
country has done something toward calling this assembly together, 
and that it will secure your attention— not while I analyse and define 
this feeling — but while 1 attempt to show how we may so employ it as 
to bless our nation. 

Fame will call those few patriots, and those only, who are distin- 
guished by brilliant deeds. So a few only have the name of being be- 
nevolent. But that Holy One, who calls the widow's mite benevo- 
lence, sees many a Christian's bosom throbbing for the welfare of our 
country, and in his sight this is true patriotism. And it should be 
a matter of joy that every appeal which reaches our Christian feel- 
ings reaches also our patriotism ; for we cannot achieve a single vtc- 
tonr for Christ without doing something for our nation. 

I have oflen walked over the beautiAil hills among which Provi- 
dence hath cast my lot, and as often have my thoughts wandered ofiT 
far, far beyond the blue mountains which bounded my vision, and sur- 
veyed this great nation. Looking down the path-way of time, I have 
seen the myriads who shall swarm here, when I am gone and for- 
gotten ; and then I have traced their quickly-succeeding generations, 
as they came and passed behind the curtam of eternity, like shadows 
over a beautiful fountain. Among these visions, which will soon be 
reality, there is much to cause the heart of the Christian to leap with 
joy, and much — ^perhaps more-^to thrill it with an agony which lan- 
guage is feeble to express. For I do believe the h^art will b« wanu 
with patriotism in proportion as it bums with piety. 

t f •¥ Oi* reMlutieai oft^ttA see page tg, 



1630.] KEY. JOHN TODS, 70 

Neither you, nor this aadience, Mr. President, bare a wish to heat 
a harangue upon the dangers which hfibg over a nation like ours, 
where everj man is tempted to differ from his neighbor just to show 
that he is independent. That clash of interests and of parties, when- 
eTer a great election takes place, will dash our hopes, unless there be 
constant and powerful counteracting causes. The notes of discord 
will continue to come in longer and deeper peals from our senate, and 
be echoed. back. by ten thousand opposing interests from different 
parts of our country. In vain we tell of our greatness, and say we are 
moving forward with the steady tread of the elephant. This elephant 
is the most terrible of all animals, if once he becomes infuriated ; and 
the most restless and agonized of all, if disease once be spread 
through his mighty frame, and torture his unwieldy system with 
pain which medicine cannot reach. 

I rejoiced to hear our respected friend and brother* speak with so 
much confidence yesterday as to the permanency and stability of our 
republic 1 confess that my narrow views have excited many fears 
on this point; but however this may be, we shall agree as to the 
sources of safety. Let it be engraven, Sir, upon the heart as with a 
diamond, that if there be salvation for our country, it will come — not 
from our formof government— not from our rulers — but from the great 
body of the people. All our institutions are reared to stand on the 
morals, the intelligence, and the religion of the people at large; and 
with these they must stand or fall. They are designed for a sanctified, 
a holy people, and they can exist among none other. Lot piety guide 
the nation then, and its legislation, which is only the index of public 
opinion, will be guided aright of course. 

We are called upon to act as patriots while we act as Christians, 
and our sphere of action is not that which will attract many eyes. 
Such honors might smother our piety, and Christ will not consent 
that those whom he has redeemed shall be put off with the poor re- 
wards of this world. 

But our influence is none the less for being silent. Had the church 
of Christ in this land, for the last two years, been a body of cardinals, 
and given laws to this nation, she could not have hoped to accomplish 
a thousandth part as much as she has done for the temporal and eter> 
nal welfare of this country, by exciting, sustaining, and extending the 
Temperance Reformation. The people of God are the salt of the 
earth, because, with holy Daniel and Job, they pray for their country, 
and because they step in and act for God and man, at the very place 
where none but Christian motives could lead men. Men enough are 
ready to fill our halls of legislation, and our honorable stations, but 
what patriot beside the Christian dared go out, with ** Abstinence" 
lor his motto, and dry up that stream from the nether world, on which 
we were hurrying toward that gulf of ruin in which all other repub- 
lics have been swallowed up ! Amid obloquy and reproach, the Chris- 
tian alone was first seen moving in this great work — a work which 
promises more for this nation, than if he had caused a ship of war, 
bearing our flag, to ride over every wave of the Pacific, or had opened 
the bowels of our mightiest mountains, and let out thence rivers of 

* Tbomaa Bradford, Esq. of Philadelphia. 



76 »ET. J09N TODD. f JttOe^ 

molteD gold. The church of Chritt receiTes not her praiM hero ; nor 
need she. A book of remembrance is before God. 

Was on object ever more unpopular than that which so h>ng en- 
gaged the noblest efforts of Wilberforce ? Scarcely a voice was heard 
bat it was the clamour of opposition. But the victory was obtained 
by the irresistible power of Christian love. A redeemed nation will 
one day raise statues to the memory of that man, and all nations wfll 
bless his name. But who would have waded through all these 
streams of obloquy and angry resistance, except one who, like Wii* 
berforce, was upheld and led forward by the Spirit of Jesus Chritt # 
This, Sir, I call Christian patriotism ; aud it is the same thing whether 
acting in the British Darliament or in a Tract Society. 

You see. Sir, what 1 mean by acting as patriots while we act as 
Christians, and thus do we hope the Gospel will be the temporal sal- 
vation of our, country ; not by compulsion ; but by regulating and 
sanctifying public opinion, and thus leavening the whole lump. 

The politician can see many an evil and dread it ; but what can hc 
do ? He can act with efficiency only when he ei^pects results to be 
immediate and his reward soon to follow ; but the Christian actg 
when results are seen by the eye of faith, and his rewards are notes* 
pected on the shores of time. Hence he plans and acts amid the bit- 
terest 84»m and the most virulent opposition, and can find a high- 
way of mercy over the great deep, while others are prudently delibe- 
rating whether they shall put out to sea. 

- Statesmen, and men of this world, feel the importance of education, 
and may pass their laws and draw out their plans. They have taken 
to theuiselves all the credit of forming the intellectual character of 
this nation. Let this be so ; but give us our Sabbath School system, 
and our Bible classes, by which we bring the lively ofades of God 
into direct contact with the conscience of the rising generation ; give 
us our Tract system, by which we carry the fruits of the tree of lilb' 
to the bosom of every family, and cause mercies to fall unseen like 
the dews of evening ; and at the great day it will be seen that Chris- 
tians are patriots in the highest aiid best sense of the word. You may 
take any, and all of the great efforts of this age— efforts which pro- 
mise to roll untold blessings down to the generations which are to fol- 
low us, and you will see that if any of these promises are fulfilled, it 
will be in answer to the Christian's prayers and the Christian's efforts. 

Others can better express their confidence and joy at the prospects 
which open to our country from the Tract System, than myself; but 
no one can feel them more deeply. I will not revel in what may 
befeasonably anticipated ; but let me pomt you, for an instant, to that 
dark heap of ruins which past ages have piled over other nations. 
Oh ! had this same system of Tract distribution been known to those 
aaints who have for centuries been sleeping in the dust, how different 
would have been the aspect of the world to<day ! It would have 
caused the river of peace to temper that fierce public sentiment 
which has thousands and thousands of times gathered the strenfth 
of nations together, and crushed them in the shock of battle. That 
land of darkness and bloodshed, where the false Prophet has reared 
his crescent, would not have been that den of pollution and cruelty 
which is still spared trembling on the brink of ruin, yet to drink of 



I8d0.] HEV. J« B. WATEftBURT. 77 

the wrath of Qod. Had the church possessed this machinery then, 
the Man of Sin would never have ascended thefhill of God, and sat 
and lorded it over God's heritag^e, till the name of Christ became the 
cloak of all that is abominable. I know very well that this system 
meets the contempt of those who deny that mercy may be conveyed 
in small earthen vessels ; and I know as well that mercy thus con* 
veyed, in multitudes of instances at least, is attended by the Spirit of 
Ciody auad is omnipotent to heal the diseases of the soul. 

It will be but a short time, Sir, are you and those who are permit- 
ted to rejoice and act with you to-day, if disciples of Jesus, will be 
gone to that world wher^ sin, and doubts, and fears are unknown. If 
allowed to mingle with that great company who go out ministering to 
those who shidl be heirs of salvation, I cannot believe that even then 
you will forget this country, so fair, so blessed, so tempted and so in- 
creasingly wicked. And tell me. Sir, will it add nothing to that 
stream of joy which will then thrill through your heart to feel that, 
under God, such a machinery was put and kept in motion by your 
instrumentality— a machinery which will not stop till all the hungry are 
fed. Ah 1 Sir, and how will you feel« when you shall see one and 
another poor wanderer conducted to the realms of glory, and as he 
casts bis crown at the feet of the Lamb, tells how he was first led 
to Jesus by a Tract, which was prepared and sent to him by this 
Society ! 

A few more days, and in the nakedness of spirit we shall go-H>ur 
bodies moulder— our names be forgotten—- the heavens shall wax old 
— 4he earth reel with age and then will the angel place •ne foot on 
the sea, and one on the dry land, and lifting his hand to heaven, swear 
by Him that liveth for ever and ever, that time shall be no longer : 
and then shall the angel of the Resurrection raise his trumpet^ and 
place the dead, small and great, before God ; and then shall the books 
be opened, and then that other book, which is the book of life, shall 
be read — and their names shall all be read — and one, yea, many — a 
great multitude shall be found there— and, under God, they were 
led to the throne of the Lamb by this Society. 

Address of Rkv. Jaiubd B. Watsrburt, of the Cohorega- 

TIOHAL ChURCBi PORTSMOUTH, N. H. 

~ This resolution, Sir, embraees topics of thrilling iaterest. Hike much 
the tone and spirit of it. fiat, as appears to me, it properly belons's te 
other bands. It should have b«en committed to one of those iodivimials, 
who, with great self-denial and peaseveraace, have explored and supplied 
ivith Tracts the Wards of thisereat City. Their eyeE have seen ; their 
hearts have felt ; and they cowd have stood here to-day and told us what 
they have seen, and how deeply they have felt. I intend not to pass un- 
meantfig compliments. This is not the place for them ; nor are they the 
persons who desire them. Theirs is a purer satisfaction, and they labor 
in view of a higher reward. A mechanic in a neighboring viyage, to 
whom the Tracts had been given, inquired of the distributor, how he ex- 
pected to be recompensed for all his expense and trouble. He was told 
that no other rewaro was expected on this side of Heaven, than the plea- 
sure arising from efforts to promote the glory of God and the welfare of 
souls. Ah, replied the man, that trul^ is reward enough. 
The resolutioA calls upon as to rejoice ui view of past success. ^Sir, we 

S 



78 &BV. J. 8. WATBEBVEt. (Juoef 

4d Hj9iet, W« would not appoar, on this haUoWed oceai^oB, liko Uio 
vaunting cbanpioni of oarth) with boating drumt and banaora flying. 
Oon is not the noi^ outcry of Mooessfiil ambition. It It the calm, grate- 
fal tatiifaction of having attempted great thini^a ; of havin|( expected 

Seal, things ; and thanks be unto God( of having, Sir, realized threat 
ing[8. I oo net say that you have met and conquered the hosts of de- 
pravity — that nothing remains but to collect the spoils and to record the 
triumph. No, Sir ! but you have overrome that fearlulness which pre* 
cedes the onset, a barrier, as soldiers tell us, more formidable than the 
actnal ettcounter. 

When the plan of monthly distribution was proposed for this city, there 
were few, I presume, who did not tremble for the result. The reeolution 
was a noble one. It struck the imaginBtion with wonder and delight* 
fiut who of us was without hie fisars r It was weU> knowi^ that there is 
scarce^ a more heterogeneous population on earth. It embraces indivi- 
duals of every denomination, ana from almoste very dime. The practicabili- 
ty of su|>plyingth«m with evangelical Tracts, in a certain way, could be easi- 
ly conceived. ^he distributor could, without much diffitultv, drop a Tract at 
every door, and leave it to be received or rejected at pleasure. Such a 
course would be attended with little self-denia) : and allow me to add, 
Sir, probablv with as little success, it would be scattwing the precious 
grain at random. If such had been your eonrse the past year, we ebouM 
Kot have met here to-day to ahaat the harvest home. But your plan re- 
eognited the dnty of delivering personally the sacred treasure, accompa- 
nied with appropriate remarks of the distributor. Tliis is the seif-deny- 
ing feature of tne system ; and it is the real secret, under God, of your 
unexampled success. This is inclosing and cultivating the ground, it is 
sowing the^ood seed of the word with a careful hand. And what are 
the results r Are they such as our f^rful hearts anticipated ? Have 
your benevolent agents been met by rudeness and opposition ? Let the 
affecting} but cheering details of the Monthly heports answer 

You inform us that in this city alone, to say nothing of numerous other 
places, the Tracts have been presented, every month, to thirty thousand 
tamilies ; and that during the past year only five hundred, on an average, 
kave refiised them. Twenty-nine thousand five hundred families, then, have 
urtttally received them. Sir, this glorious result should put uahelief for 
ever to the blush. It should cause our hearts to beat with one simulta- 
neous impulse of gratitude to God, 

Shall I call upon the distributors to rise and rekite the incidents of suc- 
cess which have fallen under their observation r Ah ! Sir, the catalogue 
would be so long, and the circumstances so deeply affecting, that time 
and feeling would be alike exhausted* They could tell us of the storrows 
of widowhood assuaged—of the profligHte reclaimed— of the burdens of 
poverty alleviated— of anj^er changed to gentleness— of profane habits 
abandoned— «f sabbath violations ceased But Sir, you have this day 
told us even more. Yon have spoken of the tear of penitence, and of the 
radiant smile of hope You have spoken of death-beds, where the soul 
eottverted from sin and confirmed in the faith, has taken iu triumphant 
departure to glory When I listened to the circumstance, related in your 
report, of the yoimg man whose attention was arrested, and whoee heart 
was m^ted, by one of yur Tracts which some passenger had dropped on 
the higb^way , I was reminded of the conversion of Saul of Tarsus. True , 
iSctwA young man was not spurring on his chai^ger to accomplish a bloody 

£»rsecution; nor was he dashed to the ground by a miraculous vision of 
e Lord. But, Sir, he was an enemy orGod ; was prostrated bv a voice 
as effectual though not as fearful, and, like the great apostle, he has, you 
inform tts> beoome a chosen vessel to bear tha same of Jesus to the 
Gentiles. 



1880.] asy. JAUXS it'AmoT. 79 

And how modi unobiervied good has flowed -fron th* ahaoil lanadMra* 
lile Tracts which you have diitribiiiad f Many a heart, I doubt not, has 
bled in secret over them ; i^nd many a soul will pam into eternity and 
render there the gratitude which circumstances did not permit it to express 
here on earth. 

Since this benevolent plan of supplying ever^ family monthly with a 
Tract, has been in operation, there has been a visible abatement of inte- 
rest in the demoralizing amusements of the city. Other causes may have 
co-operated to produce this result ; but f shall not, 1 trustj be thought a 
fanatic, if I attribute it in part to this silent spring of Christmn cha-ity; 
Yes, Sir, while the cowrt of Thespis has been thinning, the hoase of God 
has been crowded ; and wfatisi the splendid Theatre has been cioaedy the 
walls of at least one blessed sanctuary have been rising. 

Theresolation speaks of ^our e6forts, as afSirdiog incidental aid to other 
benevolent sod pbdanthropic institutions of the age. Does this need con* 
firmation .'' Do not your Tracts recommend the oiblOf and thus subserve 
the interests of that noble mstitution which is doing so much, at the prpseni 
time, to distribute it? Do they not implant and foster the spirit of Mis- 
sions? Are they not the very nutrim»'nt of the Sabbath School ? You 
have, also attacked, with no small success, thai great evil in our eottntry^ 
I had almost said that root of all evils, intemperance. True, you have nof 
slain the h^dra. But with your system of attack you have very greatly 
annoyed htm. Tou propose to cttt off bis aliment, instead of cleaving 
down his heads. It is needless to add, Sir, that the system of total ah$Ht 
nenee must ultimately kill him. View the Tract Society under what aspect 
you please, its bearing on individuals, or its benign aspect on the country 
at large, you shall pronounce it one of tbe m >st effectual though unobtru- 
sive promoters of the public good. In the language of a speaker who pre* 
ceeded me, it adapts itself to all classes, and to pv«>ry condition of life. 
Yes, Sir, it has a message for the Minister in tbe desk, and for the l^hris* 
tian^n his closet. It visits the prisoner^in his cell, and follows the mariner 
to the ocean. It has a balm for every wound, a medicine for every disoiv 
der. It takes its messages directly from the Bible. It glories in shining 
with a borrowed light The Bible Society is often and appropriately 
compared to the Sun. But, Sir, if the Bible Society is the Sun, the Tract 
Society is the atmospheric medium that reflects the glorious rayti, aiul 
throws them into every dark comer of the earth. Need we invite co* 
(^ration in such a cause? Need we exhort to perseverance.'' The re* 
ffilts detailed in your Report, Sir, are the eloquence of facts. Let them 
speak, and let the American Church fcp|, and act. 

Skbtch of the Address of Rev. James M'4bot, of the Bap- 
tist Church, one of the Society's Agents at the West. 
I have come, Mr President, from tbe West— -/rom the VaUey oftht 
Mt9i$8ippi — to return to you the thanks of thousands, and tens of 
thousands, for your benevolence in sending to them Agents to form 
Tract Societies and gratuitously distribute Tracts. The^ needed just 
such an effort. They have manifested their gratitude in their kind- 
ness to your Agents, and the promptitude with which they have co- 
operated in the objects of your benev6lence. 

"Among those who are the most favored with other means, Tracts 
have quickened the attention to divine things. They have assisted 
the devoted minister in his pastoral visits, and aroused Christians ta 
action. But among the people to whom the Sabbath brings no miuis- 
fcr— who have no sanctuary— Tracts are peculiarly needed. Such 



80 BEv. JAUBB ]i*ABor. [Juiie, 

neighborhoods are not few in the Valley of the Minusippi. But the 
extent of destitution is a rerj delicate subject to be touched by an 
Agent; for such is the pride of human nature^ that people do not re- 
lish the report that calls them destitute, even when their supply 
amounts oiUy to week-day preaching once in a month, and when the 
persoji who ministers to them only *' darkens counsel by words with- 
out knowledge.*' 

I supplied with Tracts a neighborhood, in which there were 10 or 
16 families. They did not know in what County they lived. They 
did not pay taxes ; perform military duty ; or work roads. A few of 
them could read. They received Tracts with avidity, and hailed the 
presence of a minister with joy. 

In a neighborhood in which they had no regular Sabbath preach- 
ing, the people attended with much seriousness to the preaching of 
your Agent and to the Tracts distributed. In that neighborhood was 
a gentleman who, previous to my visit, had been all devotion to " the 
sports of the turf.*' A few weeks ago, as I visited this neighborhood 
again, he walked a mile or two with me to tell me what the Lord had 
done for him and bis. '' 0,'' said he, *' I shall have cause to bless 
God to all eternity for sending you here.'' He told me that he be- 
came deeply impressed with his own situation, and detennined to 
submit immediately to Jesus. He went home to bis family with a 
deep sense that he had neglected their souls. But how to unfold lo 
them the burden of his mind he knew not. When evening came, he 
thought he could not again retire with his family without praying 
with them. After traversing the room for some time, with the Bible 
in his band, he thus addressed his family : — '* O my wife .' O my chil- 
dren ! I have neglected your souls. But now I wish to pray witb you. 
I wish you to go with me in the service of the Lord." A few days 
after, (at Christmas) his daughters were invited to a balL They an- 
swered, " We cannot go." Ah ! their father had been praying with 
them. Now the father, the mother, and the two daughters (all of the 
family that are of mature years) are rejoicing in a good hope, and are 
professors of religion. A number of others in the same neighborhood 
have been brought to the Savior, and have obtained regular preaching. 

Frequently, after leaving a neighborhood, I have received letters, 
informing of the Divine blessing on these bumble labors, and request- 
ing my return. One individual wrote me nearly in these words : ''I 
take up my pen with a Joyful heart, praising and blessing God that 
ever he sent you here. I was then crying peace, peace, when sudden 
destruction was nigh. Afterward I heard you preach from the text, 
' To-day, after so long a time, if you will hear bis voice, harden not 
your hear^.' You told me my time had been long ; but, bless the Lord, 
this was my day. I trust I have a peace with God that passeth all under- 
standing. I now am enabled to go on my way rejoicing. In a letter re- 
ceived from six ladies in the same county, they say, '* We have met 
this day in order to inform you of the success of your labors. We were 
in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity until you warned us of 
our danger. We thank God for sending you, and you for coming and 
leading os in the way everlasting. O, dear Sir, we think there is a 
great work for you to do in this part of Zion; for the harvest truly is 
plenteous, but the laborers are few." 



It ii not the Tract interest alooe that is promoted by the labors of 
yoar Agents ; but the Bible, the Sundaj SchooK and the Temperance 
cause. In a large number of places, a Ttmperanee Society has been 
formed soon afler our Tract operations, and OFidently as the result of 
them. 

I called at the house of a rich merchant, where the Minister of 
the Congregation spent the evening with me. The decanters and 
other drinking apparatus were soon brought forward. I raised my 
Jiands and exclaimed, " Toiie& no^ taste not, hand/e not" The Min- 
ister advocated the temperate use of ardent spirits ; but after a free" 
discussion of the sulgect we dismissed it A few days after, I saw 
the Minister. He told me he was convinced— that *' Touch not, taste 
not, handle not, was best." He told me afterward, that, when he 
went home after our interview, he said to his son, " Benjamin, go 
pour that whiskey out of the decanter into the barrel." But how 
they should dispose of the contents of the barrel became the next sub- 
ject for consideration. This son at first wished to sell it ; but he was 
present at one of our meetings in an adjoining county, where the 
Temperance cause was again introduced, and retumeil declaring to 
bis father, that he did not think it right to sdl the whiskey ; and it was 
left to be converted into vinegar. 

The father and two sons began to think of a Temperance Society. 
They had a meeting, and a Society was formed consisting of five 
members. That Society has since increased to about one hundred ; 
and within a few miles another Society has been formed. 

I have had the opportunity already of laboring in Western Penn- 
sylvania, Western Virghnia, Ohio, and Kentucky ; and in each state- 
in each district— which I have visited, 1 have found evidences of the 
Divine blessing on Tract distribution. I have seen the Deist weep, 
while one of your Tracts has been read. 

On one occasion, a gentleman hearing ray name, inquired of me 
whether I was the one who distributed Tracts in his neighborhood. 
I haformed him I was. He then related, apparently with deep inte- 
rest, the revolution produced m his mind by means of the Tract The 
Bible of Divine orif^n. He told me he had long been a Deist; that 
when he received that Tract he did not intend to read it. Hut to hand 
it to another ; but he read it and it had entirely changed his mind in 
relation to the Bible ; that he thought he should never again doubt 
its authenticity. 

When in Kentucky, in a place where they had enjoyed a great re 
rival of religion, I was informed ^y the Minister that one of the first 
subjects was brought to the Savior through the instrumentality of the 
Tract the Croff of Christ. 

In Maysville, a young lady was awakened by the Tract on Fashion* 
able Amusements^ who is now a member of an Evangelical Church 
In that town. 

In Newport, Ohio, when forming a Tract Society, an old lady came 
forward to subscribe, and desired her husband klso to give his name 
as an Annual contributor, saying that a Vraet was the first means qf 
her conversion to Qod, 

Very firequently, when looking upon the immense fieldsi in the 
Valley of the Mississippi, white already to harvest, the thought has 



I 



ii lucv. jAVis u*ABOT. [June^ 

been deeply impressed upon my mind, that soon, the Agent, the 
Committee, the Society, must meet the multitudes of the West at the 
bar of Christ — ^I rejoice at having the privilege to-day of seeing the 
friends who have made so many sacrifices both of' labor and money 
for the West. I have often seen the big tear drop from the manly 
cheek while an assembly heard what you were doing for them. 

I have seen sectarian bigotry withering under the information that 
an Episcopalian, a Congregationalist, a member of the Reformed 
Dutch Church, a Presbyterian, and a Baptist, are with one heart isn- 
gaged in selecting and preparing these Tracts for publication.— The 
most devoted among the various denominations are rising above the 
peculiarities of sect, to espouse the cause of God — not of a party— 
as their cause. This Society has done much to banish sectarian bi- 
gotry from the earth, and I trust is destined to do more. 

-I have seen the immediate fruits of your example, when I have 
read from your report the pecuniary sacrifices which you have made 
to supply the wide^spread desolations, not in the Valley of the Missi- 
ssippi only, but of South America, of the shores of the Mediterranean 
--«f the world — Tes, I have seen suspicion disarmed, when the peo- 
ple have seen the efforts you were making for which you expected no 
compensation until the resurrection of the just. 

Ton have done "much ; but much more is still to be done. There 
are professors of religion, who say. If those who are destitute of the 
Bible will come and let us know their wants we will supply them. 
We will give them Tracts, if they will come and ask us for them. 
But you have better understood the commission of your ascended 
Master to proclaim the good news to " every creature. "-*The Apos- 
tles did not wait for the nations to come to Jerusalem to hear the Gos- 
pel ; but were willing to ** go out into the highways and hedges, and 
compel them to come in." Your Society have imitated their example. 
Your Agents have penetrated places seldom visited by ministers. 
Your Tracts have invited the attention of the people to the Bible. 
The Bible has invited them to the sanctuary ; and there they have 
been invited to the Savior. This work must not stop until the des- 
timte every where are supplied, or the Lord ceases to bless your 
labors, and to give you the means of sustaining them. 



PREMIUJIIS OFFERED. 

A benevolent individual has placed in the hands ofthe undersigned 
the sum of $60, to be awarded by the Rev. James MUnor, D. D. the 
Hon. Theodore Frelinghuysen« and the Rev. Absalom Peters, to the 
author of the best Tract showing " The Importance of theJSotpel, 
its MiniUry, it9 S^Abathf and Us Ordinances to the Well-being onci 
Perpetuity of our Free Institutions.** 

The manuscripts must be presented on or before October 1, 1830, 
and each accompanied with a sealed envelope, containing the name 
ef the writer, which will not be opened except in case of Uie success* 
^l Tract, and should be addressed, (pdst paid) to 

WILLIAM A. HALLOCK, 
144 Nassau-^treet, New-York. 



18S0.] puuiiTu ornuD. 

ApremhiiD of $100 is ilio ofikred far as 
tampcTU 



88 



"Eiia; which abaUcon- 
f the eiiiling enls of in- 
E* therefor, coiuiilered in theii relalion M 
mperate themselree, and to locialy." The muiatcripli to 
be addreued to the EdUor« of the Naw-York Obtetrer, New-ToA, or 
of the Jounia] of Humauil;, Andover, Mail, on or before the first 
dayof NoTemberneit. 

Alio a premiutn of $S0, forthe Tract which ahall be deemed bCEt 
adapted to exert a religiatu infltienet upon jroun^ mm in Cotltgt. Tbe 
manaicripti are to be addreiied, free of eipeiue, to Her. 3. H. Cox, 
D.D. orRer. J. M. Mathew., D.D. New-York.by the flnt of Sep- 
tember oext 

RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURT OF THE AMERICAN TRACT 80CIETT, 

Frtm Mtf 1, u Hay IS, IS30. 

Mptl— The Receipla bom April IB ^ Jf>;y l>ua omhird InlUi UK, beini K~ 



mle4«d inlbe Fiftji A^ 



Utmlk Faa^ Mn. A. E. Blow, Tr. 
HpanlBlaiTta,':F>m.,IIn.LiieKlliC. SlHoir, & 
Owego, (Tlua Co. An.) E.Jiit* Dili. CoL C.D.I 
Fcm, Pn, Bwriel Welb, Ar. 
Ponlud jfhUMqu On. nBoihf JaduD, S«. 
Smrma, FeiL. Hn. AHoUk Aior, Ac- • 
Inj, Clwrlci Linu. Tr. . 
"■■-- "—aiVm— - - 



Wca Furmi, Abt. Omn Bi. Jobi, TT. 



... -vAhi^dH.HorKe IH 

mlulon t AKwdl, E. B. Matm, 
mnridi, Wurrn Co. " — -- 



UiHlBrni, rem., Ibn Hkl 
LjoiM^Hiu, Ffoi., ihtH 

KMrTii 



., Mn. Hirj KaMdUiTr. 



luIlvT MHker, Sec 
Oh DuTIOD, Tc. 

■remft MomiiaiB, ifarns o'o. Bnert ■aiia, Tr. ' 



I4t 



RECEIPTS* 



Staiwat«r.reiD.,Mw.Bai'aliWintermoot/rr. . 
PENN.—Hartord, Samuel E. Kingsbury, Tr. 

MD.— W«>rceHier Co. Fero^ Mi» Itoria f. BredcU,Sec . . 

V1R,--Prince Riward Cii. Theol. Sam. Arfatide* 8. U^tb, Sec. 

N. CAR.— EUiabethlown, Bladen Co. Fein.,Bllr8. Jane Wrlgm,8ec 

QEO. Augusta, Francis M- Robertson, Sec. . • • 

LawrencevilJe, Fem., Juliet Wilson, Sec. .... 

TENN.— Ksexville, James Park, Es^Tr. 

OHIO^-<3inrinnall, Henry B. Funh, Tr. . 

Cleaveland, Thooia/ Davl», Tr- •. „_,»^ 

Elyria, (Lorain Co Aux ) Rev. Daniel W. Latlirop, See. . 

GranviUe, Rev. Jarob Little, Pres. ..... 

Wakeman, Huron Co. R«v. X. Bctls, Ag. . •. ^ • 

ARK. TER Linle Hock, Fern. Mrs. A. 1. Gritlenden, Sec. 

SlKJIETY NOT AUXILIARY. 

NEW-f ORK— N<r«r Utrecht, Fem. Bib. Hiss, h Tract Soc Mrs. 
Catharine Knaim, Tr. . . ... 

Tracts sold at the Deiwsitory to individuals, (including fSO remit- 
ted by Rev. O. Eastman, Ag.) 
Directors for Life, 

CONN Goshen, Rev. Grant Pow- 
ers, by his Ch fie Cone- 60 00 

NEW-YORK— .Blooming Grove, 
Orange Co. llezekiah Howell, 
Esq (in part of $50,; . . 10 00 

N. JERt^E v.— Lebanon, Rev. Ja- 
cob J. Schultz, by Ladies, (in 
part of 130.) ... 275 



FarTr.i Dm- 

3001 

4 00 

33 00 

18 37 

20 00 

10 00 

150 00 

10 00 

17 50 

00 



175 



21 00 

19 36 

50 00 

3 00 

5 00 



4 86 
101 00 



» 



»♦ 
n 



Members for Life. 

MASS.— Manchester, Hev. Saml. 
M. Enierson, by Ladles, 

Paxton,Rev. Cyrus W. Oonaot, 

CONN^-Hartford, Charles Bliss, 
(in part of f20,) . 

Lisbon, Dea. William Adams, (in 
part of i^,) 
„ Eunice Averill, Do. 
Daniel Braman, Do. 
Mary Ann Branch by Sa- 

bina Branch, S}o. . 
Desu Levi Crosby, Do. 
Elisha Morgan, Do. 
„ Silas Read, Do. . 

Plainfield, Erastus Lester, Esq. (in 
partof|9()t) 

Sterling Rev. Otis Lane, by Ladies 
of Sterling & Voluntown, . 

NEW-YOKK..~Bloomlng Grove, 
Orange Go. Mrs. Frances How- 
ell, (in full of $20,) . . 

David H. Moffat, (in full of $300 12 00 
Joseph Moffat, . 30 00 

Dnrbam, Dennis Baldwin, (hi full 
of$20J .... 

East Granville, Mrs. Sarah H. Sa- 
vage, by F.AT.S<in fUllof$20,) 

Montgomery, Orange Co. Hannah 
M. Goiidit, by her father, Rev. 
R. W. Coadit, (in part of $90,) 10 00 

New-York City, Henry S. Mulli- 

San, by his father, William C. 
lulUgai, Biq. . . . 30 00 



20 00 
20 00 

10 00 

600 
6 00 
600 

500 
500 
500 
400 

600 

SO 00 



500 



15 00 
700 



Sdioharie, Schoharie OonMrs. An- 

gelira Weidman, bv Ladies of 
lev. Mr. Weidman^s Society, 20 00 
Sherborne, Zaccheus W. Elmore, 90 00 
Westiiwn, Orange Co. Rev. Chris- 
topher Cory, by Ladles, 
TENN.— GreenviUe, Rev. F. A. 
McCorkle, by citizens of Green- 
ville and vicinity 

Annual Members. 



20 09 



20 00 



1 66 



50 

oo 



R. ISL.->Providence, Col. Alexan- 
der Jitnes, . . . 3 00 

CONN.— Farmington, Henry L. 
Bidwell, .... 2 00 

Greenwich, Miss Lanra Howe, 2 CD 

NEW-YORK — New- York Ci^, 
Lewis Thibou, ... 2 00 

Other Donations. 

MAINE.— Qorham, Samuel Clark, 
MASa— HaverbUl, Misi Rebecca 

Marsh, . . « • 

CONN.— Bridgewater, two Lad's. 

Norwich, William C. Oilman, Esq. 25 00 
JN E W.YORK.— Uooperstown, Dr. 

Thomas Fuller, . 
Genoa, Cayuga Co. Miss Cyrene 

Isaacs, (deceased,) a Legacy, 
Livonia, LivingstonCOnMiss Maria 

Beecher, for Tracts for Greece, 
Manbeim, Herkimer Co. Luther 

Pardee, .... I 00 
New- York City, W. WUliams, 89 

N.JER.— Newark, «W.W.*» . 60 00 
PENN.— GUgal, Indiana Co. Oh. 

and Congregation, . 2 00 

The above list contains donation^— 
For Tracts for Greece, . . 4 00 



300 

25 00 

400 



Whole amount of Donations $540 91 
Received for Tracts sold, 1.145 42 

Total, $1,686 33 



THE AMERICAN 

Oh. T.] JUI.T, 18S0. EKO- "i 



Bte Tmt No. US, Peter nd Mm Hay. 



AMHKIOAW TKAOT 800XBTT. 

It is th« objec^f the GiEOTfTtta CoMaiTTEi of tmb American 
Tract Societt, in tbii doeamcnt, to Iky before the Branches and 
AuxlUariei, <npporten sind ftiendi of the Society, b NtiD Sytttm of 
Pricct and Dueounit at which the Sodet; '« PublicBtions will here- 
■fUr be ioid, with (be Tusons for its Kdoption. They nill first 
Mate the 
Sj/iitm of Pricu nnd DiuourUi hUhtrlo adopltd and now laid aiide, 

TIm price of the dnodedraa Ti:BCts, embradBg the priacipal pirt 
ofthe Sodely's Publications, hm beeo one cent for 10 pages; the 
covtTt of 8 page Tracts being counted •■ 3 pages each, and (he coreni 
of all larger Tracts bemg not coouted, and of coarse grali*. 

Tlie dueatndi made on all the Seciety't PuUiiiBiiiHis hare been as 

Vw. V. 1 ytuQtM Ho, m. 



86 NEW PE1CE8 AND DISC0t7KTS. [July, 

follows: to BeneTolent lagtitutions, and to indiyiduak purchasing 
for gratuitous distributioD, or to sell again, 10 per cent, discount; to 
Auxiliaries contributing one-fourth part of their funds as a donation, 
20 per cent* discount ; and to some large Branches and Auziliariet, 
owning Depositories from which minor Auxiliaries are supplied, a still 
larger discount has been made by a special vote of the Committee. 

The embarrassments growing out of this system of operation, and 
which have led the Committee to the adoption of the change herein 
announced, are chiefly the following : viz. 

1. A large portion of those who co-operate with the Society, espe- 
cially in the more distant and destitute parts of the country, either do 
not understand the practical operation of the system of giving 20 per 
cent, discount to Auxiliaries, and at the same time requiring one-fourth 
part of their funds as a donation, or, if they understand it, do not see 
the propriety of its adoption ; while, at the same time, it introduces 
much perplexity in the details of the operations of all Auxiliaries. 

2. This part of the system bears very unequally on Auxiliaries in 
destitute parts of the country, which need to have the whole amount 
of their funds returned to them in Tracts, compared with Auxiliaries 
in places abounding in means, many of which it is desirable should 
contribute more than one>fourth part of their funds as a donation. 

3. The giving of so large discounts to Branches and Auxiliaries, 
necessarily prevents the Society from affording its Publications at as 
low a rate as is desirable, to that portion of the community not enti- 
tled to a discount ; while, at the same time, the large discounts, in 
connexion with the facts that so large a portion of the covers are 
gratis, renders the nominal price of the Society's Publications so 
much greater than the amount received in the sales, as to convey an 
erroneous impression of the rate at which they are actually afibided. 
The selling of Tracts at 20 per cent, discount from the rate of 10 pages 
for a cent, is equivalent to selling 12^ pages for Lcent, and this rate 
of discount is somewhat less than the average discount hitherto made 
by the Society on all its Publications. Add to this the fact, that of the 
whole number of pages of Tracts and covers issued by the Society, 
previous to May 1, 1829, 21 4-10 per cent, were covers; and that of 
the whole number of pages of Tracts and covers, 17 3-10 per cent. 
have been covers not counted, and gratis, in the mode in which the 
sales have hitherto been conducted ; and it appears that, while the 
Society has nominally been selling 1000 pages for a dollar, it has ac- 
tually sold,' taking into view the discounts and the covers, all its duo* 
decimo Tracts, on an average, since the time of its formation, at the 
rate, of aboqt 1^ jpf^g^s of Tracts and covers for a dollar. 



1850.] NEW PRICES AND DISGOUIVTS* 87 

The Committee, in the adoption of the system of prices and dis* 
counts DOW to be submitted to the Christian community, not only hope 
to obviate some of the principal embarrassments above alluded to, but 
they have felt warranted, by the present reduction in the cost of the 
raateriaU and mechanical labor employed by the Society, to afford its 
Publications, on an average throughout the country, at prices con- 
siderably redaced* 

Syttem of Prices arid Discounts noto adopted, . 

1. Useful matter will, as soon as it can be prepared, be printed on 
both sides of the covers of the duodecimo Tracts; and as the expense 
of issuing each cover somewhat exceeds the expense of issuing a Tract 
of 4 pages, eadi cover vnU^from and after the present time, be counted 
as four pages in the sales. This method of counting the covers, in 
connexion with a change in the system of discounts, will enable the 
Committee, while they increase the number of pages sold for a cent, 
to determine on a numiiier which will be of convenient use-— a point 
which all who are conversant with the detail of Tract sales will see to 
be indispensable By this method of counting covers, the prices of 
the Tracts of different sizes will also bear essentially an equal relation 
to their cost ; and should it, at any future time, be thought desirable 
to omit the covers on any of the smaller Tracts, no derangement will 
be thereby occasioned in the system of prices now adopted. 

2. The price of the Society's duodecimo Tracts, each cover being 
counted as 4 pages, will be, throughout the country, from and after 
the present time, one cent for fifteen pages; and the prices of its other 
Publications as in the accompanying schedule.* 

3. Discounts will he made only to Unrge Branches and Auxiliaries 
having Depositories from vfhich minor Attxiliaries are supplied. The 
doing away of all other disoounts will greatly simplify the Tract ope- 
rations of the country ; and, in connexion with the consequent increase 
of the number of pages afforded for a given sum, will especially ad- 
vance the interests of the more distant and destitute ponions, which 
have hitherto been, to a great extent, supplied at the rate of 10 pages 
for a cent, without discount. The expenses to which^ large Branches 
and Auxiliaries, owning Depositories, are subjected for freight, and 
in several of our principal cities and towns for rent and agency, are 
necessarily large ; and while they must, in no small degree, be sus* 
tained by donations from the places where such Depositories are lo- 
cated, the Committee believe that to afford a discount to aid in susr 
gaining such Depositories at the principal commercial centres through' 

* See cover. 



88 NSW rmiCEB AND DISCOUNTS. [Jidy. 

out the country y will further the general interests of the Tract cause, 
and is essential to the carrying into effect of a primary principle in 
the Society's Constitution ; that .*' the prices of its Tracts shall be> as 
far as practicable, the sane in all parts of the United States.^' 

4. Id the language of the Society's Contlitution^ as amended at the 
last Anniversary, ^* Any Traet Sodety atmitaUy eonlnbuHng a dona- 
tion from its fundi to the Tretuury ofihu Society, maybeeotuidertd an 
Auxiliary," While this proyiston of the Constitution has been made 
to obviate embarrassments which have hitherto existed, especially in 
distant and destitute portions of the country, the increasmg claims 
upon I he Parent Institution demand that the aggregat$ amount iff do- 
nationt from its AuxiHariea sAotiid be by no sneans dimisiished, but 
rather greatly increased; and such, the Committee trust, in the ex- 
panding benevolence which the Holy Spirit has awakened in the fol* 
lowers of the Redeemer, will be the actual result. The openings 
which, in Providence, are spread before the Society for gratnitous 
distributions in the great VaHey of the Mississippi and other destitute 
parts of our country and the world ; the necessity of adding, from 
time to time, to the number of its PuMications, and of snttaining a ge- 
neral Depository from which supplies on sale may at all times be ob- 
tained, particularly for tlie systematic and -stated distributions now 
extensively adopted ; the necessity of frequently giving short credits 
to feeble Auxiliaries in destitute places ; and the fact, that the Publi- 
cations of the Society, as the nature of the Institution demands, arc 
sold ** AT cosT'^^all conspire to show that increased and liberal defM- 
^tens to the Society are indispensable to the vigorous prosecution of its 
great and important work. For a large part of these donations it.de- 
pends on its Auxiliaries ; nor can the Committee believe they will be 
less abundant, or permanent, or usefiil, or acceptable to God, because 
they will hereafter be the free and voluntary apffropriations of those 
who love the cause. 

6. Life and Annual Directors will be entitled to receive, ainnually, 
9000 pages of Tracts, or such of the other Publications of the Society 
as they prefer, to the value of two dollars ; and Life and Annual Mem- 
bers to receive, annually, 1600 pages of Tracts, or other Publications, 
to the value of one dollar; and may draw the same directly from this 
Society, or from any of its Branches or Auxiliaries which have De- 
positories. 

0. All Publications drawn from the Depositories of Branches and 
Auxiliaries, by Directors or Members of the Parent Society, or by 
authorised Agents in the name of the Parent Society, may be charged 
to the Parent Society at their nomtna^ price, without atiy discount^ 



1^30.] XUXBICAV TRACT SOCIETY, BOSTON. 89 

Bj the aboTe lystem of Prices and Dbcounts, the Society will sell 
as 1118117 ""^^"^ t^*i> 1^^ pae^es of Tracts and coyers for a dollar, on 
an average throughoat the country, as shall equal the whole amount 
of discounts made to Branches and Auxiliaries owning Depositories, 
which will increase the average quantity sold for a dollar to not far 
from 1700 pages. 

The Committee would refer to the Society's Fifth Annual Report, 
now in the press, for numerous additional statements relative to the 
cost of the Society's Publications, and the principles on which all its 
pecaniarjr concerns are transacted. It has been their sole endeavor, 
unless their own hearts deceive them, so to discharge the responsible 
tnist committed to tliem in this eventful period of the church and the 
world, an shall render the Society the most extensively useful in view 
of our relations to God and eternity. To His smiles and blessing, and 
to the approbation and Christian confidence of all who love and co- 
operate in this cause, do the Committee commend the measures herein 
fuinottnced ; praying that they may be the means of exciting many to 
greater activity in this work ; of increasing the number of Publica- 
tions dispersed ; and of bringing a higher revenue of praise to our Di- 
vine Redeemer, m the salvation^ through his grace, of increased mul- 
litndes of our dying fellew-raea. 

By order of the Executive Committee. 

S. V. S. WILDER, Pret, of the 8oc. 
WnxiAii A. Hallocx, Corresponding Sec, 
New- York, June, 1830. 

07 The sehedide of prices above referred to, and the form of the Con>titation of 
jtt Auxiliary aa oow reriaed by the CeBUBittee, will be foiiad on the cover of thu> 
Number of the MagMtine. 



SIXTEENTH ANinVKRSART OF THE 

BRANCH AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, BOSTON* 

The Sixteenth Anniversary of this Society was held in Park-street 
Church, May 20. The President, 

HON. WILLIAM REED, 

in the Chair. The Rev. James L. Kimball having resigned the o£Bce 
of Secretary last fall, the Executive Committee filled the vacancy of 
that time by the appointment of Mr. IValter Follett, who was now 
elected to the office. 

The meeting was opened with prayer by the Rev. Thomas Shepard, 
of Ashfield. The Annual Report of the Executive Committee was 
read by the Secretary. The following resolutions were then adopted : 

Resohedt That this Meeting learn with pleasure the increased in- 
terest which has been taken in the circulation of religious Tracts, ii| 
consequence of the sifstcnuUic monUUy distribtUion* 

7* 



90 AKBMCAN TBACT 90CIETT, BOMOIT. [iuly, 

R$9olveit That a judieioui and liberal diitribMtioB of veli^ous 
Xractf if a powerfiil means of checking the progrese of vice and 
error, and of correcting the moral and religious sentiments of the 
community. 

Resolvea, That this meeting feel a deep and increasing sense of their 
dependailce on God, and the necessity of more fervent prayer for the 
Holy Spirit to accompany the publications of this Society. 

The Meeting was addressed by Rev. Mr. M'Aboy, of Athens, Ohio, 
one of the Agents of the American Tract Society at New- York, in 
the Valley of the West; Rev. Mr. Cleavelsnd, of Salem; Rev. Mr* 
Holmes, of New-Bedford ; and Rev. Mr. Green, of Boston. 

ABSTRACT OF THE REPORT. 

The anount of Tracts ciraUated, in what u'now the Seeietff's field 
rf lab0r, has been greater than in any former year. Sold at the 
General Depository, 6,382,800 pages ; delivered to Life Merobera 
298,720 pages ; circulated gratuitously 1,234,348 pages ; whole amount 
7,865,868 pages. 

In addition to the above donations, $196 88 have been appropri* 
ated for the circulation of TracU in the Western States, and #188 00 
to publish and circulate Tracts among the Jews. 

STATE OF THE FUNDS. 

Jleeetved, ttom May 12, 1880, to May 12, 1890, 

For Tracts. Tract Magasine, and Christiaii Ahnoaaee, |5,6SS 06 

D<HiatioaB from Auxiliaries and iadinduals, .... 1,SD5 65 

From Life Members, 774 00 

CoUeeted at Amnial Meetinflr, May, 1689, . 141 61 

For Rent from Mass. Sabbath School Union, . 95 00 
Balance in the Treasury al the last Asnual Meeting, inefalding 

Woodman's Legacy, 2,348 18 

Total, . , . '. Tf 11,108 06 

Pmidt dating the year, ending May 12, 1830, $0,624 07 
Balance in the Treasury, including the indispoeable part pf the Wood- 
Fund, . 1,477 99 



Tot«l, .... 11,10806 

Seventy new Auxiliaries have been formed during the year, about 
260 visited and revived by Agents. Three new Depositories have 
been established, one of which is in Harosted, Lower Canada-^Ca- 
nada begins to invite effort. Whole number of Auxiliaries about 672. 

Perhaps the most interesting feature in the operations of the Socie* 
ty during the last year, is the system which has been adopted for the 
circulation of Tracts — the tystem of a tnonthhf distribution. There is 
nothing which has given so much prominence to the Society, and set 
it before the community with such a definite object fn view. It enlists 
the feelings and active efforts of Christians wherever they have been 
made acquainted with it. 

The Committee have taken a deep interest In this system, and re- 
commend it to the Auxiliaries. They have the satisfaction to know 
that it is becoming extensively adopted. Between 00 and 70 Auxi- 
liaries have it in successihi operation, and as many more have taken 
measures to eflfect it, whose progress has not yet been reported. There 



ItfdO.] ?£lfN8TLTA]fIA BKANCH, PHILADBX.PBIA. 01 

can be but little, if any, doubt that this is the system by which Tracts 
will ultitnately bo 4istHb«ted among all the Society's Auxiliaries. 

Though it is but a few months since the plan was adopted by any 
of the Auxiliaries of this Society, interesting reports of its success are 
almost daily received. The report from one town says that *' the 
religious society has been greatly increased in consequence of it i" 
iirom another, that " the sanctuary has been more fully attended since 
it was adopted ;" from another, that *' the minister acknowledges its 
great assistance in his parochial visits ;" from two others, that '' tem- 
perance societies have grown out of it ; from another, that ** the 
Sabbath School and Bible Class have both been greatly increased, 
several intemperate men reclaimed, and the Temperance Society 
strengthened by its aid;*' from still another, that of 600 families only 
two are known to refuse the Tracts ; and from all the towns which 
have reported their success, that the effects are most happy. 



THIRD ANmVERSART OF TNE 

VMSWlChWABilA BRAVTCH, PHILADELPHIA. 

The 3d Anniversary of the Pennsylvania Branch of the American 
Tract Society was celebrated in the 7th Presbyterian Church, Phila- 
delphiii on Friday, May 2S, 1830, at 9 o'clock, P. M. The President, 
THOMAS LATTIMER, Esq. took the Chair. 

The Meeting was opened with Prayer, by the Rev. Thomas 
M'Auley, D. D. 

The Treasurer, Mr. Frederick Erringer, read the Report of the 
state of the Treasury, and the Corresponding Secretary read the An- 
Dual Report of the Executive Committee. 

The following resolutions were then unanimously adopted. 

On motion of the Rev. Mr. Wisner, of Ithaca, N. Y., seconded by 
the Rev. N. Murray, of Wilkesbarre, Pa. 

Rcfolved, That the Report now read be accepted and printed, ud" 
der the direction of the Board. 

On motion of the Rev. William J. Armstrong, of Richmond, Ta., 
seconded by Rev. B. B. Smith, of the Episcopal Church, 

Resolved, That the success which has hitherto attended the monthly 
distribution of Tracts to every family willing to receive them, de«> 
mands increased exertion to carry it into universal effect. 

On motion of the Rev. Dr. Edwards, of Boston, seconded by the 
Rev. Mr. M'Aboy, of the Baptist Church, Agent of the American 
Tract Society in the Valley of the West. 

Resolvedf That the principles on which this Society is founded, and 
the good which it is adapted to accomplish ought to commend it to 
the vigorous efforts and fervent prayers of KlI within its bounds. 

The Meeting was addressed by the Rev. Messrs. Wisner, Ann- 
strong, Smith, Edwards, and M'AlK>y. The audience was larger 
than usual, a^d a feeling of deep interest appeared to pervade the 
meeting in favor of renewed efforts to extend the influence of the 
Tract system, and particularly of this Branch. 

The Benedictioa was jiroaounced by the Rev. Dr. M'Atiley. 



92 BRANCHES AND AUXILIAHIES. [JuIy, 

STATE OF THE FUNDS. 

Received, for Tracts sold, including donations fVom Societies 

Auzilianr to the Braacli, . f4,86S 05 
Life Directors and Members, 686 00 

Total, .... $5,550 05 

Paid, during the year, to the American Tract Society; . $3>8TO S8 

PrinUng, 409 05 

General Agent, Assistant, and incidental expenses, . . 14ii4 85 

TravttUing Agents, I ' ' ^^ ^ 

For books sold on commission last year, . . • » 3S7 04 

Total |5»557 8fi 

Tracts sold the last year, 4,437,890 pages. 

Total Tracts circulated since the formation 
of the Society, 15,743,800 pages. 



SOUTH CAROLINA BRANCH. 

The Fourth Anniversary of this Society wHs held April 7, at the 
Depository in Chalmers Street. The Ftesident, Thomas Legabe, 
£sq. in the chair. After prayer by the Rev. Dr. McDowell, the 
Annual report was read by the Corresponding Secretary, Rey. Jo> 
seph Brown. Resolutions were then offered and adopted, among 
which was the following : vie. 

Resolved, That this meeting regard the constant improvement in the character 
and variety of Religious Tracts, the recent plan of adding a Monthly Distributiou 
to the methods previously devised for their circulation, and ttie immense good tiiey 
are obviously effecting, as furnishing the most powerful motives to united, generid 
«nd untiring eflbrts in this important cause. 

The Meeting was addressed by the Rev. A. White of Johns Island, 
Rev. U. Powers of Cheraw, Thomas S. Grimke, Esq. and Rev. Jo- 
seph Brown. 

Reciepts, during the year, $915. Distributed gratuitously 
119,140 pages. Edition of Christian Almanac issued, 8,000. The 
System of Monthly Distribution has been efficiently prosecuted in 
Charleston 3 months, with less difficulty and more pleasure than was 
anticipated. The Society has 46 Auxiliaries, one of which reports 
that a man had been influenced by the Tract Evils of Excessive 
Drinking to abandon his cup, and another by the 8teearer*s Prayer 
to cease his profaneness. Rev. John Diokson, Agent, Depositorif 
Rooms, Chalmers Street. 

CINCINNATI BRANCH. 

The Third Anniversary of this Society was held May 25, Rev. 
B. P. AtdkiiOtt, one of the Vice Presidents, in the Chair. After 
prayer by the Rev. Dr. Wilson, Mr. Henry B. Funk, the Treasurer, 
read an abstract of his report ; and the Annual Report of the Board 
was read by Rev. Oman East^n, General Agent of the Ajnerican 
Tract Society for the Western States. 

The following resolutions were then unanimously adopted : 

Resolved, That the American Tract Society and other similar institutions of the 
day, in which christians of different denominations are engaged, are powerfU aux- 
iliaries tothe faithful preachiagof the gospel, in extending the Redeemer's kingdom. 



lAdQ.] SEARCHES AJTP AI7XI1>I4EII^* 93 

Re»ol9edf That the rapid inereaae of pcmolatioii in thi« western country, admo- 
nishes the patriot and the christian to be vigilant in developing and executing every 
sutlahb measure to extend moral or religious instruction, 

JI«solve<^ That the system of giving one religious Tract, monthly, to each ftmily 
in this city, meets our approbation, and that we deem it of great importanceto ex.- 
tend it throughout the land. 

The i^eetiD^ was addressed in an interesting and impressive 
manner, by Rev. Dr. Wilson, Rev. Mr. Finley of the Methodist 
Church, Rev. Mr. Qallaher, and Rev. Oman Eastman. 

Receipts, during the year, $2,624^67. Amount of Tracts sold, 
2,641,110 pages; gratuitously distributed 275,240 pages; total cir> 
culated, 2,916,369 pages. Depository, West 4th St. near Main St. 
RoBBRT BoAL, JuN. Agent. 



MOBILE TRACT SOCIETY. 

This Society was formed abput one year since, by Messrs. Vail 
and Case, Agents of the American Tract Society. By the First An- 
nual Report it appears, that the total amount of reciepts during the 
year is |(1069 50. During the year, there were received from the 
Parent Society, 886,000 pages of Tracts, 666,000 of which were sent 
to Aiixiliariea, and 170,000 pages distributed in that citjr and vicuiiCy. 

THEflDlISSOURI AND II.LINOIS BRANCH 

Held its Third Anniversary in Saint Louis, April 2. After prayei 
by Rev. William P, Cochran, it wa«, among other resolutions, 

Re»6lv€'dfTh»t this Society recommend to its Auxiliaries, the monOUy distribu- 
tion of one Tract to every family, so fiur as practicable. 

The Meeting was addressed in an eloquent and feeling manner, by 
Dr. G. W. Call, Mr. Allen, Mr. Grosvenor, and the Rev. W. S. Potts ; 
and the exercises were closed with the performance, by the Choir of 
the Church, of the beautiful Anthem, <' Strike the Cymbal." 

Receipts during the year, $603,01 . Circulated al3,106 pages, and 
2,161 copies of the Christian Almanac. The Society has 15 Auxili- 
aries. We regret, that our limits permit no further extracts flrom the 
.report. 

WINCHESTER, VA. TRACT SOCIETY. 

Third AniuTarsary held April 7, in the Episcopal Church. Rev. 
J. £. JaCKS0H» President, in the chair. Prayer by Rev. Dr. Hill. 
After the readmg of the Annual Report, the Meeting was addressed 
by Mr. Andrews of Vaucluse, Rev. Dr Hill, Mr. Davis, Mr. Murphy, 
and Rev. L. Eichelberger. Copies of the Report and four of the 
above addresses have been forwarded, which, in the absence of other 
matter, would have in a very interesting manner filled the present 
number of our Magazine. Circulated, during the year, 235,374 
pages Tracts, 841 bound volumes, and 4,749 Children's Tracts and 
other publications. Amount remitted by. the Society during the year 
for publications f825,80. The valWI of the capital stock in the De- 
pository It $348,68 ; and the fact that Mts vfkoh eumUd has been 
twice Bold &ui during the year, aftirds th« best evidence of the 
Society's activity. Mr. Daitiil Gold; A(|;ent. 



94 S0BJBCT8 rO& KBW TftACTS. JuljT, 

A NEW TRACT WANTJBD. 

We need, in thii State, says a Clergyman in Miisouri, a Tract, on 
the AeeoufUMlUy of man for kis BeUef. It if common to hear pro- 
fesied friends of the Gospel declaruig that it is no matter what a man 
btlie9€9f so that he is sincere. 



OTHER SUBJECTS FOR NEW TRACTS. 

Permit me, says tti able writer, to suggest subjects for some addi* 
tional Tracts that we need. 

One might be entitled, " My Mother,^* showing what a hold a mo- 
ther can take of the conscience of her child. 

Another might be, " The Idler" showing how much is lost by 
losmg time. 

Another, ^ The House of God Explored" showing the varied cha- 
racters and motives of a Sabbath Day audience. 

Another, ^ Honesty the best Policy," showing how much men suf- 
fer, and how egregiously they sin, and how much less good they do, 
by not being strictly honest. 

Another, *' The fvhole Christian" showing that the believer should 
not be destitute of any one of the right affections. 

Another, ** The Blossomtt the ripening Fruit, and Ae Autumn of 
Vice." 

Another, ** The Backbiter," Why is this sin let alone 7 
~ Another, *' Decision of Christian Character" The want of this di- 
minishes, incalculably, the aggregate strength of Zion. 

Another, ** He came nigh, and was lost," showing how and why 
God brings his kingdom nigh to many who are finally lost 

Another, " Let your lips keep truth" showing the many ways in 
which men falsify the truth. 

Another, *' The Trimmer," showing the mischief a faint-hearted 
professor may do to the cause of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Why not multiply Tracts till we can suit every case, as we have the 
Tippler, Sabbath-Breaker, Swearer, &c. We may thus send the 
whole Gospel, where the living preacher cannot go« 



BFUCU GOOD DONE WITH SHALIi MEANS. 

An excellent Clergyman of Virginia, being a Life Director of the 
American Tract Society, some months since obtained 2 dollars* worth 
of " Doddridge^s Rise and Progress" from the Depository in Win- 
chester. These he sold to individuals of his congregation and neigh- 
borhood, at the Society's prices. With the proceeds he purchased a 
new supply, which were disposed of in the same manner ; and thus he 
has already 80 or 40 families supplied, and the money is still going its 
benevolent round. 



A gentleman, under the signature of*' Lies Richmohd," who last 
autumn gave $60, in part for perpetuating J%e Young Cottager, 
has recently enclosed $60 more, saying that, should CK>d prosper 
him in his business, he will remit the ramainlDg $80 in the course of 
the year. 



1830.] 



KECEIFTI. 



9i) 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE T&EASURT Of THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 
During the month ending June 15, 1830. 



FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 

VER.->Middlebur3rj Eliaha Brewster, A; 

Rutland, A. L. Brown, Sec 

MASS.— Boston, American Tract Society, J. Tappan, Esq. Tr. for 
promoting the caose of TracU in the Valley of the Mississippi, 

Otis, Mig. Robert Hunter, Tr *^'^. 

Sandisfield, Russel Morley, Tr. * 

Springfield, Solomon Warriner, Jun. Tr 

R. ISL.— Providence, Israel H. Day, Sec .... 
CONN.— Brooklyn, (Windham co. Aux.,) Edwin Newbury, Ajr. 

Green's Farms, Edward Hyde, Ag . 

Guilford, Henry E. Hodges, Ag 

New-Haven, A. Townsend,- Jun. Tr. ...... 

Sharon, Charles F. Sedgwick, Sec. 

Wallingford, 

Woodbury, Female, Mrs. Elliza Preston, Ag. .... 
N. YORK.— Albany, Central Branch, D. M'Kercher, Sec. . 
Berkshire and Newark, Rev. Marcus Ford, Pres. . 
Clove, Ulster co.. Hiss E. Bevier, Tr. . ^ 
C<Aocton, Steuben co., John Clark, Tr. .W , 
Columbia in Walton, Del. co., Darius Seely, Sec. 
Geneva, James Bogart, Tr. . ... 

Goshen, Orange co.. Dr. J. S. Crane, Tr. . . . 

Harlsem, Female, Mrs. Ann Ball, Tr 

Hartwick and Fly Creek, Albert North, Tr 

Hempstead, L. I., Robert Eells, Tr. 

Hudson, Female, H. Root, Sec 

Lisle, 1st Society, Norman Marsh, Tr. 

New-Windsor, Silas Corwin, Tr. 

New -York City Tract Society, Alfred Edwards, Tr. 

Do. by Female Aux. Mrs. J. R. Rurd, Tr 

Penn-Yann, Rev. C. Eddy, Ag 

Poughkeepsie, Lawrence Van Kleek, Tr 

Poundridge, Fern. Mrs. Hannah L. Keeler, Sec. 

Rochester, Monroe co., Levi A. Ward, Tr. .... 

Schenectady, Isaac Ledyard, Tr 

South East, Putnam co. Female, Rosanna Jackson, Sec. 
Springfield, Otsego co.. Col. Lebbeus Loomis, Pres. 

Troy, Charles Lyman, Tr 

Union and Vestal, Peter Merserau, Tr 

Utica, Edward Vernon, Sec. 

Walton, Del. co., Fem. Miss Hannah N. Seymour, Tr. 

Whitehall, F. A. Kent, Sec. . . 

Wmdsor, Broome co., Marcus Sage, Tr 

N. JER — ^Arawell, Fem. Mrs. E. Skillman, Tr 

Hardwick Cong. Gratitude, P. O. Fem. Mrs. Rebecca H. Vail, Tr. 

Jersey City, Female, Mrs. Sarah Olcott, Sec 

Pertii-Amboy, Fem. Mrs. Margaret Maurice, Tr. 

Somerville, Fem. Mrs. Sophia Talmage, Tr 

White House, in Readingtown, Dr. William Johnson, Sec. 
PENN.— Dundaff, Dr. William Terbell, Sec 

Do. Fem. Mrs. Abby L. Terbell, Sec 

Brie, Fem. Mrs. Mary Lyon, Tr 

Philadelphia Branch, Rev. Joel T. Benedict, Ag. . 

Pittsburgh, Rev. Robert Patterson, Ag. . . . 

MP.— Baltimore Branch, James W. Welling, Ag. 

DI8. COL^Alexandria, Fem, Mrs. E. S. Ladd, Sec 

S. CAR.— Charleston, S. Car. Branch, Rev. J. Dickson, Ag. 

GEQ^-^beq^sw, Eifllpfham oc, Rev. C. F. Bergmam Pres. . 



ForTr. 


39 00 


5 00 


1 79 


4 50 


21 88 


30 00 


10 00 


3 50 


3 20 


54 56 


4 57 


8 70 


150 51 


9 59 


1 3S 


800 


5 S5 


50 00 


365 


50 


11 00 


624 


700 


5 00 


50 


25 00 


43 37 


14 00 


13 00 


7 84 


100 00 


30 00 


5 12 


15 10 


70 00 


6 42 


50 00 


550 


11 00 


20 00 


3 00 


3 00 


350 


4 00 


12 75 


338 


2 31 


492 


10 25 


500 00 


10 00 


255 42 


35 00 


100 00 


800 



Don. 



196 88 

59 

1 50 



1 00 

1 66 
3 19 



600 



2 00 

3 91 

5 13 



1 QD 



425 
1 12 

609 



10 06 



96 



ttECfelPTfi. 



[July. 



FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 

ALA.— Huntiville, Sunuel Coltart, Af 

MISS.— Natchez Branch, Thomas Henderson, Tr. . . • 
KEN.~DanTme, Michael G. Yoace, Ag. . . . 

OHIO.~Cleareland, (Cayahoga co. Aux») Thomas F. Davia, Tr. 
Delaware, Rot. Henry Van Deman, Ag. .... 

Frederick, Knox CO., ReT. John M'Kinney, Ag. . . . . 

Marietta, Rer. Luther 6. Bingham, Ag 

Warren, (Trumbttll eo. Aux.) Rev. Harvey Coe, Sec. • 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 
N. YORK.— Bavlington, Benevolent Association, . 

Middlefield, do. 

Orange co. S. School Union, 

SmithviUe, Jefleraon co., Rev. Mr. Jenks, Ag. .... 

Windham, Mrs. Elizabeth B. Strong, Tr 

N. J£R.--Elizabethtowji, Un. Tr. Soc. J. J. Bryant, Tr. . 
Paterson, Sd. Reformed Dutch Ch. James Moore, Sec. 

L. CAN— Montreal, Rev. 6. W: Periuns, Ag 

Tracts sold at the Depository to individuals, .... 



FarTr. 


89 00 


76 96 


117 50 


600 


90 00 


30i)0 


89 11 


49 50. 


S35 


10 66 


3S0 


7 00 


3 00 


SOOG 


1315 63 



Don. 



75 
26 



Directors for Life. 

N. YORK.— Albany, Hofl. S. Van 
Rensselaer, (in part for perpe- 
tuating the PUgrim's Pfogress, $100 00 

VIR.— Old Concord, Campbell • # 
CO., Rev. Isaac Cochk'an, by 
Congregation df Little Con- 
cord, Charlotte cO. . . 50 00 

Members for Life, 

VER.-^6rownington, Rev. A. L. 
Twilight, by a friend,. . .20 00 

MASS. — Amherst, Henry Keyes 
Eastman, by Jonathan East- 
man, Esq. New- York, . 90 00 

CONN — New-London, Miss Ma- 
ry Cecilia Law, by two friends, "20 00 

N. YORK. — Durham, Greene co., 
Mrs. EudOsia Boothe, (in part 
of $30,) . : . .5 00 

Newark, Rev. Marcus Ford, by 
Ladies SO 00 

New-York City, Mrs. Frances 
M'Comb, . . . . 30 00 

Orangeville, Genesee co., Rev. - 
Warren Day, by himself, (in 
fuU of ISO,) ... 7 00 

South Salem, Thoihas Mead, . 80 00 

Windham, Broome co.,Mr8. Eliza- 
beth B. Strong, by Mr. Austin 
Strong, (in full of $20,) . 10 00 

N. JER — Hanover, N. P. Thomas, 
by Legacy of Elizabeth C. 
Thomas, . . . . 20 00 

Do. William H. Thomas, by do. 90 00 

MISS— Natchez, Rev. J. Van 
Court, 20 00 

IX)U.— Baton Rouge, Mr«. H. 
Buh!er,byFem.A.T.a. . 20 00 



,^nnual Members, 

N.Y ORK— New-York City, Mrs. 

Helen Noe, .... 2 00 
N. JER.— Portland, Miss Ann 

Ustick, . . . . . 2 00 

Other Donations, 

MASS. — Oakham, Rev. Andrew 
H. Reed, .... 1 50 

Otis, Isaac Hunter, 37 cts. David 
Spear 50 cts. ... 87 

CONN.— Coventry, Gad Page, 1 OO 

N. YORK— New- York City, Mo- 
ses Allen, and Richard T. Haines, 
avails of horse and wagon, . 58 75 

A Friend, $1, Chabrier Peleubet, 
for Val. Miss. $2, . . 3 00 

Owego, Tioga county, William 
Piatt, Esq 10 00 

N. JER.- Hanover, William O. 
Ford, 5 00 

Millstone, John C. Demund, . 6 00 

ALA. — ^Whitesburg, Madison co., 
Mrs. Elizabeth Gardiner, . 1 OO 

LOU. — Concordia, Dr. Kerr, . 5 00 

Ibberville Parish, P. Winfree, 
Esq. $5, Cash $1, . . 6 00 

The above list contains dona- 
tions for promoting the cause of 
Tracts in the Valley of the Mis- 
sissippi, .... $199 88 

In part, for perpetuating " Bun- 
yan*s Pilgrim's Progress," . 100(10 

Whole amount of Donations, $799 44 
Received for Tracts sold, . S1648 05 

ToCal, $3J377 49 



THE AMERICAN 



See Tcul No. iOi, Adrulagia of Pnyer. 

THE CHANGE IN PRICES AND DISCOUNTS. 

Wr hate prepared Ihe folloiring summary alaiemcnt of the chaagc 
tDdde by this Society in (heir ly alem of pricea aiiil djicounis, and of 
the reaiiODg for ili sdaplioD, from a belief th^t i( will be acceptable (Q 
nwnj friends of Ihe Tract CBu»e. 

The iy>{«n nau adopt d is to count each cover of the duodecima 
Tracts at 4 pngea. and sell 16 pages for a cent; and 10 lell the other 
publicuioiii oTlhe Sociplj at the nev prices-fixed in the Sodrly'i list, 
all without anT discount, except lo Branches and Aiuiliariei ovDiog 
Depoiitoriea from wliicb their Auziliariel are lupplied with Tractt ; 
and the discounts lo these to be greater, oi leu, u their dtatance frons 
the General Depositor; shall increase their eipeue for freight, and ai 
Ihe magnitude of their operaiiDnB ihsU increase their eipenic for 
rent and permanent agency. The tennB of admitting Auiiliariei were. 

VoB.V. 8 WmotBWo.sa. 



9S THE CBAZrOE IN PBICJE8 AND DISCOUNTS. [Aug* 

by an amendment of the Society's Constitution at the lait asniTer- 
sarfi so changed, that " any Tract Society annually contributing a 
donation from its funds to the Treasury of the Parent Institution 
shall be considered an Auxiliary;" and Branches and Auxiliaries 
having Depositories admit their Auxiliaries on the same terms. 

The principal evil remedied by the change, is the doing away of the 
Complex, and to many quite unintelligible system of requiring one 
fourth part of the funds of Auxiliaries as a donation, and at the same 
time allowing them a discount of 20 per cent. These were the terms 
equally to the most flourishing Auxiliary in the older states, and to 
the most feeble Auxiliary in the new settlements. 

By the present system it is referred to the option of each Auxiliary, 
and each member of an Auxiliary, to designate, according to their 
own ability and sense of duty, what portion of their contribution shall 
be for Tracts, and what portion a donation ; there being appended to 
the Constitution now recommended for adoption, two columns, one for 
subscriptions, the full amount of which is to be remrned in Tracts, and 
the other for donations. 

The whole system is based on a fundamental article of the Society's 
Constitution, that **ihe prices of its publications shall be, as far as 
practtcable^ the same in aU parts of the United States," and has a most 
extensive bearing in favor of all the distant and destitute portions of 
the country The principle is, that the Society is common cause for 
the whole of this great cooununity ; those who have means sustaining 
it by donations; and an indigent man on the banks of the Missouri 
receiying the same amount of publications for a dollar, or a cent, as 
the man who lives next door to the Society's house, or any one of the 
Society's officers or members. 

The publications of the Society are, by the new system, on an ave- 
rage throughout the country, sold at a considerable reduction from 
the former prices, which the Committee have considered to be war- 
ranted by the existing reduction in the price of the materials and me* 
chanical labor employed ; the principle on which the Society's prices 
are graduated, being to sell its publications ** at cost ;" or, in other 
words, that the whole amount received ioto the Society's Treasury 
for such ot the publications as are sold, shall be equal to the whole 
amount paid for issuing them. 

As the cost of each cover fully equals the cost of a Tract of 4 pages, 
there is a manifest propriety in its being counted 4 pages in the sales, 
especially as each cover printed, after the change in prices, will contain 4 
l>ages of useful printed matter; but another prominent reason for count* 
ing each cover as 4 pagtes, is, that by so doing the Committee are able 
to sell more than 10 pages for a cent, and yet fix«n a iMimbcr whidb 
is of comparatively convenient use in eounting. 



1830.] THB atONTRiiT PISTALSUTION. 99 

Whoerer regards intelligently the system of operations adopted, will 
not fail to see its accordance witli the fact, that the Institution is to 
all intents a Christian charity, which is to be sustained by the dona> 
ttons of the people of God. It is earnestly and confidently hoped that 
the spirit of benevolence now pervading the Christian community, is 
mch, that the aggregate amount of donations from Auziiiaries will be 
enhanced rather than diminished by its being referred to each to con- 
tribute according to their i^ility and their gense of duty . Aid in dona- 
tions is urgently needed at the present hour, and will doubtless con- 
tinue to be needed as long as the Society is called to act. A great 
portion of the population of our own conntry are still unsupplied with 
Tracts, and it is an occasion of unfeigned grief, that the Society has 
thus far been able to do no more for South America and the Fa^an 
world. 



THJB MONTHIiY TRACT DISTRIBUTION. 

Facts and considerations are almost daily presenting themselves to 
the mind of the careful observer, which show the wisdom of Provi- 
dence in devising this system of benevolent exertion. It may, indeed, 
carry a Tract to some who think it unworthy of their rank and station 
in life to learn the way of salvation from so humble a vehicle of reli- 
gious knowledge ; and to some, who, hardened in impenitence, will 
tcceive it with scorn ; and to some who, abounding in all the means 
of grace, and improving them, by the Divine blessing, to their own 
growth in holiness, and being the almoners of God's bounty to others, 
nay seem not to be fit subjects for a charitable distribution of Divine 
troth ; though few such will consider the monthly Tract unacceptable, 
or fail of retoniing fourfold into the Treasury flrom which it came— 
but the great appalling fact in relation to this subject is, that by all 
the benevolent bat unsystematic effiirts hitherto made in the Tract 
eaase. Tracts have rtaehed but a tmaU part of the population; and 
that part, to a great extent, has been the part most t>lessed with all 
other means of grace. And we might go on, from year to year, with 
the same miscellaneous eiSbrts, and do incalculable good, but yet one 
halfofXYie entire population of these United States would probably 
never roceive a religious Tract until their period of probation here on 
earth is closed. 

While we are thus benefiting a part, the command of Christ still 
sounds in our ears to carry the message of his Gospel and tender it to 
ALi.. Whatever may be our excuses, we cannot evade this command 
without coatimial guilt. It is still binding ; we now see the duty» and 
how it may be discharged ; and are encouraged by rich blessings at- 
tending its fhithful performance. The portion of tmth presented 
f^oi^th aAer month can scarcely fail of b^ing aQt>b;ect of attention to 



100 CAIiI* rOE SELF FKOK OERMANT. [Aug. 

those who receive k; the monthly Ttstt of a devoted Cbristtett on an 
errand for eternity, preaentiag, wjtb love and kindneM, the meuaj^ 
of the Gospel at the firufide of the entire populatioB, is a spectacle 
over which angels might rejoice ; and the blessing received by the 
Distributer into his own heart alone outweighs all the sacrifices made. 
But we will not eateige on tMe topic. We rejoice to sec thie woiIk 
going forward ; and would iwite every active Christian in the land 
to consider the motives which urge him without delay to brmg it into 
vigorous prosecntion in his own vicinity. Far more must be done 
than has been hitherto, er our solemn oUigatiens in reepett to this 
department of Christiaa benevolenee wiU never be fulfilled. 



CALL FOR HELP FROM GERMAISfY. 

The moral state of Germany, we fear, is too little known by Chris- 
tians in this country, and too little remembered in their prayers and 
efforts. The civil and ecclesiastical authority is almost every where 
in the hands of Infidels, or Rationalists as they call themselves, and 
the humble and devoat followers of the Lord Jesus Christ suffer op- 
pression and persecution. They are not, however, jitting down in 
despair; they are rousing to eflfort, confident that, in the strength of 
their Divine master, and by the influences of his Holy Spirit, Zion 
shall yet arise from the dust, even in Germany. They call for the 
prayers and the active sympathy and aid of all Evangelical Christians. 

The corresponding Secretary of the American Tract Society has 
just received a letter ftom Mr. J. G. Omckbr, a member of the Com- 
mittee of the Lower Satony Trad Society ^ located at Hamburgh, un- 
der dale of April, 1830, stating some of the embarrassments under 
which they labor, and accompanied by an appeal to British and Ame- 
rican Christians for pecuniary aid. 

Our Society, says Mr. Oncken^ dwindles into nothing when I com- 
pare it with the American Tract Society, and yet the Lord has done 
great things for us when I take into consideration the difiiculties 
which a truly evangelical Tract Society has to overcome in this land 
of darkness and spiritual bondage. We are opposed both by civil 
and ecclesiastical power. Most pastors in the Lutheran community 
are bitterly opposed to the contents of our publications, and use their 
influence to hinder their circulation where they can; and in several 
kingdoms their distribution has been strictly prohibited. In many 
instances, however, these measures have rather been conducive to the 
furtherance of the Gospel; if God will work, who can hinder it? Our 
little Society has, notwithstanding its difllculties, prospered from year 
to year ; friends have been raised up who have given us of their gold 
and silver, and others who have been very aealons to distribute them 
in all parts of the country. The Lord has owned our feeble work in 
the conversion of sinners, so that our hearts have been encouraged 
and our hands strengthened. 



1DS0.] CjiXL foe help from 6EBMANT. 101 

Daring' the piast year we distributed 260,623 Tracts, and our in- 
come amounted Jo between 5 and 6,000 marks, about 1,500 dollars. 
If we had had the means, much more might have been effected ; the de- 
mands for Tracts were, and continue to be, most pressing The im* 
portance of Tract distribution is perhaps no where of such utility as 
in this country. Here the missionary cannot preach in private houses 
the glad tidings of salvation, nor even pray or read the Bible with a 
few persons together, without exposing himself to the watchful eye 
of the police, who will either fine him or put him ip prison. About a 
year ago 1 had to pay 56 marks for having met at my own house 
with about twenty friends, to read the Holy Scriptures, to sing and 
pray. In other provinces a missionary is not allowed to enter the 
country, and thus the poor j^ople die more hopeless of heaven, with 
their rationalist pastors, than the Chinese or the hardened Jew. But 
our Tracts can find their way where no other means can, under exist- 
ing circumstances, be enjoyed.. Satan begins to feel that these little 
messengers of peace are made» in many instances, by the power of 
Divine grace, instrumental in pulUng down his strong holds, and hence 
he stirs up to opposition all who Ykturt enrolled themselves beneath his 
banners. 

Our brethren in England have, from time to time, come forward 
and gfven as their kind assistance ; but alas ! hitherto nothing has been 
undeftaiien adequate to the forlorn condition of my native country ; 
how would my heart rejoice if our transatlaiHic brethren could give 
us, in any way, some assistance. 

The claim the Committee would make, says the printed appeal ac- 
companying the leiter, is founded on the call, the loud, long, increas* 
ing call, made on tbcm from various parts of Germany, backed by 
ample encouragement derived from the blessing with which it has 
pleased |be glorious Savior to accompany the reading of these publi- 
cations. 

During the two past years alone, in addition to former spheres of 
usefulness, active and warmly interested agents have sprung up in 
Bremen, Celle, (where an auxiliary has been formed,) Gottingen, 
Hanover, Brunswick, Hameln, and throughout Hanover in Crenetal ; 
Pyrmonty Lippe-Detmold, Hesse, Elberfelt, Crefeld, Wesel, and 
many parts of East-Friesland — Airther in Poland, Silesia, Bohemia, 
Upper-Saxony, Bavaria, Westphalia, Prussia, Dantzic, Konigsberg, 
many parts of Pomerania, and of Mecklenburg ; Tjiuringia, Stutt- 
gardt, Tyrol, Oldenburg, Holstein, Alsatia, Luneburg ; and many of 
our correspondents in these towns and counties are themselves de- 
positories from whom numerous ministers and others are supplied 
with smaller quantities, in their respective circles. Many of them are 
surrounded with a Catholic population. 

To meet these demands, the committee have tried every means for 
raising subscriptions, for diminishing the price of printing and paper ; 
have ventured on larger editions, and have stereotyped several nonw 
bers. The Treasurer is, notwithstanding, always in advance; and 
though the funds Increase, the stock of Tracts lessens. Will it be sufr 
fared to dry up ? Shall a door thus widely opened, in every part pre* 
sentingan ever-increasing field of useful operations, be opened in vain ? 
ChristhuQ brethren, ye answer, no ! Think whcU one Trad may dQ ^ 

8* 



iOf ST89SIUT1C MONTSliT «I9TBIB0T10ir. [Au^. 

and thmk that for $90 6^000 oojiief of <' Saarcfa the S«n|itiues/' or a 
Bimilar Tract, are printed ; for $1 you show the way of galvation to 
250 immortal eouU. 



TRACT DISTRIBUTION IN NEW-ORLEANS. 

It was announced, some time since, that the Committee of the Ame«- 
rican Tract Society had made a grant of 600,000 pages of Tracts, 
to aid the Board of Agency in Neiv-Orieans, particalnrly in their grt* 
ittitous distributions ib that city ; and also thut Mr. Moses H. Wilder 
had been commissioned by the Parent Institution as an Agent to assist 
them in their responsible labors. Mr. Wilder has now presented 
the report of his agency to the month of June, of which the foUowiag 
ii an abstract. 

On my arrival in New-Orleans the Depository contained, ip Tracts 

and volumes, _ . . 1,08^,580 pages. 

Since received, . . . . * • • 717,600 



Sold to AuziHarieg and individuals 216,49^ 

Ghituitously distributed in Texas 15,5f20 

Do. in Florida .... 10,000 

Do. io interior of Louisiana . 144,800 
Do. in New-Orleans to Sailors and 
Boatmen 42,000; Sabbath Schools 
2,500; monthly distribution 240,145; 

miscellaneous 34,500 .... 319,145 

Do. to Steam-Boats on the river, • . 16,000 



1,800,1«) 



721,958 



Remaining in the depository June 4, . . 1,135,186 

"^Systematic Monthly Distribution, 

The monthly distribution of Tracts to every fiamily in the city wil- 
ling to receive them was comd&enced in March, and has been syste- 
matically prosecuted, witii very small exceptions, throughout the 
city for three successive months. I hoped to find individuals to engage 
in the distribution who would be able to continue the work without 
the aid of an Agent. Only six, however, have yet enlisted as distribu- 
tors, a part of whom have proved very zealous and efficient laborers. 
The results of the distribution for April were as follows. 

Families supplied: French 2,316; English 1,156; Ger- 
man 108 ; Spanish 98 .... 3,678 
Houses to which access was not gained . < 16S 
Families refusing the Tract . . , . 66 

Whole number reported • 3,912 

The manner in which the Tracts have been received has been truly 
gratifying, and, so far as I can judge, they have been read by a greater 
proportioo of those who receive them than those distributed in New,* 



liSe.] STSTXMATIC KOITYBtT mBTKlSmX0ff<. 1^ 

IToriE, mid with gM«t«r kilerest. Often have the French ladles Ibl- 
lowed nra in the street, as I have passed their doon, to get more Tracts^ 
and many have expressed their satisfaction in high terms, that they 
could onee more have Tracts to read; for they had not seen any since 
they had beeti in the city, in the last month's distribution 1 was often 
oorapeiled, by families , who spoke in English, to go in; and some- 
times have conversed with them freely respecting the concerns of the 
toul ; in one or two individuals I have found considerable asziety an 
the subject.of religion.* 

A Frenchman who, in March, treated me very coolly, in April met 
me with gratitude for the Tract, and in May came te the Depository 
to obtain a Bible for a friend, and expressed the great interest he Mad 
felt in reading it himself. On giving a Tract to an old lady, she ex* 
pressed much joj at seeing Tracts u this country, and said she had 
often read them m England with much profit. 

A Spanish woman appeared much gratified to find a booik that she 
could read ; saying, ** You must have a good heart to give away such 
good books." When I called the next month, she said she had much 
trouble to make her husband believe that she bad not bought the 
Tract ; he was at length satisfied ; carried it to his store in the lower 
part of the city, and lent it to his neighbors. On visiting that District 
in April, I found much mquiry for the Dairyman*s Daiighter in 
SpaniA, 

An old military officer said he hfid received a few Tracts from a 
clergyman some months before, and was much pleased with them, 
and begged that he might have several for bis daughters in French 
and Spanish. 

A young woman said she had read the Watchmaker many timea^ 
and was anxious to get some other. I asked if she knew any thing 
of the religion which was so dear to the poor Watchmaker. She said 
she did not, and that was what caused her trouble ; she would give 
the whole world, were it at her disposal, to know that she was a chris*- 
Uan. After some conversation 1 left her the ** Way la be Setved,'* pro* 
bably never to see her again till the final day of judgment. 

On presenting a Tract the second month to a French Druggist, be 
tooh the last one #ut of his desk and said it was good, and appeared 
mueli pleattd to* receive another. He toon followed me to another 
house, md urged me baidt ; taok me into his room, and showed me 
his Bible, and seemed to wlshxae to nnderstaad that he read it much 
more now than tiefore I left him the Tracts. 

I met a man fn the street wiio said the Tract yen gave me the other 
day told me it was wrong to work on Sunday, and added that he had 
tUaiight more of Sabbath^breaking for four days than he had before 
for as many years ; he thought it was all wrong and he would be guilty 
of it no more. 

A young aMm of intelligence, a catholic, called on one of the dflkeis 
of the Board of Agency, and told him that a gentleman had been 
giving away Tracts in his neighborhood ; that he had been prejudiced 
against them, but if all our Tracts were such as that geatieaMua left 
at his house he would do all in his power to promote their circulation. 
The Tracts referred to were tlie Watchraafcer, Way to be Saved, and 
Dairyman's Daughter. 



104 arsTCiUTic monthlt sisiributioii. [Auf^ 

Often, on passing tbrmigh a District tdker it was supplied, I hw^ 
seen men and women sitting io their doors with a Tract in their band, 
and deeply engaged in perusing it. Thirty or forty families have been 
supplied with Bibles. Though [ cannot report any cases of conver- 
sion through the instrumentality of these Tracts, yet the eageritess 
with which they were sought after, and their effect, already apparent, 
in leading people to think about their souls, have brought me to the 
conclusion, that eternity will unfold the most important results from 
the monthly Tract distribution in New-Orleans. 

Distribution on the Levee. 

A most important branch of Tract operations in New-Orleans is a 
judicious distribution on Sabbath mornings, on the Levee, which is 
then crowded «rith sailors, boatmen, laborers, pedlars, merchants, an^ 
in fact with all descriptions of men. Numerous vessels and steam- 
boats are loaded and unloaded on the Sabbath, and probably more 
sail on that day than on any other. 1 have generally spent the' Sab« 
bath in distributing small Tracts to every one that would take them, 
at the same time inviting them to the Mariner's Church. 

On offering a man a Tract on Sabbath breaking, he began to swear 
in the most dreadful manncf . f , however, read him the Swearer's 
Prayer. This induced one gentleman and another to ask for a Tract, 
and about 30 were immediately distributed. The next Sabbath I found 
the same man on the Levee ; he invited me on board his boat, and I 
had considerable personal religious conversation with him. It appeared 
that when about 15 years old he was hopefully converted, and had 
fallen into this dreadful state by imbibing the sentiments of Univer- 
salism. His confidence in that system seemed now a little shaken ; 
he had just received a letter from his wife in the country, which he 
said shook his faith raor« than any thing he had seen since be had left 
the church. 

As four men were unloading a flat boat, I told them that they had 
forgotten a law that was in force in this country. They said they 
were well acquainted with the laws of Louisiana, and were not con« 
scions of having violated any, and desired to know to what law 1 re- 
ferred. I replied, " Verily, my Sabbaths ye shall keep." O, said 
the master, " there is no Sabbath here.*' I replied, Ood never ex- 
empted New-Orleans. He acknowledged he was wrong, and Imme- 
diately left his work ; said he had been m the habit of going to church 
constantly, but as every body worked here, he thought he would not 
be alone. I gave them each a Tract, and in the afternoon they were 
ail at the Mariner's church. 

One morning I found an old sailor making preparation to sell a 
quantity of poultry, gave him the Tract ' On the Lord's Day' and en- 
deavored to persuade him to put aside his business and go to church. 
He acknowledged my advice was good ; but said he should lose all his 
property if he did not take care of it. I told him he had better lose 
his property than lose his soul, as he certainly would, if he continued 
a Sabbath-breaker. In the afternoon he was at the Mariner's church, 
and before service related the circumstances of our interview, adding 
that he could not get along with his work, and was obliged to put it 
liy and go to church. 



1830.] AMEBICiiN TRACT 80CIXTT, BOSTON. 109 

' I asked a youngs sailor if his mother never tidlud to him aliout re- 
ligion. He said she did. ** Yes/' said another who stood near ; " and 
she prayed for us too ; and if we had fo|]owe<l her advice we should 
have escaped many a hard time." After some very intei«sting^ cob* 
versation, during which an occasional tear stole down their cheeks, 
I gave them the *< Praying Mother" and ** Charles Grafton." In the 
afternoon and evemog they were both at the chorch, aad were very 
solemn. 



TWO TRACTS DROPPED BY THE WAT-SIDE. 
A clergyman of New-Yorlc city related from the pnlpit the Mhw- 
ing facts : A clergyman in a neighboring town, some months siftce, as 
he was riding, passed some young females, near a school-hoifso^ and 
dropped from his carriage two Tracts, which he had previously mark- 
ed. Some time after he was conversing with a young woman with re- 
ference to her spiritual state, and found her rejoidng in the hope of 
pardoned sin. He inquired the history of her religious feelings, and 
she traced them to a Tract dropped by a traveller, which was mani- 
festly one of the two above referred to. He was at length called to 
visit another young woman on a sick bed, whose mind was calm and 
composed in view of death, which the event proved was near at hand. 
She traced her first serious impressions to the circumstance of two 
Tracts being dropped by a traveller— one of which she said was taken 
up by her cousin and the other by herself; and now, said she, we are 
both hoping in Christ. She had retained the Tract as a precious trea- 
sure, and putting her hand under her pillow, showed it to the clergy- 
man, who immediately recognised the marks he had written on it. 

AMERICAN TRACT SOaETY, BOSTON. 

fVoiii a Clergyman, en the tubjeei of Monthbf DUtribution. 

The Tract cause is advancing among us. This we^ completes Hie 
first Monthly DistrilMition to every family. We bav^ some CaCholies 
who receive them cordially. This system of effort is of immense im- 
portance to the church : it illustrates the practicability of lay effbrfa 
in the benevolent movements of the age. I have often thought that 
the members of the church sustain the same relation to the ministry 
that the common soldiers in the army svstain to the ofilcers. The suc- 
cess of Tract efibrts will convince multitudes of our church members 
that it is their doty to embttrtt in other departments of benevolent en- 
terprise; and the charch will become strong and efficient jast in pro- 
)K>rtion as tke aelive eihoperaHon of lity membert with ihtit mivuiers 
can be relied'on. 

""^""^"^ » 

AWARD OF FREMIUM 

FOR THE BEST TRACT TO DISTILLERS AND tEltDXRS OF 

ARDBNT SPIRITS. 

The Committee to whom was assigned the award of a premium 
of $50 for the best Tract on the subject of distilline and vending ar- 
(lent spirits, have agreed to prefer that entitled " AUnrm to Distalefs 
and eUl who encourage them." The author, on opening the sealed en- 
velope^ pioTes to be theBer. BAXTsa Dicnmoir, of Newark, N« J. 



106 TRACT MANITAL. [Aug. 

The Committee have examined twenty mflnuscripi Tracts on the 
-subject,* all of them breathings a correct spirit, and many of them 
evincing great strength'of argument, sound intelligence, and a highly 
gratifying tone of piety, as well as distinguished ardor in the cause. 
After a careful and impartial consideration of the several productions, 
they came to the award above announced, in reference to a perform- 
ance which, on the whole, appeared to them best calculated to reach 
the object for which the premium was offered. 

Gardinbr Spring, > Committee of 
Samusl H. Cox, ^Examination. 

New-York, June 30, 1830. 

N. B. The Rev. Mr. Mllvaine, the remaining member of the Com- 
mittee, being absent from the country, could not act. 

* At lettBt feven of the Tra«ts submitted appeared to the Committee too good not 
to appear (after a few alterations) in some form before the public. 

PREMIUM OFFERED. 

A benevolent individual has placed in the hands of the undersigned 
the sum of 50 dollars, to be awarded by the Rev. Warren Fay, D. D., 
of Charlestown, Mass. ; Rev. Justin Edwards, D. D., and Rev. Samuel 
Green, of Boston ; to the author of the best Tract On Prayer ^ which 
shall be presented on or before the first day of January, 1831. 

" It has often occurred to me," says the donor, *^ that, while so 
many noble plans of christian benevolence are in progress, each ac- 
companied with full instructions as to the manner in which labor or 
money can be applied to the best advantage, our dependence oh God 
is too much overlooked ; and that the duty and manner of pleading 
acceptably with Him from whom all help cometh, for spiritual bless- 
ings, and for success to these enterprises, is too little insisted on. 

** The exigencies of the times seem to require a comprehensive 
manual on the duty of Prayer, which may be accessible to all, and 
adapted to the peculiar circumstances of this new era of the world. 

'* The Tract should contain particular instructions relative to Closet 
PrayeTf Family Prayer^ iioeial and Special Prayer, (on which point 
I have felt that Christians Heeded much to be enlightened',) and Public 
Prefer, The whole to be so exhibited that a plain man may easily 
comprehend the subject, and be led, by the blessing of God, to feel its 
importance.*' 

The manuscripts should each be accompanied by a sealed envelope 
containing the name of the writer, and may be addressed either to 
Mr, Aaron Ruuell, No. 26 CornhiU, Boston, or to 

WILLIAM A. HALLOCK, 144 Nassaustreet, Wew-York. 



TRACT MANUAL, 

Published by the Executive Committee of the American Tract So^ 
piety ^ specially intended for the use of the Officers and Solicitors of 
Branches and AuxiRaries : pages 24, 12mo, 

It is the design of this work to present, in the most compressed 
form, the principal fac^ relative to the history, character, and opera- 
tions of the American Tract Society, and the most desirable methods 
of promoting in usefnlnesf • |t is sot vncommoii for the frieo<ls of the 



.J 



1800.] 



RECEIPTS. 



107 



Traet caose^ aad especially the Solicitors of Auxiliary Societies, to 
meet with obfections founded in ignorance, which they find it difficult 
to answer, from their limited knowledge of the facts which have been 
published frqm year to year in the Society's Annual Reports and other 
publications. To such, especially, it is belieyed this Manual will 
prove acceptable- and useful. 

It first presents a brief History of Tract Societies ; and then, in de- 
tail, the principal facts relative to the American Tract Society ; its or- 
ganization ; commhtees ; principles on which its pecuniary concerns 
are transacted ; its present pecuniary resources and the means by 
which its operations are sustained ; its House ; prices of its publica- 
tions; discounts; field of operation; Agents; usefulness; &c. Various 
suggestions are added relative to the formation of Auxiliaries^ the 
construction of large Branches and Auxiliaries owning Deposito* 
ries at the principal commercial centres ; the duties of their respec- 
tive Officers and Agents ; and the qualifications of Tract Solicitors and 
the manner in which their duties are to be performed. 

Copies of the worl^ may be obtained by Auxiliaries and friends of 
the Society, grattiitously,' from the General Depository : indeed it is 
desirable that every active friend of the Tract cause should pos&ess 
the information condensed into this little Manual. 



BECEIPT8 

INTO THE TREASURY OF THE AfilERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 
During the mmttk «ikding July 15, 1830. 

FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 
VER.— Cornwall, Benjamin F. Haskali, Pres. ... 
]IIASS.~Bo8ton, American Tract Soc., John Tappan, Esq. Tr. 

Do. by their Fern. Auz. Wiscasset, Me., Jms. S. Pttyaon, Af . 
CONN— Black Rock, Capt. G. Sturges, Pres. 

Cheater, Fern. Rev. William Cave, Ag 

Hartford, Conn Branch, Charlefl Hooner, Sec. 

Huntington, William Milla, Sec 

KilUngworth, John S. Hull, Sec 

Northneld, Lyman Webster, Tr. 

West-Chester, David L. Parroelee, 

N. YORK.— Bath, James O. Hifgin«, Tr. .... 
Fi8hkillLandinff,Femn Miss M.W.Teller, Sac. . 

Gallatin, Rev. Herman Vedder. Ag 

Goahen, Orange Co., John S. Crane, Ag 

Greenville, Fem., Miss Hannah Hicock, Sec. 
Hampstead, Rockland Co. Fem., Mrs. Elisabotfa Coe, Sec. 

Jamaica, L. I., Marvin W. Fox, Sec 

Jamestown, Fem., Rebecca H. Harvey, Tr. .... 

Lodi, Joseph Plumb, Tr 

Newburgh, R. B. Wmiams, Tr 

New- Windsor, Silas Corwin, Tr 

New.Y«rk City, Chrystie-street Methodist Church, Fem., Mrs. 
Sarah B.Stilwell,Tr 

Seventh Presbyterian Church, Ezra C. Stadge, flee. 

St. George*B Church, Fem., by Uieir Juv. Auz. 
Partlaad,ChatauqueCo.,T.Judaoo,Ag. .... 
PMighk«e|KieiF«a*ilin*TabitliaTice^Tr. . ^ . . 



ForTr. 


Dm, 


8 00 


500 


1000 00 


" 


553 


1 84 


"7 24 


276 


3 10 


125 


SOO 00 




6 75 




3 75 


1 25 


10 55 


3 51 




1 00 


80 00 




4 00 




400 




10 66 




400 




8 00 




3 74 


1 24 


533 


1 77 


2 93 




940 




200 




1 50 




689 




300 




366 




L 3 95 





108 



UECCirTS. 



Sidney, Delaware Co., Rev. John B. Fish, ^ 

Taogtacaaick, Rev. Herman Vedder, Ag^. ..... 

Troy,GlMrlefJL7»an, Tr 

Utica, Edward Vernon, Sec • » 

WhitePlain8,F«m., PoHy Ward,Pre8. . . 
N£W-J£R^BaBkinfridge,BeraceSheldfln,8ec. . . 

Bedmuuter, Isaac M. Fiiher, Pres. 

Chatham Village, Mrs. Charlotte 8mitli,Tr 

Frankfort, Fen., Miss Elisa Ckutin, Tr. . • ^. • „ • , : 
Slarksborough Congregation in Hardwick, Fern., Miss ISt itarionr 

sou, Sec. 

New- Vernon, Morris Co., J. J. Oliver, Sec. . .... 

Oxford, Fem., Mrs. Sarah Sherrerd, Tr 

Pateraoo, Juv., Henry Van Hoateu, Tr. . . . . . 

I'nncetoo, Fem., Miss F. W. Morford, Tr. .... 

Springfield, Abijah L. Dunnell, Tr. 

Stillwater, Fan., Mrs. Catharine JehucMSi, Sec 

PENN^— North Middletown, Cumberland Co., .... 

Pittsburgh, Rev. Robert Patterson, Ag 

VIR.— Staunton, Charles Patrick, Esq. Tr. . . * . 

S. CAR.-Charleston, S. Car. Branch, Rev. John Dickson, Ag. 
GEO.— AugusU, Francis M. Robertson, Sec. 
ALA..*-Concord, Green Co», Fem., Mrs. Ebzabetfa F. Cnanifig- 

ham, Tr 

TENN.— Nashville, Samuel B,Snowden,Tr 

OHIO^Chilticothe, Rev. John P. Bailsman, Tr. 

Cincinnati, Henry B. Fuuk, Tr 

Ellswofth, Trumbull Co., R G. Huntington, Sec. 
Wjuxpn, (TnimbuU Co. Aux.) Rev. Harvey Coe, Sec. . 

rf"**? ' - SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 

^. YORK.— Orange C6. S. School Union, John W. WeBs, Ag. . 
N. JER—Elizabethtown, Union, J. J. Bryant, Sec. . 

Pataraon, Ref. Dutch Ch., Ralph Doremus, Tr 

PEIVN.— Philadelphia, BapUst General Tract Soc., Rev. Noah 

N. CAR.— North-Carolina Book Co., by W. Whitehead, Fayette 
viUe,N.C 

Tracts sold at the Depository to individuals, (ia<^ding.t27 50, for 
use of Room) 



{F#r2VJ 


3 9n 


5 All 


40 od 


115 0« 


5 WN 


9» 


338 


536 


75 


509 


800 


6 00 


300 


188 


2 24 


300 


400 00 


15 00 


50 00 


72 00 


10 DO 


57 50 


38 00 


150 00 


9 50 


5 00 


4 m 


9 18 


400 


79 68 


23 41 


146 74 



I^». 



75 
1 12 



500 



00 



Director for Life, 

MASS.— Patton, Rev. Cyrus W. 
Conant, (m full of $50,) 30 

Members for Life. 

N. YORK.— Sidney , Dataware Co., 

Rev. John B. Fish, by himself, 20 
South Salem, Miss Blary M. Mead, 20 
PENN.— Philadelphia, ReV. Thos 

G. Allen, by a Frinnd, . . 90 
Pittsburgh, Samoel Thompson, (in 

full of $20,) ... 10 

LOU.— New-Orleans, Henry True 

Page, .JO 

T£NN.— Nashville, Samuel B. 

Snowden,(iupartof|2i',) . 10 
" Hon. Robert U hyle, 20 

Annual Membtrt. 

N.YORK.— Fi8hktU,MiM Faa^r 
M. Gary, 2 00 

New-York City, i. M. CatiiB, $2, 
James Davidson, $2, • . 4 00 

N. JERSEY.— Orange, Barney N. 
Powfoi, for lfi» 6 1830, . 4 00] 



n 



Other Donations. 

VER.— Cornwall, Miss Lucina 

00 Bingham, 3 00 

Benjamin F. Haakall, $1, 
Mrs. Betsey HaskaU,- 

$1 .« 00 

MASS.— Chesterfield, Misses M. Si; • 

00 L. Davis, 1 00 

,CONN.— Middletown, Mercy Hall, 50 
OON. YORK^New-York City, Peter 

H. W^endover, . 10 00 
00 Troy, Ladies' Ludustrious Soc.4n 
i Rev- Mr- Tueker's Congrega- 
Oq: tion, for Tracts for Greece, 1(> 00 

PENN.— A Female Friend, . .2 00 
00 pmO.— fitomeraet, Rev. Thomas 
OOi Moore, 6 00 



The above list contains doaationr- 
Far Traclnlbr Greece, . . 10 OQ 

Whole amoant of Donations, 1220 99 
Received fbr Tracts aeld, 2,620 80 



Total. $2,841 79 



THE AMERICAN 

OL. T.] BBVTBUBBa, 1680. PfO. 



NOTEl. TRACT PUBLICATION. 

We have been kindlf preaented wilh ao iDtereitinf; little Tolume of 
130 pagei 18ma. publuhed by (be " Ha«a*chiiMtU Sabbath SchooJ 
Union," entitled, 7Ae Slameeod Family ; or fiufifry nflke AmerUan 
n^ocl Sodely. It ii intended Tot the Sabbath School Library, and be- 
ing a weli-writtea narratiTC of Ibiniliar coiiTeriatkm* occurring be- 
tween tbe Dialher of (he Slanirood family, faer liz children, and a 
little nepheir uul niece, in Bie luceeuire ereningi, in two of which 
their circle w«i enlivened bjr the campanyorCol. Mertoo, Hn. Stan, 
wood'i Invther ; theobole hiilor]> ii full of intcreil to a child, and can 
jKarcely be leti lo to the benerolent reader of more matnreyean. 
The alor; conmenen wilh the Hlilory of the :^merican Tract Sodsty 
at Botton, and pTOceedj wilh It till (ha time of the tbrmation of the 
American Jnei Society il N<w>Tork, Mid thence eontiouet the Hii- 

Vol. V. 9 Wwu Na. M. 



110 NOVEL TUACT PUBLICATIOIT. [Scpt* 

tory of the latter Society to the close of the year 1829. The little 
group are full of their inquiries respecting the various items of the 
History, in which they incidentally fall on the most common Infidel 
objectiona of the d^y to the T^act and all kindred Societies. Their 
various inquiries are answered by facts which had apparently been 
treasured in the minds of Mrs. Stanwood or Col. Merton, or which 
Mrs. Stanwood is represented as reading to her eager and playftil 
auditory^ from letters in her possession, but which are really drawn 
from official documents, and especially from the proceedings of the 
first ten years of the American Tract Society at Boston. 

The book, as to the construction of the family circle, and the order 
of their conversations, is fiction ; but all the essential information pre- 
sented is fact. The principal statistics of the Society are stilted in 
brief; the anecdotes of the usefulness of Tracts are given at much 
greater length, and are selected from the Society's publications with 
so much skill, and so adroiUy interwoven with the various incidents of 
the narrative, as continually to interest the reader, and make a deep 
impression of the good the Society has accomplished. 

The little work, we venture to say, will convey to the mind of the 
intelligent child more information concerning the character and ob- 
jects of the American Tract Society than is possessed by one in 100 of 
the members of our Evangelical churches. The author has, in gene- 
ral, presented the facts to which the book alludes with great accuracy : 
in a few points we would cheerfully suggest some corrections for a 
second edition. We could also suggest a few topics of interest to be 
added, though we see nothing of special moment that is deficient, and 
the book certainly has this advantage, tha^ it ends before the mind of 
the reader is satisfied ; and leaves the impression that the subject is 
far from being exhausted. 

We think the unknown writer of this little volume (a lady we pre- 
sume) has done an essential service to the cause of Christian bene- 
volence. The design of thus eommunicating facts to the young re- 
specting the Christian operations of the age is a most happy one ; and 
so ably has it in this instaace b«en executed, that the reading of this 
trork will be a sufficient inducement to us to read, for the sake of re- 
freshing our memory and our own personal gratification, those other 
kindred works which have been recently published by the same So 
^ety* if they are not from the same pen, vis. Conversations respect- 
ing the. Sandwich Island Mission; the Bombay Mission; the Ceylon 
Mission, &rC. We only add, that it is iqimensely important the author 
of siich a work should be aware of the responsibility assumed in its 
preparation ; and should labor not only to give the principal matters 
of fact with accuracy; but so to present the great objects of these in- 






183t).] TWO INFIDEL OBJECTIONS CONTRASTED. Ill 

stitutions, as to impress the mind of the young reader with their real 
magnitude and importance in the work of bringing a world uito sub- 
jection to Jesus Christ. 



TWO INFIDEL OBJECTIONS CONTRASTED. 

Friends and enemies of our benevolent institutions are daily be- 
coming more numerous and decisive. Among the objections urged y 
against the American Tract Society, we frequently meet with the two t 

following: 

Obj. 1. That ike prices 0/ iU pubiieaHon$ are ao higb, that the 
Socie^ is amassing large pecuniary resources from the profits of 
the sales. 

Obj. 2. That the prices of Us publications are so i<ow as to interfere 
with the profits made by others on kindred publications, impoverish 
the Society, and create the necessity of large donations to sustain its 
operations. 

We leave the two objections to stand contrasted ; simply adverting 
to the following &cts : 

1. The principle adopted by the Committee is to sell the Society's 
{Hiblications at such prices that the amount received for such as are 
dold shall be equal to the whole amount expended in issuing them; so 
that the Society^ shall be. neither enriched nor impoverished by its 
sales. 

2. The Society's Fifth Annual Report, presented in May last, con- 
tains a complete inventory of the property of the Society, and a full 
exhibit of all its pecuniary concerns, in which it is believed every 
question of moment that can be raised respecting them is answered 
by an accurate statement of facts. By that inventoiy it appears, that 
the whole amount due from the Society (chiefiy for paper bought on 
a credit) was, within a very small sum, equal to the whole amount 
due to the Society on Tracts imd at a credit; and that all the pro- 
perty of the Society (exclusive of its house, which was erected solely 
by donations for that explicit object) consisted of the publieationi in 
its Cfeneral Depository, its stereotype plates, engranings, and paper on 
hand, the total value of %shich was, in round numbers, ^37,000. 

3. The Society's publications being sold without a profit, the ex- 
pense of all its gratuitous distributions, and of spreading out its opera, 
tions over every destitute field to be occupied, must be sustained by 
donations ; and these donations must be, increased just in proportk>n 
to the fidelity and activity of the Society in obeying the command of 
Christ to convey a knowledge of his Gospel to " every creature." 



iI2 rOBBiaN CORRESFONBENCE* " [Sept. 



FOREIGN CORRESPONDENCE* 

£)rcm the Prater Book a^id Homily SocUty^ London, dated SaHt^wry^ 

Sgtuare, JiprU \9th, 1880. 

Mt Dear Sia — ^Tour most welcome letter, and the handsome 
present of your Society to the Committee of the Prayer Book and 
Homily Society came duly to hand, and I received instructions some 
time since to communicate their sincere acknowledgments of the tes- 
timony of your reciprocal kindness. The union of drue Christian 
love is indissoluble. May this love abound in all Christian Socfeties*. 
How beautiful to behold, and how precious would be thai Tree, en 
which should be engrafted many branches, bearing various kinda of 
choice fruit — all r.eceiying, under God, their life and nourishment 
frbm one general root :— it would fairly represent to us the Word of 
Ood, the grand foundation and root of every Christian doctrine, to- 
gether with its beautiful branches, set forth in pleasing dress, in Reli' 
gious Books and Tracts* 

The great God who created us, and whom we are bound lo serve,, 
is pourtrayed unto us in the Holy Scriptures in most charming cha- 
racters — none of which may be esteemed more than these which de- 
scribe him as " the God of peace and love.*' In these we behold him 
rich in mercy, faithliil in holiness, recondfing the world unto himself 
by his only-begotten Son Jesus Christ, in whom righteousness and 
peacp have kissed each other, and by whose 3pirit the fruit of love^ 
and peace, and every Christian grace, is yielded in us. 

How shall we then become the heralds of peace to the great ma&s 
of our fellow sinners who are still rebellious, remaining in darkness 
and the shadow of death ? How shall we visit every alwde of wide- 
edness, and speak the same language in every tongue tbrouebout the 
wide world, in, the glorious message of peace ? Where are the Minis- 
ters of God to be found, suffiicient for these things! Their vocal 
powers, however enlarged their heart, are altogether feeble,, when 
compared to the field before them. Where their voites, therefdre, 
may not be heard, let their words, in form of Books or Tracts, found* 
ed on every doctrine of Holy Scripture, bo sent forth to every clime^ 
and every tribe, to proclaim peace *^ through the blood of the Lamb :" 
each as 'it were being a branch from that living Tree, the Word of 
God, inasmuch as it is founded on its truths, receives aU its authority 
to declare and explain, and its power and usefulness to promulgate 
the word of life, whithersoever it is sent. 

How needful then is it to examine carefully whether these branches 
which, by God's permission, we send into the world, set forth in some 
the duties, and in some the practice of our holy religion. The wrath 
of God against desperate offenders ; the fallen state of man ; the 
grace of God through- Jesus Christ; the divine nature, power, and 
influences of the Holy Spirit ; the necessary duty of repentance ; 
the privileges of believers; the consolation of the saints; may all be 
suitable treatises in their place, and prove so many beautiful bi;an<;he^ 
of the living Vine, and be profitably circulated. That such beauty 
2x\»t8 in most of your little messengers, the seal of God put n^ofi 



r830«] JL^NDON TBACT SOClfiTY* US 

them in their general asefulness will evidence. Tou will, I am per- 
suaded, agree with me, that it i9 needful to keep a constant watchful 
eye upon all such Tracts, to be sent into the world for such a holy 
purpose as that of awakening, leading, guiding, and strengthening 
the souls of men to the hav«n of peace. 

Let the children of God, then, in America, as well as in England, 
remember their high privilege: they are "workers together with 
God." And, inasmuch as they cannot work of themselves, but the 
Spirit of G>od must ** work ta them both to will and to do of his own 
good pleasure,'' let them not forget that the branches will not bear 
fruit except they abide in the Tree, and that it is needful they should 
exercise themselves constancy in prayer, in foith, in much diligence, 
and watchfulness : they must ever be mindftil of the Scripture cau^ 
tion, ** Be not weary in well doing;'! and be encouraged by the con« 
ditional promise, '* in duo season ye shall reap, if ye faint not.'* 

Believo me to remain, my dear Sir, with all Christian affection, 
yours most sincerely, Thostas Seaward, 

' AssistatU Secretary, 



LONDON RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETT. 

THIRTY-FIRST ANNlVBRSABir. 

The Western General Meeting of the friends of this Society was 
held at Willis' Room, Iting-street, Jameses Square, on Thursday, 
May 6, 1830. The Marquess Cholmondslet in the Chair. 

The meeting was addressed by Mr. W. Jones, Assistant Secretary ; 
Rev. R. W. Sibthorp, Secretary ; Rev. T. S. Grimshawe, of Bidden- 
ham ; Rev. John Clayton, Jun. ; Rev. J. H. Stewart; Rev. Dr. Milnor, 
of New-York ; Rev, J. Hartly, Missionary, from Greece ; Rev. C. 
Scholl, Foreign Secretary; Hon. and Rev. B. W. Noel; Rev. J. 
Hatchard, of Plymouth; Hon. and Rev. G. T. Noel; Capt. Vernon, 
R. N. ; Rev. G. Clayton ; Rev. J. Hughes, Secretary. Collection £36. 

A Sermon was preached for the Society on Wednesday evening, 
May 12, by the Ret. J. F Desham, at Long Acre Episcopal Chapel. 
Collection £39 10s. 

The Thirty-first Anniversttry of the Society, at which the Report 
was presented^ and the Officers elected, was held May 16, at the City 
of London Tavern. The Hon. Thomas Erskius in the Chair. The 
Assembly was addressed on this occasion by Rev. Dr. J. P. Smith ; 
Rev. Dr. Milnor, of J^ew-York ; Rev. David Stuart, of Dublin ; Rev. 
J. C. Boddington, of Horton ; Rev. John Dyer, Secretary to the Bap- 
tist Missionary Society; Rev. S- S. Wilsoh, Missionary, from Malta; 
Rev. W. H. Stowell, of North Shields ; Rev. James Matheson, of 
Durham ; Dr. Ring, of Reading. Collection £60 Is, Sd, 

ABSTRACT OF TH£ REPORT. 

Shwrt Extraelt from the Soeiety*s proeeedifUir in foreign parts. 

Si AH. — The works which have been distributed by the Missiona- 
ries have excited great attention. Several persons have been deeply 
impressed with the truth contained in the Chinese Tracts, and of one 
the Missionaries express a hope that he has received the truth in tfao 



114 LONDON TEAGT BOCfETT. [Sept. 

love of ift« It is of great importance to distribute Chinese Tract* 
with a liberal hand at Bankok, where upward of 300,000 Chinese 
are to be found. 

MAiiAccA.— The Missionaries, during tlie past year, have printed, 
in addition to other works, 18,700 Chinese Tracts, and 6,500 New 
Sheet Tracts, most of which bare been distributed in the neighbor* 
hood, or sent to the different Missionary stations in the Eastern Ar- 
chipelago. The Missionaries have discovered, with much pleasure, 
that the books which were formerly g^ven away have been carefully 
preserved. 

Singapore. — ^The Rev. Robert Bum, the Secretary of the Singa-. 
pore Committee, in acknowledging the arrival of a grant, mentions 
the wide circulation of the Tracts received. The Missionaries visit 
the junks which come from Canton, Onam, Siam, and other places ; 
and on one of these occasions 17 of those small vessels were visited, 
and the men liberally supplied with religious publications, which were 
thankfully received. Visits are also made to the people. On one of 
these occasions Mr. Gutzlaff remarks, *' As usual, we met with a very 
hearty reception wherever we came. In the houses, in the temples, 
and in the open streets, we had often crowds almost instantly gather* 
ed around us, giving ear with cheerful countenances to the word of 
life, and stretching out their hands eagerly for books. Some would 
tell us the nature of our books and the doctrines taught in them ; and 
the terms by which they generally desigpiated them was, ^ books to 
reform the world,' and works ' making th'e heart better.' " 

PiNANG. — ^The fbrmer grant to the Rev. S. Dyer reached him iq 
due course. He speaks of the great value of English books, and has 
received a farther supply to the extent of £20. He has remitted £.12' 
for a former consignment, and a donation of £3 from a friend in aid 
of our funds. The manner in- which Mr. Dyer circulates religious 
publications will be seen from the following letter; 

** The Chinese, you know, are very polished idolaters. A few even- 
ings since there was special worship performing in their temple ; and 
while the worship was proceeding I was engaged in the temple dis- 
tributing Tracts. 1 sometimes think the priests will soon ezpell me 
from the temple ; but my Tracts are mostly distributed therein, or at 
the threshold, or just outside of the gate ; and it is very common to 
see persons who have accepted my books entering the temple for 
the sake of the lights, and there reading them ; which often inducei^ 
others to come for supplies ; and I consider it an omen for good that 
books are received and read." 

Mr. Dyer also remarks : *' I hope the Committee will bear in mind 
the great importance of aiding in printing for the Chinese ; there are - 
many Canton people in Pinang who cannot understand a word I say, 
and the only way of doing them good is by giving them books. It is 
the same at other stations." 

Batavia.— -Several thousand copies of Chinese books and Tracts 
have been printed at Malacca for the use of Mr. Medhurst, and aho 
three or four new works. He took a long voyage up the eastern coast 
of the Malayan peninsula, and circulated a large number of Chinese 
and Malay publications. On visiting Sangora, a Siamese town, he dis- 
tributed his books among the people. *' The crowd of children/' he 



1830.] LOtfBOir TBACT SOCIETY. I1& 

remarkSi ** and other carious people who pressed around, anxious fa 
get a sig^ht of the stranger, was great. Our books were universally 
well received, and one man was so much struck with what he saw and 
heard, that he clapped his hand upon his purse and asked me if I 
wanted to make use of money, as his purse was at my service. The 
man^s purse, perhaps, did not contain many pice, and he might have 
been more ready with his words than he would have been with his 
deeds ; but this was the first time I ever knew a Chinese ready to of- 
fer pecuniary assistance." How interesting are first attempts to pro- 
claim the Gospel to those who sit in darkness ! 

BuRMAH.— The Committee have often felt the importance of aid- 
ing the operations of the Missionaries in Burmah who are printing 
Tracts in the language of the people. It is stated that nearly the whole 
of the male population in Burmah can read, and that Tracts may be 
printed and circulated without any limit, except that of the funds 
which may be furnished, and such publications will most easily and 
successfully spread the truths of the Gospel in Burmah. The history 
of the Mission shows the beneficial influence of Tracts. 

MADRAS PaESIDENCT. 

Madras.—* During the year, 48,000 native Tracts were printed and 
several new ones were in the press. The Tracts issued during the 
year were about the same in number as those which were printed. 
The following extracts are taken from the letters of several *^ fellow- 
workers'' in thu good cause. 

'^ A heathen came from a village more than 50 miles distant, having 
a Tract in his hand which he said he had received from a passing 
Missionary, a long time ago, and declared, that by this Tract he, aa 
well as some other families in his village, had been deeply impressed 
with the wickedness of idolatry, and the necessity of conversion, and 
he was come now to obtain more Christian instruction. There are 
now some congregations of ours in that neighborhood. Thus, we see, 
that after msmy days the seed sown begins to shoot forth to the glory 
of the Lord. 

'' It should be remembered by the Committee, and the friends of 
the Tract Society at large, that, what cases of partial success want 
in individual importance, is supplied by their numbers. Heathens, 
before large assemblies of their own people, declaring their convic- 
tion of the truth of the Christian system, and their determination to 
embrace it ; others, by a comparison of the doctrines of Christianity 
with the senseless and impure ceremonies of heathenism confessing 
the decided superiority of the former ; Romanists tearing from their 
necks the emblems of their idolatry, and throwing away, with abhor- 
rence, the charms in which they had been instructed to place unwa- 
vering confidence : — these and such like circumstances, although not 
sufficiently important to detail, have repeatedly occurred, and cannot 
but have a powerful tendency to loosen the prejudices and awaken 
the attention of both heathen and Christian idolaters." 

Mr. Reeve, who is supplying for Mr. Hands during his absence in 
England, remarks, ** I passed a Sabbath in one of the largest towns 
on my journey to Bellary, when one fact came to my knowledge 
which may be viewed as a ground of encouragement. A wearer camo 



116- LONDON TftitCT dOClCTT. [Sept. 

and importuned me for a fresh supply of onr Sacred Writing, saj- 
ing he had received, on a former yUii I had made to his Tillage, an 
invaluable boon, which he highly prized, carefully preserved, and al- 
most daily studied. He went and fetched the book to convince m6 
of the truth of his assertions. It was a copy of the Gospel of St. Luke, 
which had been given to him in 18524; and, from the manner in which 
it was fingered, it seemed not to have been neglected." 

Bamgalors.— The Rev. W. Campbell is publishing an important 
series of Tracts in the Canarese language, on a variety of scriptural 
subjects, which, when completed, will form a complete body of Divi- 
nity for native Christians and readers. The Committee, to encourage 
this work, have sent Air. Campbell a supply of 24 reams of paper, and 
2i,500 Tracts. 

NAOBROOiLand Pai«amcottah natitb Thagt SocisTr.— During 
the past year 35,000 Tracts were printed. 

BOMBAY PRESIDfiNCir. 

SuRAT. — Since the former Report received from this station the 
missionaries have circulated in the city and province of Surat 26,000 
Tracts in the Gopjuratte language, and they rejoice that their oppor* 
tunities of distributing these messengers of mercy daily increase. 

CEYLON. 

CoLUMBO. — The Rev. B. Clough informs the Committee, that all 
former grants of paper safely reached Columbo, and were found use- 
ful to the missionaries. In reference to the ." Pilgrim's Progress," in 
Singhalese, he remarks, " This valuable and truly important work I 
doubt not will be made a blessing to many in this country. It is sought 
after with great avidity by natives of all classes : the whole story is 
told in a style so closely approximating to the Oriental, that when 
tbey commence reading it rivete their whole attention until the story 
is out. I have, at present, scores of applications for the first part, 
which is out of print. 

Jaffna. — The General Report contains much information from this 
district. During the year 66,600 Tracts were printed, winch, with 
70,840 circulated up to the close of the preceding year, made a total 
of 126,440 distributed by the Society since its formation. Several new 
Tracts have been printed and most extensively circulated. 

Sandwich Islands* — The American missionaries, in nine months, 
ending September 1, 1S28, printed 61,90Q copies of Hymn Books, por- 
tions of Scripture, and Tracts. They are in a situation to print 600 
reams of paper in the year, which wUl make 22,000 volumes of 300 
pages each, or 800,000 Tracts of 8 pages. These efforts have been 
confined to the American Brethren; but the Committee have ez' 
pressed their willingness to help them, by supplies of paper, should 
the same be found necessary. 

St. Hklgna.— To the Superintendent of a large Sunday School on 
this island the Committee sent out a grant of 2,^M) publications; and 
the Library, containing all the publications, was purchased for the 
use of the School. 

AMERICA. 

Spanish AMERiCA.^Very encouraging information has been re* 
ceived from Mexico. About 6,000 children's books reached that city. 



1830.] BRANCH SOCIETIES. 117 

A Spanish priest read and approved the little woiks, and prepared an 
advertisement for insertion in the Mexican papers. Within six days 
the whole of these works were sold, and the Committee have received 
a remittance of £50, with instructions to send out 80,000 copies of 
similar useful works. Several new books for children have been print- 
ed, and 33,100 have already been sent to Mexico. All the friends of 
the young will pray that many of the lambs of the Savior's flock may 
be led to the Good Shepherd through their means. 

INCOME. 

The total amount of the Society's receipts, the present year, is 
£35,062 (Ss. 7d. ($111,388,) being an increase of £2,330 198. 3d. 
over the income of last year. Of the whole sum there were received 
from sales £19,954. 

' There were circulated, during the year, 10,569,937 publications, 
being an increase of 456,474, without including any of the Tracts 
published at the Society 's-expense in foreign countries. 



trSEFULNfiSS OF TRACTS. 

Swearer^s Prayer blessed to a Ploughman. 

In the district of A , says the Charleston Observer, as somt) 

-Sabbath School children were going one Sabbath morning to their 
school, having with them a little bundle of Tracts, they passed by the 
field of a man who had long neglected the sanctuary and the ordi- 
nary means of grace. One of them passed over the fence and fast- 
ened to the plough-beam the Tract called "TAe 8wearer*s Prayer ^^ 
and cofttinued on to school. On Monday morning when the man 
come to his plough, he found the Tract, but was unable to tell how it 
came there ; and surprised at the singular circumstance, took it home 
and read it carefully again and again. Conviction fastened upon his 
conscience; he began to attend places of public worship. His anx- 
iety after truth continued, until (as he trusts) he found peace in a Sa- 
vior's blood, and has since connected himself with a Christian church. 



CINCINNATI BRANCH TRACT SOCIETY. 

During the third year of this Society's operations, ending May 1, 
1830, its receipts were $2,624 67, Amount of pages sold, 2,641,101 ; 
delivered to members of the Board, 10,000; dispersed in the monthly 
distribution in Cincinnati, 265,240; total issued, 2,916,350 pages ; 
being an increase of 1,864,285 pages over the issues of the preceding 
year. During the year 80 new Auxiliaries have been reported, ma- 
king the whole number of Auxiliaries 87. The Society at Indiana- 
polis has, during the year, purchased 285,000 pages, and that at Ma- 
dison 11 1,280 pa^g^s. 

The SysUnuUie Monthly Distribution was commenced in Cincin- 
nati in the month of November. The city was divided into 53 dis- 
tricts. The number of families reported by the distributors, as visit- 
9t the ilrst ipopth, was 3,622, of which 30 dedi^ed re<;eivi|ig thei 



118 BKANCH SOCIETIES. [Sfipt. 

Tract. Tracts distributed in shops, 170. Whole numbev~ef Tracts 
distributedi 3,962. About the same number have been distributed 
each month. 

A Committee reported that one firm which bad for several years 
been accustomed to deal largely in the article of whisky were, on 
reading the Tract and attempting to give it circulation, struck witli 
the inconsistency of engaging in efforts to promote the cause of tem- 
perance while they continued to deal in that article. They delibe- 
rately came to the conclusion, therefore, that henceforth they will 
touch not, taste not, handle not, the poisonous liquid. 

The same system has also been adopted by several of the AuxUia- 
rles of this Branch. 

TRACT GIVEN TO A WORKUAN. 

A gentleman in Indiana gave to a workman, who was about to leave 
him, out of health, a Tract, which he promised to read every Sabbath 
for two months. About two months after the gentleman caUed at a 
public house, a few miles from his place of business, and as he was 
about to leave, a poor woman being informed who he was, asked him 
if he had any little books. At first he did not know the object of her 
question. She told him that two months l>efore a sick man called at 
her house and remained a day or two, who had with him a little book 
which he said you gave him. I read it, and was so anxious to obtain 
it that I offered him 25 cents for it, which he refused, saying that he 
bad promised to read it every Sabbath for two months, ^w I Uta 
anxious to obtain the value of 25 cents of the same kind. The gen- 
tleman immediately gave her one of each kind he had with him, tell- 
ing her she was welcome to them. The interest and gratitude which. 
thi| woman manifested, said the gentleman, was more than a full com:' 
pensation for the $5 worth of Tracts which I took iVom home. 

TRACTS ON A STEAM-BOAT. 
Prom a PMsemger* 

It was Sabbath morning. Soon after the boat #a8 under way the 
deck passengers commenced their fovorite game at cards. Two young 
men in the cabin started a game of back-gammon. Among the cabin 
passengers was a man of venerable appearance, a professor of reli- 
gion, from New- York. The game went on without interruption. At 
length two religious Tracts appeared on the table: the hand that 
placed them there was concealed. One of the young men seeing the 
Tracts, closed the board, and said, *' I had much better be reading 
these Tracts than playing on the Sabbath.'' The other was much 
displeased. A young lawyer, who thought much of his talents, ex- 
pressed his indignation at the Tracts, his disrespect for the Bible, and 
dared the man who had placed the Tracts on the table to show him- 
self. This led to a long conversation with regard to the truth of Chris* 
tianity. The passengers being most of them professed friends of re- 
ligion, either engaged in the conversation, or listened to it. After 
it ceased, their attention was directed to the Tracts, and there was np 
'more playing during the day. 

BRANCH TRACT SOCIETY AT PFTTSBURGII. 

At the Annual meeting of this Society, held in June last, the Re- 
port was rei|d by Rev. Job F. UaUey ; addresses were made by him 



1830.] 



BECXtPTSi 



119 



VfBer. Meiflrs. £. P. Swift and O. Eastmftn, and by Rev. Dr. Her- 
ron ; and resolutions were adopted to sustain the monthly distribn- 
tion, which has been for some months successfully prosecuted in that 
city, and to make vigorous efforts to enlarge the Depository for the 
accommodation of the 160 Auxiliaries of that Branch. On opening 
the subscription the President arose and said he would give $25 to 
supply the city for one month, if eleven others would do the same. 
The students of the Theological Seminary at Alleghany town vo- 
lunteered for one month; the teachers in the Sabbath Schools of the 
1st and 2d Presbyterian churches, for one month each ; the ladies in 
each of those churches, for a month ; three individuals subscribed 
$25 each after the meeting; the whole sum raised was $380, and 
committees were appointed to solicit further subscriptions. 



Rev. 0. Eastman, General Agent of the American Tract Society 
for the Valley of the Mississippi, is now on a visit to the Eastern 
States for the purpose of awakening a deeper interest in behalf of 
the Society, and especially of its operations at the West. 



CHRISTIAN ALMANAC FOR 1881. 



Just published, 1^ Metm. Lkieola aad Edmandt, fbr the AmericaH Tract SoeSety , 
BoBton, price 6i cents singlet 50 cents per dozen, $3 50 per hundred, $39 50 per 
thousand ; sold by the publishers and booksellers generally ; also, at the Tract De- 
pository, No. 36 Comhill, Boston. All who wish a supi^y of the Christian Almanac 
will do well to obtain them early ; those who wish to receive them from the Tract 
Depository shMiJd direet their i^ers to Ifr. AARON RUSSELL, Agent, American 
Tract Society, Bofton. 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 



During the mmOk ending Ainguti 15, ISaCI* 

FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 

VER.— Orwell, Linus IVHcox, Sec 

MASS.— Boston, American TTact Society, John Tiqypan, Esq.Tr. 
Springfield, Solomon Warriner, Jun. Tr. . . . • 
WilUamstown, Williama College, Prof. Ebeneser Kellogg^ Ag. 

CONN<— Branford, 

New-Haven, A. Towasend, Jun. Tr 

Norwich City, F. A. Perkins, Esq. Tr. , . . . 

West Oreenwioh, W. B. Sherwood, See 

West Hartfbrd, Mark Gridley, Tr. for VslL Bliss. 

N. YORK^-Canaan, Four Comers, Fern* Mrs. E. C. Wanier, Pres. 

Cannel, (Red Mills,) Fem. Phebe Smith, See* .... 

Corinth, Fem. Hannrii Earley, Sec 

Harpersrille, Broome Co. Azor Smitli,.Ses. ... . 

Hempetead, L. L, Robert Eelli, Tr 

Ithaca, (Tompkins Co. Auz.) Daniel L. Bidiop, Tr* 

Jamaica, L. L, James Rider, Tr. ■ • 

Marbletown, Ulster €o>) Louts J. Hasbroudi, Tr. 

Naples, Fem. Mrs. LmwT.MarnB^Tr. 

Naw-York City Tract flk>ciety, Alfred Edwards, Tr. 

Do. by Fhm. Auxiliary, Mrs. J. R. Hurd, Tr. . 
Troy, Chades LysuB, Tr 



\FarTr 

69 08 

SO 00 

8 63 

15 36 

fid 74 

t53 

3 14 

4 on 

6 00 

565 

6 40 

41 01 

1 06 

6 69 

70e 

S3 50 

05 50 

30 00 



I Dan. 
SOO 



S87 
6 18 



SO 46 



1 75 

36 39 

35 

1 88 



120 



RECEIPTBi 



"N. JER^—Bloomfield, Jut., Robert R.Kenogf, Sec. . 
Hardwick, Warren Ca, Fern. Mia Sarah M. Roy, Tr. . 
Jersey City, Fem^ Mra. Sarah Olcott, Sec. . • . . . 
Mendhain, Fern. Miss Ruth Dayton, Tr. . . - . • 

Morrislown, Fern. Mn. Lewu MiUa, Tr. ..... 

New Hope and Lambertsville, Fern., Ellen W. StuddifcMid of L. Sec 
Princeton, Fern, flfiis F. W. Morford, Tr. . . . . 

Springfield, Abyah L. Dunnell, Tr 

FENN. — Montrose, Susqh. Co., Jerre Lyoni, Seb. • . k 
Piiiladeli^iia Branch, Rev. Joel T. Benedict, Gen. Ag. * 

DIS. COL.— Washington City, John Kennedy, Tr. 
YIR.— St. Geo. Par. Accomac Co., Fem. Hiaa Sarah P. Satchell, Sec. 

Winchester, Daniel Gold, Ag 

N. CAR — Salem, William Lewis Benzoin, Sec. 

ALA.— Huntsville, Samuel Coltart, Ag 

IND^— Terra Haute, WUliam C. Linton, Ag. .... 
OHIO— Cincinnati, Henry B. Funk, Tr. . . 
Harpersfield, (Ashtabula Co. Aux.) Rev. Perry Pratt, Sec. 
Perrysburrh, (Wood Co. Aux.) Leander Sackett, Ag. 
M0«— St. Louis Branch, W. S. Obnsted, Tr. . 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 
N. YORK.— New-Utrecht, Fem. Bib. Miss, and Tr. Soc. Mrs. Csp 

tharine Knapp, Tr. 

N. JER.— Elizabethtown, Union, J. J. Bryant, Tr. 

Paterson, in Presb. Church, Henry Van Honten, Tr. . 

VIR. — ^Fredericksburg, Prayer Book and Tract Society, Reuben 

T. Thorn, Tr 

N. CAR.— North-Carolina Book Co., Rev. James W. Douglass, Ag. 
Tracts sold at the Depository to individuals, . 



ForTr, 


Don. 


884 




3 74 




500 




1 00 




90 00 


10 00 


850 


1 50 


1 00 




400 




450 




500 00 




101 18 




15 00 


5 00 


65 01 




50 00 




80 00 




46 00 




100 00 




61 38 




10 00 




119 50 




624 




1 60 




400 




29 94 




36 00 




360 35 





Director for Life. 

]aASS.^SpringfieId, Chicopee Par. 
Rev. Alexainder Phoenix, by his 
Ch. and Cong, (in fuU of $50,) $30 00 

Members for Life, 

CONN.— Bridgeport, Miss Polly 
Cornelius, (in ftall of $90,) . . 10 00 

North Branford, Rev. Judson A. 
Root, by Mrs. Emily P. Root, (in 
partof$30,) 13 46 

N. YORK.— New-York city, Ebe- 
nezer Piatt, Jun 90 00 

PENN.— BTConnelsburg, David Ag- 
new 90 00 

VIR.— Winchester, Miss Anna D. 
Holliday, by a Friend, (in part of 
$90,) 5 00 

ILL —Galena, Samuel T. Smith, by 
himself and Rev. Aratus Kent, 90 00 

OHIO — Coshocton, Rev. George 
W. Warner, by a Member of us 
Church, 90 00 

Annual Directors, 

N.-^R.— Newark, Hon. Theodore 
Frelinghuysen, 5 00 

GEO.— Washington, Rev. Jesse 
Mercer, FUt-Pretidtnit ... 5 00 

Annwd Members. 
«ew.Y<Htcfty,Ar<bibflldC.Bnriy, 9 00 



Daniel Lord, Jnn. for 1899 and 1830, 
$4— Leander Mead, $9, ... 6 00 

Rev. William M'Murray, D. D., 
Mrs. John Peck, ..... 4 00 

John Steele, « . . 9 00 

Other Donations. 

CONN^East.GoBhen,H. Baldwin, 1 00 

N. YORK.— Livonia, Miss Maria 
Beeeher, avails of jewelry, . . 75 

New-York dty, A Friend, 95 cts^ 
do. A Friend 25 cts 50 

Owego, Tioga Co., Mrs. Blary E. 
Putnam, avails of a gold chain, . 3 00 

Westford, Otsego Co., Fem. Pray- 
ing Association, S Q9 

GEO.- Washington, Rev. Jesse Mer- 
cer, Fiee'Pretidmtf for Tracts 
forBurmah, 15 00 

ALA.— Whitesburg, Madison Co., 
Mrs. E. Gardiner, 1 00 

KEN.— ^aris, Mrs. Todd, ... i 50 



The «bove list contains d<«atioD8— 

For TracU for VaUey of Miss. $ 90 46 

For Tracts for Bonnah, ... 15 00 

Wh<de amount of Donatioaf, $875 5$ 
Received flv Tracts sold, 9,016 03 

T«t<L $%fi»i <n 



THE AMERICAN 

OL. T.] OOTOBBS, ISSO. l^^' 



8h Tnet BUod ED«, No. 56. 

TAIiLEV OF THE HISSIBSIPFI. 

At the present monieDl, wheneffortB are making;, in soniany vays, 
to promote the moral velfare of tbe Talle; ofthe IVetl, everj inlCt 
ligeni Chriitiui and patriot muit detire toposieaa bimselfof the real 
mallen cffaet in reapect bi the actual Itate o( that pact of our coua- 
trj, that he ma; iDilablr ettimale ita claimi, and the encouragemenl 
to prolecnte the TBrioul Cbriitian enterprise! commenced in its be- 
half, and that he may know what ii hii own duty in relpect to thein. 
Xo all inch the follawinj; facts, fh>m • discreet and faithflil laborer 
in Alabama and Tenoeisee, cannot fail to be aecepiable. 
Qar. Fkuicis H. Ckb's Ripoai or his Aatucr ron the Aue- 

BIIUV TKACT SoCIITT in AlUBlHl. AHD TlHIIESSEE. 

Amount of labor performti. 
Travelled, in 18 months, by water and by land, inclading joum 



i9& K£V. aiE. case's sepoet. lOci* 

116 other Tract Sodetie»; pot iDto grBtakous drculation 254,000 
pages of Tracts, about 83,000 pages of which I distributed with my 
own hands^ preached ^14 times ; procured 6 life memberships, and 
commenced elTortt for obtaining several others ;.oblaiii6d4d«ub9crib' 
ers to the American Tract Magazine, and subscriptions in all, for the 
Tract cause, to the amount of upward of $4,000, chiefly from Auzi* 
liariea for "Bracta-to be circulated within the two Statea, a ooaside^ 
rablft parr of which subsoriptiooS'bafye alreadj^been paid^ 

In the gratuitous distribution- of Tracts* many . opportunities were 
furnished for making a personal application of the truth of religion 
to the consciences-of those who received them. Christ, in the parable 
of the supper, directs his ambasaadors. to go out into the highways, 
and compel the people tii oetme in. With this direction before me, I 
have made it one object .to giv^ Tracts to these whom 1 met by.th^ 
way, and to converse^ wslt^ theoa about the salvation of the Gospel. 
Many, travellers' and families re^noving: still farther to the West, as 
well as. families living upon tfeca public roads,have thus received some 
of your interesting puMicotioBSy accompanied also with a word of 
Christian advice. At my afipointmentB for preaching, even when the 
formation of an Auxiliary wa» not- the parlieular object in view,! 
have taken occasion, generally, at the close of the meeting, to explain 
the design of your Society, and to distribute Tracts among my 
hearers. You would Ymare. been pleased to witness the eagerness 
with which they were g/ener«Uy received. My usual practice was» to 
lay a quantity of Tracta. li^ion the tabie^ and inform the people that 
after the meeting was dismissady they might take one each, or one to 
a family, according to the supply which- 1 had with me at the time. 

Eager RuepHan^ of Tracts. 

I have often been djelighted to see the old .and the. young, After the 
benediction was pronounced, press toward the table, with extended 
hands to recehre the Tracts. If there, happened not to be enough to 
fun«|sh all, the inquiry was anxiously made, can you not part with a 
few more. After the bustle of receiving them was over, you would 
hear a hum of voices, and see persons in every part of the room, and 
about the door, wholly taken up in reading the Tracts. ' Some would- 
read them through Imbre leaving the place, and exchange them for 

others* 

Objfieiioru ObviatedM 

It was interesting to hear the remarks of the people on -these occa* 
sions. One would say, . ** I never sayr a Tract before " In a dlfierent 
direction you would hear another telling those around him that he 
used to think Tract Societies were designed to make moneyi; but he 
was now convinced- that it waa not so. One after- another would 
come forward and subscribe and become members of an Auxiliary, 
and inquire when they could get their Tracts.- The conductor of a 
newspaper in; Tennessee, informed me that he went to the court- 
house, wherel hadan appointment to preach and form a Tract Society, 
with a full determination not to subscribe, nor let any of his family 



ISdO.] flt£T« «&. case's EE70BT. tS.$ 

do 80. After faearlo^ the 8tatetn«dt that was made, hh changed his 
resolution, put down his own name, and the names of his children, 
and was active in persuading his neighbors to becotne members of the 
Auxiliary. He kindly offered to publish the proceedings of the meet- 
ing, the constitution adopted, and any other article on the subject of 
Che American Tract Society which I might wish to have inserted. I 
found that the enemies of religion had circulated false reports respect- 
ing your Society, which rendered it necessary Tor me to improve 
every opportunity to explain the principles upon Which it is formed 
and conducted. I have heard many fVankly acknowledge that they 
had been mistaken in their opinion respecting the object oTthis Insti- 
tution, and under the influence of this mistake had withheld their co- 
operation. It was gratifying to see those who had heretofore stood 
aloof from this benevolent enterprise, come forward as its advocates 
9nd supporters. 

NuuiHy of diffimng hiformoH&n.-'^'Jirgtmenl fot Munthly 

ZHstribuiioiu 



Permit mo hereto «Mfce a reoMirk on the ffmportance<4]f having the 
public more generally tnibrmed respecting the object of your Sodeiy. 
. There are moltitndes who never tee either your Annual Report or 
your Magazine. Preachers of the Gospel would render esMntial aid 
to the Society by discussing the subject before their people ; and 
Agents will find it no smalt part of their work to enlighten the public 
mind, and erase the unfavorable impressions made by mistatements 
from the enemies of truth. The Tracts themselves, when ctroulated 
among the people, have the effect to dissipate the prejudices of the 
uninformed, and for this, as one reason, among others, I have urged 
upon the friends of the cause the importance of a montMy iliffrSti- ' 
iioa. Eight of the most active Aoxiliaries, in my field of labor, have 
resolved to distribute Tracts in this sy Mematic mfmner. Hilaliy others , 
it is confidently believQd, will foUow their eacample. 

Usefulness of IVacis. 

Thouch bat comparativdy few Tracts bad been cinmlated in Alaba- 
ma ami Teonesaee previous to 1829, yet I baard of as many as twetnlty- 
/our instances of hopeful conversion through their instrumentality> as 
weU as many other instances of external reformations so evident is it, 
that the Messing of God attends the exertions of those who are enga^d 
in this cause. Who can estimate the vahie of these immortal souls :, 
and who can tell the number that will go ftx>m those two states, and 
rejniee eternally «n Mount Zien in consequence of what yonr So- 
ciety has raeentiy done for that region of country ! 

fVani ofaddiiunud Laborers. 

The field Ui which I labored is in many respects a highly interesting 
one. The people generally are distinguished for hospitality. Th^e 
are scattered over this field taany ver;f aMiv^ Christians : these I 
heard frequently lamenting that there were so few preachers of the 
Gospel to occnpy snch an extent of (rountty. "they wete highly 
iMteased with the object of my agency, and engaged tn the Ttact cati^c 



1^ AEV. Alb. cass's msroAT. [Oct. 

with a commendable seal. Applications for preaching were very 
frequent. I sometimes preached in places where the people told me 
they had not heard a sermon fir six months, Not unfrequently did 
they urge me to tarry a few dajB, and preach to them ; but such way 
the nature of my business that I could not tarry, and I found it neces-i 
3ary to deny many such requests. The question was repeatedly 
asked, if I would not come and lire among them, or procure some one 
to preach to them the words of eternal life. There is surely (what- 
ever some may say to the contrary) a great want of preachers in. 
Alabama and Tennessee. In those denominations which do not em> 
ploy circuit-riders, the preachers often have charge of four, and some- 
times five churches each, and can preach to them only about one 
Sabbath in a month. There are also churches which have no stated 
preaching, not even once a month. This deficiency, it is true, is ii| 
part made up by circuit preaching. But this circuit preaching can 
only to a very limited extent come on the Sabbath, when the people 
are at leisure, and when it is important that they should attend divine 
Worship. If we were to say nothing about the qualifications of many 
who adl themselves preachers, but should admit that they were aU 
well furnished to the difficult and responsible work of the Gospel 
ministry, it would even then be no misrepresentation to say that the 
two States above mentioned are not half supplied with preachers of 
the Gospel. 

Bible, Sabbath School, and Temperance Cause. . 

There is also a great want of Bibles in those States. Considerable 
has indeed been done recently by the formation of Bible Societies, t 
heard of as many as 60 such Societies ; attended the annual meeting 
of several, and assisted to form one. Tet I heard individuals who 
had the means of knowing, say that in some large sections of coun- 
try, as many as one half of the families were still destitute of the Scrip- 
tures. In Tennessee a class-leader was found who had no Bible, 
and there is but little reason to suppose that the members of his elai3 
were any better supplied. 

Sabbath Schools are becoming more interesting and numerous than 
they were a few years ago. I had the pleasure of visiting and ad- 
dressing 21, and heard yf 55 more which it was not convenient for 
me to visit.. 

The cause of Temperance in that region is evidently progressing. 
At a Presbyterian camp«meeting in Alabama, Dr. Beecher*s six ser- 
mons on intemperance were read in the intervals of preaching. They 
were listened to with interest by a numerous audience ; and at the 
«lose of the reading about 60 individuals came forward and pledged 
themselves, by enrolling their names, that they would use no more 
ardent spirits. I heard of St6 Temperance Societies in the two States ; 
was present at the meetings of several, and heard of the reformation 
of a number of drunkards through the exertions of the (Hends of the 
cause. 

fbur days' Meetings^^-^Revivdls of ReUgion, 

From all that I saw and heard it appeared to me that the cause of 
cyangelical religion is rising in that part of our couptry. I nf tended 



leSO.] REV. UR. Case^s ttJ^6t*r^ 125 

12 sacramental meetings, and found them occasions of peculiar inte- 
rest. These meetings generally continue 4 davs in succession. A 
number of preachers attend them, and individuals frokn the neighbor- 
ing churches, where the distance is not too great, also go up to meet 
their Lord at the f^ast. At several of these meetings there was some* 
thing resembling a revival of religion. But what is to be much re> 
fretted, at the close of the meeting the people are left for a long time 
without preaching, and the attention subsides. I noticed the same 
also at the three Presbyterian camp meetings which t attended. They 
were still and solemn meetings. No disorder was witnessed, but the 
Reason seemed like one continued Sabbath. The whole time from 
tnoming till night being taken up in religious exercises, the world and 
its cares were wholly excluded from the mind. In a country like that, 
wh^re the people live at a considerable distance from each other, 
camp-meetings, when properly conducted, are no doUbt the means of 
great good. 

In addition to what I saw at these meetings I had the pleasure of 
preaching in two places where there were interesting revivals. It is 
the custom of many of the preachers in that region, in a time of reli- 
gious excitement, to request all who feel anxious on the subject of re* 
ligion, and wish the advice and prayers of God's people, to take seats 
together in a particular part of the house. It was affecting to see 
numbers, sometimes many, rising and coming from every part of the 
assembly, with tears in their eyes and taking their seats among the 
anxious. After they were seated the minister gave them an exhorta- 
tion, and offered a prayer with particular reference to their case. 
Tour Agent was called to address 6 such circles of anxious souls 
while in the Valley of the Mississippi. He attended also 30 prayer 
meetings ; 6 monthly concerts ; 90 other religious meetings of different 
denominations ; visited 4 missionary stations among the Indians, and 
3 schools connected with these missions. 

Indispensable importance of the Tract cause at the South and West. 

I saw many things in that part of our Zion which should excite 
Christians to more importunate prayer and more vigorous exertion. 
The Lord is evidently blessing the labors of his faithful servants. 
The harvest truly is plenteous, but the laborers are few ; and it be- 
comes the duty of all Christians to pray the Lord of the harvest, that 
he would send forth laborers into his harvest. There is much, very 
much, yet to be done in those states ; and not a little of it, dear Sir, 
will fall to your Society. The Gospel can be preached, through the 
medium of TVaets, to the whole population of that country. These 
silent preachers can easily find their way along the course of every 
river and valley, and into every corner in the mountains. 

Argument for the Tract cause, from the diversity of denominations. 

There is one fact, which more than any thing else convinces me 
that your Society has yet much to do in diffusing the blessings of sal- 
vation over that extensive region, I refer to the fact, that the com- 
munity there is split up into such a'great variety of denominations. 
There are 4 or 5 varieties of Baptists ; 2 of Presbyterians ; 2 of l\/Ietho- 

10* 



12(( &£v. UA4 case's' asFOiir. [Oct. 

dfsu. There are also the Seceder« ; the Lutherans ; tke Covenanters; 
the Unitarians ; the Unirersalists ; the Roman Catholics, &c. Persons 
of different religions opinions live in the same settlement, and it is only 
a few fayored spots where there are enough evangelical Christians 
of any one denomination to support the uninterrupted ministrations 
of the Sanctuary. To such a state of things the publications of your 
Society are happily adapted. Being free from every thing sectarian^ 
instead of exciting the jealousy of the different denominations, they 
are calculated to strengthen the bonds of brotherly love among the 
friends of truth, and make them feel that they are disciples of the 
same Master. 

Opposition from the Enemies of Evangelical Religion. 

Such denominations as deny the fundamental doctrines of the Gos* 
pel will, and do, speak against the circulation of Evangelical Tracts. 
So do the infidel, and the atheist, of which there are some, would to 
God I could not say many, in Alabama and Tennessee* A vigorous 
moral conflict is already going on in that country. There is a waking 
up of all parties. The friends of truth and the advocates of error are 
taking sides. Things are coming to a crisis, and that soon, throughout 
the whole Valley of the Mississippi. The powers of darkness are on 
the alert, and seem determined to make this great Valley their battle- 
ground. Let Christians go forth to meet them, not with carnal, but 
with mightier weapons, drawn from the armory of Heaven, and fight 
valiantly the battles of the Lord. 

Powerful motives to redoubled effort. 

Let every Christian in the land be summoned to prayer and to effort^ 
and let all the benevolent institutions of the day redouble their ex* 
ertions, and send forth ministers, and Bibles, and Tracts, and Sun^ 
day School Teachers, in ten-fold greater numbers than heretofore. 
Let the patriot too participate in this enterprise, for his country is 
deeply interested in the issue of the conflict now going on. Religion, 
patriotism, philanthropy, every thing dear to man as an inhabitant of 
earth, or a candidate for heaven, unite their claims, and call upon 
us to act, not for the present generation merely, but for generations 
unknown. Now is the time for action. If we wait a few years the 
enemy of Grod and man will have increased his forces and intrench- 
ed himself in many a strong hold, where he can carry on successfully 
the work of death, and it may require centuries to dislodge him. 

I rejoice to learn that you are sending forth Agents in some por- 
tions of the West, to effect the systematic and stated distribution to 
every family willing to receive Tracts. Would to God that your So- 
eiety had the ability to sow the precious seed of divine truth monthly 
over the whole of that immense field. What consequences would re- 
sult from such a measure ; what happiness would it confer on mil- 
lions, and what a revenue of glory would it bring to God ! Can it be 
that there is a Christian or a patriot in the land who is unwilling to 
contribute something as the means of producing such a result? A 
heavy responsibility is resting upon us all in regard to this matter. 
The Lord grant that we may feel it in all its weight, and rouse to 
action. 



i88(r.] 



XiOHSON TltACT SOCIETt'ir l£7 



£KTRACT3 FHOM THE ADDRESSED 

^/ the late Jinnivertary of the London Religiow Tract Society* 

We had hoped, under this head, to have furnished our readers witli 
the address of the Rev. Dr. Milnor, the substance of which is re- 
ceived in the London '' World;*' but are forbidden, by his special 
request, that his addresses in London should not be re-printed from 
public records of the meetings, on account* of the inaccuracy of the 
reporters. 

DIFFUSION OF LIGHT AMONG CATHOLICS. 

'■ The Rev. D. Stuart, one of the Secretaries of the Irish Evange- 
lical Society, said, if any evidence were wanted to prove the effi- 
ciency of various societies in Ireland, it was to be found in the fact, 
that the Roman Catholic hierarchy and priesthood, generally, had 
been compelled to follow their example. If Protestants established 
.Education Societies, the people would be educated, and the Roman 
Catholics bad been compelled to establish their Education Societies. 
(Applause.) If Protestants had their Bible Society, the people would 
read the Bible, and the Roman Catholics had been compelled to stere 
otype an edition of their translation of the Scriptures. If Protestant? 
had their Religious Tract and Book Societies, the people would read, 
and the Roman Catholics had been compelled to form their Religious 
Tract and Book Societies. With regard to the Catholic publications, 
he, as a consistent Protestant, and, as he trusted, a humble disciple of 
the Lord Jesus Christ, could not rejoice in their dissemination ; but 
he considered the establishment of these societies might be fairly 
looked upon as one of the ** signs of the times," and while Protestant 
publications, based upon the unadulterated Word of Grod, went forth 
into conflict with those of the Catholics which were opposed to the 
vital essential doctrines of the Sacred Book, believing in the omnipo- 
tence of truth, they (the Protestants)' could have no fear, through 
God's Spirit aiding them, as to the result. It had pleased Almighty 
God himself, in giving his word at ** sundry times and in divers man- 
ners," to give it to the fallen race of Adam in the form of Tracts ; and 
he would mention, as an interesting fact, a circumstance that came 
under his own observation, illustrating the mode in which God's pro- 
vidence often mysteriously co-operated with the designs of his mercy 
in the accomplishment of the purposes of bis love. 

The Rev. Mr. S. then related the circumstances attending the con- 
version of a Roman Catholic, through a fragment of the New Testa- 
ment, who had now, for many years, been a humble disciple of the 
Lord Jesus Christ. 

AGED BLASPHEMER CONVERTED. 

The Rev. J. Boddington (of Horton) said he had been connected 
wUh a Religions Tract Society, established in a large village, three 
years. During the last year it had been distinguished by a signal ln< 



stance of God's mercy, which he would dctaiK One of the distributors, 
in the course of his labors on the Sabbath, had been in the habit of 
calling at the house of an old man about 70 years of age, who was at 
that time laboring under a very painful disease, but who had been 
living during the whole of his life entirely ignorant of the Gospel, and 
was a great blasphemer of the sacred name of Jesus. His wife and 
daughter were animated by a different spirit, and were anxious to 
read the Tracts. The old man consented, but when he received the 
Tracts it was always with so much ill temper and moroseness as great* 
ly to distress the distributor, whose mind upon one occasion was so 
powerfully operated upon by that conduct, that he determined to pas£i 
the house without calling. When the Sabbath returned, and the hour 
arrived for resuming his labor of love, he determined upon making 
the subject a matter of special prayer, and fervently to supplicate 
God to soften the heart of that veteran in sin. His mind becune com- 
posed, and he determined to prosecute his labors whatever the con« 
sequence might be. The old man met him as usual at the door, and 
he put into his hand a Tract " On the comparative Value of Time 
and Eternity." The word " eternity*' arrested the man*s attention, 
and induced him to peruse the Tract, which issued in leading him, as 
a penitent sinner, to the foot of the cross. From that period he be- 
came thoughtful, and his nights were spent in restless anxiety, la« 
mentation, and mourning. His wife supposed that his distress arose 
from the painful disorder under which he labored ; but he would give 
no answer to the questions addressed to him, having determined to 
conceal his convictions. At length the power of divine grace was 
eminently illustrated, and he was compelled to disclose to his wife 
the cause of his distress, which arose principally from the thought 
that, having so long neglected the divine ordinances, there was now 
no mercy for him. It was at length determined that his case should 
be made known to the young man who had distributed the Tract, and 
who was eminently pious. The old man told his tale of wo with many 
tears, wept bitterly over his past life, and entreated him to pray for 
him and with him. The disease under which he labored was making 
rapid progress on his constitution, but his sincerity and devotedness 
to God were strikingly exhibited. As he approached nearer to eterni- 
ty, the name of which had roused him from his lethargy, he was visited 
by several pious persons, who testified to the efficacy of the blood of 
Christ. The disease proved fatal, but he left the clearest evidence 
of having died in the Lord, one of the last proofs of which was the 
following. He sent for the Traet distributoTf and told ^tm, as a dying 
Hnner on the verge of eternity^ never to fprow weary, never to be dis- 
toiira^ed, never to desert the honorable post he oeeuj^ed, on account of 
the dyfkuUies and obstructions which he met with tn the way, adding 
that, had it not been for his perseverance and Christian kindness, in all 
human probability he would have died as he had hitherto Uved, *' with*' 
out God, and without hope in the world :" but that now he rejoiced in 
Christ Jesus as his Savior, 

The above fact is a delightful illustration of the useiialness, under the 
Divine blessing, of the systematic monihfy dishibution, when pef- 
severed in by a faithful Tract I>i8tribQti»r. 



1890.] VSEStfLZTEBS OS TRACTS. i£8 

The Re7. J. Drsa addressed the meetiog in reference to the in- 
tolerable censonhip of the press in HanoTer, German?, where a re- 
spected Secretary of the Society was assured by a pohce officer that 
the distribution even of the Dairyman's Daughter would subject him 
to imprisonment— and all this in a Protestant and Lutheran com- 
munity. 

The Rbv. S. Wilsov, fl'om the Mediterranean, stated numerous 
.facts, showing ihe success of Tract operations in that part of the 
world, particularly in Malta and Greece. 

TbeRiY. W. H. Stowell, among other things, noticed his personal 
obligations to the Religious Tract Society, having had his mind first 
impressed with religion by reading its Tract ^* Serunu ThougktB on 
EiemUy." Since that time he had felt it to be his duty to distribute 
religious Tracts, and make himself useful to his fellow-creatures. 
Among other instances of the success wliich had attended his efforts 
to do good by circulating Tracts, he mentioned that of a young man 
who had been converted to God, and had become extensively useful as 
a Sunday school teacher, and subsequently as a missionary and a 
preacher of the Gospel. 

USEFUIilfESS OF TRACTS. 

TRACT ** POOR SARAH" BLBSSED TO A PHYSICIAN. 

As I was dining, says an officer of the American Tract Society, 
with a pious family in Conaecticut, a very respectable physician pre- 
sent said to me, *' I ought to be a friend of Tracts, Sir. It was the 
Tract Poor Sarah that first arrested my attention to the concerns of 
eternity. I did not feel easy on the subject for about six months, when 
I indulged a hope, and made a profession of religion." He now labors 
to benefit the souls as well as the bodies of his patients, often pray- 
ing with the poor and distressed, and directing them to that great 
Physician of souls who can administer to them consolation in all the 
circumstances of life, in death, in judgment, and in eternity. 



** TRACT ' SABBATH OCCUPATIONS' THROWN FROM A STAGE.*' 

Two Ladies, says a devoted friend of the Tract cause in Connecti- 
<;ttt, were passed by the stage on a Sabbath morning, when a pas- 
senger, more sealous it would seem to inculcate the proper obser- 
vance of that day upon others than to sanctify it himself, threw from 
the stage the Tract entitled Sabbath Oecupations* It was taken up 
by one of the Ladies, (who had neglected to read the Tracts she had 
received from an Auxiliary Society,) and was read, and read again 
and again, with solemn and attentive interest. She requested others 
frequently to read it to her. She has obtained peace in believing, and 
nothing she lays would teq^pt her to feel as she did before reaiding 
that Troct. 



THB TRACT AND THE PBACB ORCHARD. 

A gentleman, formerly a member of my church, (says a clergy- 
ms9,) being on a visit to a friend, expreised much anxie^ to letom 



190 AXBmcAzr Tiuxar orocixvr. OOct. 

hone whbfai.a given lime, m he had a Itaegt ordhavd of paadies, 
which he vighedto gather far the diatiUerjr. liiafriend femonstnited 
with iua; hat it anrailed nothing; he anittgo and gaither bis |>eaclies 
£»r thediitiUeiy. ** WdU, if you nrast go,'' laid hiis ffiead, I will gvne 
yen a Tnct to read, and prefenled faim KUtre^'t Addrat. He ac- 
cepted it, and read it; and 8oon after sent word to his friend, that 
instead of carrying his peaches to the distilleiy he had grren them to 
ius iiogB, and fiirther, that be had resolved nerer again to mffir his 
mill to be used to prepare grmn for the dixttUery, 



AMERICAN TRACT SOCIRTY. 

PAINFUL DEFICIENCY OF PECUNIARY MEANS. 

The receipts of this Society from May 1, to September 16, hare 
amooBted only to f 10,136 86 for Tracto sold, and $1,966 12 in do- 
nations: total, f 12,101 ^ 

This, amcNmt is less than the receipts of the preceding year during^ 
the same period, by the sum of .... ||9,686 18 

The deficiency in the receipts has been such that the Committee 
have been compelled to raise from the banks, on their own personal 
responsibility, to meet due» since August 1, the sum of $4,300 00 

And notes of members of the Comnlttee, including the last men- 
tioned sum, wre now outstanding, which must be paid previous to 
January 1, to the amount of $9,430 60 

By an actual inventory of the Society^s means, presented in the 
last Annual Report, it is shown that (exclusive of the house furnished 
by citizens of New- York, in which the Society's operations are con- 
ducted,) the whole that it possesses, including all dues for Tracts sold 
on a credit, is only equal to the value of the publications in its Gene* 
ral Depository, its stereotype plates, engravings, paper, and other 
materiiaU in vse in transacting Us concerns. It has no permanent funds. 
Its publications are actually sold at cost— i. e. the whole amount re- 
ceived into the Treasury for such as are sold does not exceed the 
amount expended in issuing them and bringing them into circulation. 

Aad it can increase the number of its publications, and conse- 
quently the stock in its General Depository; and can sustain its 
Agents in crxciting an interest ui the churches, and extending its ope- 
rations, especially at the West and South ; and can make grants of 
Tracts to the destitute, in this and foreicn lands, ONJLT bjfihe vokole 
amount thus expended being contriJnUedin the free donations nf those 
who love this cause. 

We beg the followers of the Lord Jeios to examine the above sim* 
pie and definite staiement of /cuts. 

We beg those wbo^are entertaining a vague idea that our Benevo- 
lent Societies are abounding in means, to examine it 

We beg those whose hearts have been rejoicing, from month to 
month, at the multiplied evidences of souls converted to Christ by 
means of Tracts, to examine it. 

We beg those who have looked over our country and seen the wide 
openings for Tract circidation, of nopandlaled interevt, etpechiliy in 
aU the neiv and deaiitnte iettl^meiitBi to exmfiie it. 



1880.] HONTBLT T1U<;T SISTftlBVTIOir. IBI 

We beg those Brmoolhaiid AaadliaEcy Soci«tMi, wMch might contri- 
Irate 0/ leMt a small dontUion annumy^ and might, with tome exer- 
tion, always pay for the Tracts liiey order, on delii'vry, to escainine 
this statement. 

We beg those Ladies who might constitute their pastors- direetora. 
and members for life, and have not done it ; and those individuals 
vho might contribute donations, large or small, to sustain this Society, 
prayerfiUly, to txamine this aUUemerU of facts. 

We make no comment. We pray Grod to enlarge the hearts of his 
people, and warm them with love to his cause ; and that the glorious 
spread of the knowledge of a Redeemer upon this apostate earth may 
not be hindered. 



MONTHLir TRACT DISTRIBlTTIOlf. 



This good work is going on very extens Jpy in our country. It is 
impossible now to specify the places from «p><^b we have received the 
gratifying intelligence of souls converted, churches strengthened, and 
the cause of Christ advanced, through its instrumentality. The more 
the influence of this work, if performed by faithful distributors, is ez> 
amined, the more does it appear to be in fulfilment of the command 
to carry the Gospel to *' every creature,^* There are very few families 
comparatively, even in the New Settlements at the West, in which 
some one of their members cannot read — and for such families, can 
Christians of our favored land do less than to go and read to them a 
Tract, and tell them the simple story of the cross ? 

We wish all who look at this system of effort to consider thre$ items 
of good which it occasions^-tbe good done by. the Draeti distr^mted — 
by the spiritual conversation, prayers, or other jE>erioiuiJ labors qf the 
Distributors-^axid in the promotion of active piety and growth in 
grace in the hearts of the Distributors thtmselvet. 

We pray those who love the Lord Jesus to consider ishen this world 
will be converted to him, unless private Christians, male and female, 
come forward and co-operate with faithful ministers in carry ing^ 
the Gospel to the fireside of those who feel not its value, and never en- 
ter the sanctuary where if is publicly proclaimed. 



RECENT PUBUCATIONS. 

No. 239. Marm to DistiUers and tkeir. Allies ^A premium Tract. B^ Rev. 

Baxter Dickinson, pp. 18. Thii Tract is based on tho principle that the produc- 
Han of the destroying element must cease before Temperance will be universal ; 
and the duty of ceasing its production is urged upon the distaier and him who fur. 
Dishes the materials, with no loss of words, in a manner, the force of which every man 
who has a conscience will be constrained to feel. 



Curd—** To GeatleiMfi." On Profane Swearing; being the six lines of Cowper. 
" It chills ny blood to hear the Uest Supreme,'* 4lc. Price 1 cent for 5, or 20 cents 
oar 100. 

Donation from England. — ^The Committee gratefully acknowledge ihe recast 
of the stereotype plates of Pik^o Pertuaoweo to Earlff Pisty, 360 pp. 18mo. \i a 
donation firom " An EngUok BoptUtP This excellent work was sometime since 
approved by the Poblishiag Cottunitteef and will be immediately put to pre A. 



BECEIPTS 

INTO THE T&BASUEY OF THE AMERICAN TEACT SOCIETf , 
Dmrint Hkt mmdk eudhig S^Hemker 15» 1830. 



FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 
MASS*— Boston, American Tract Society, J. Tappan, Esq. Tr. 

R. I8L.^Newport, B. S. Cahobne, Sec 

CONN.—Brooklyn, (Windham Co. Aoz.) E. Nevburj, Ag. . 
Norwich, lit Soc- in S. School, Fern. Mias E. C. Lathrop, Sec. 
N. TORK.->Aabuni, Clark B. Hotchkias, Tr. .... 

9tet Edward, Zadock Wheeler, Esq. Pres 

GodMUjChrange Co. Dr J. S. Crane, Tr. . . » . . 
Oreenvule, Fem. Miaa Hannah Hicook, Sec. 

Hndflon,Tem. Mrs. Root, Tr. 

Honter, E. J. Stimpstm, Sec 

Monroe, Orange Co. Benjamin C. Smith, Tr. 

Schenectady, Isaac Ledyard, Tr 

Schoharie Kill, Fem 

Stuyresant, Columb. Co. Fem. Mrtf. Frances W. Wright, Sec. 

Troy, Charles Lyman, Tr 

Utica, Edward Vernon, Sec. ^ • . 

N. JER.— Blo(ynfield, Juv. IO»rt R. Kellogg, Sec. 

Kingston, Fem. Jane K. Comwfe, Tr. 

Morristown, Fem. Mrs. Lewis Mills, Tr 

New Brunswick, Abraham Suydam, Tr. 

Newton, Jut. Jonathan F. Shafer, 

Peterson, Jay. Rev. Samuel Fisher, Pres 

Princeton, Fem. Miss F. W. Morford, Tr 

Westfidd, Fem. Mary Pierson, Sec - . 

Woodbridg e, Fem. H. B. Barton, Sec ' 

PE\N.— Erie. Fem. Emily Wight, Sec 

Honesdale, Wayne Co. Stephen Torrey, Sec. . « . . 
M'Connellsburg, M. Augustus Jewett, Sec. . . » . . 
N. CAR.— Raleigh, Rev. P. W. Dowd, Sec. .... 
Salisbury, Michael Brown, Tr. . . . « • . 

ALA.— Huntsville, Samuel Coltart, Ag 

TENN.— Jackson, Creorge Cromwell, Tr 

Memphis, (Shelby Co. Auz.) Littleton Henderson, Tr. 

N^hrille, Samuel B. Snowden, Tr 

KEN. — Lexington, Luther Stephens, Ag. .... 
OHIO.— Cincinnati, Henry B. Funk, Tr. ..... 

Delaware, Alexander Anderson, Ag 

Newark, Rev. C. P. Bronson, Sec 

Putnam, O^uskingum Co. A ox.) Edwin Putnam, Ag. 
Sandusky City, Joseph Darling, Ag. . . . 
BOCH. TER.— Ann Arbour, Fem. Harriet 6. Mills, Sec 

Dexter, Fem. Miss Orphah Williams, Sec « 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 
(1. JER^-Elizabethtown, Union, J J.Bryant, Tr. 
DIS. COL«— Georgetown, Juv. in S. School, Christ Church, 
VIR.— Fredericksburg, Prayer Book and Tr. Soc. R. T. Thom, Tr 
Tracts sold at the Depository to individuals, (including $50 for 
ii^eofroom,) 



ForTr. 


15 50 


40 00 


10 00 


3 75 


16 00 


502 


600 


8 00 


3 75 


aooo 


425 


40 00 


500 


750 


40 00 


254 00 


7 14 


956 


750 


6 42 


600 


200 


10 00 


225 


2 14 


15 75 


4 00 


8 12 


20 00 


40 00 


20 00 


191 68 


10 00 


130 CO 


145 00 


30 OO 


10 00 


11 50 


130 00 


10 00 


5 00 


600 


13 76 


700 


3 74 


369 73 



DQn. 



1S5 
1 ^ 



^50 



Ob 



5% 



3 50 



2 0/) 



Director for Life, 
DIS. COL^Washington City, 
Walter Lowrie, Esq. . . . $100 
Members for Life. 
CONN.— Plainfield, Mrs. Survlah 
Hink]y,(inftillof$20,) . . . 
TENN^Nashville, Samuel B. 
Snowden, (in foil of $90,) . . 
Annual., Members, 
CONN.— Middletown, N. Bacon, 
VIR«— Eastrille, Wm. 6. Smith, 

Other DonctHons. 
" A Friend to the Tract cause," 
by Rev. B. W. Crane, . . 
*'AH:Iend>" 



00 



15 00 
10 00 



SO 
6 



00 
00 



00 
91 



CONN.— Coventry, A Friend, 50 

cts^— J. H. 40 cts dp 

N. YORK.— New-York city, Mrs. 

Jerrett, 2 00 

PENN.— Mount Pleasant, Asa 

Smith, 3 05 

VIRw— Norfolk, C. K. Strib- 

bling. Esq 5 00 

S. CAR.— Columbia, Mr. WiUiam 

Shear, 10 00 

OHIO— Jeromeville, J. M'Combs, SO 

Wliole amount of Donations, $ 198 19 
Received fof Tracts sold, 1,706 06 

Tota\ $l,9p^ 25 



THE AMERICAN 

Oh. T.I SrOVSHBHR, 18M, [I«0- 



Sea True No. ail, "ToPumi-" 

REPORT 

OF A aPBCUL OOmOTTEE ON THE EXTENSIOII OP TRACT OPE- 
RATIONS IN FAOAH LAND& 

Ths fbUoviof Repoit, pmeBted to lh« Eieratirc Committee o( 
the Americui Tract Society, claims the attention of all who deiiic 
tin* adTancemGnl of the Redeemer'! kin^oiD. 

The Committee appointed to coniider " what openlngi there may 
be in Divine ProTidence lor exteDding- tbe Socielj'i opentiont m 
fbnign coDQtriei," fatring corresponded with all the Miiaionai; So- 
cietiet in our comstr; known to be engaged in promoting the ipread 
attht Gospel among the Heathen, and haTing iooght, in other ways, 
to obtain inch information as would aid thero in diwhaiging the duly 
assigned Ibem, would ptcsent tbe fallowing as the result of their ex- 

Vol. V. ' 11 Wbom Ho. 8fl, 



1S4 REPORT ON FOREIGN OPERATIONS. [NoV. 

It is, your Committee believe, the unanimous testimony of all who 
have been long^ and successfully engaged in efforts to spread the Gos- 
pel among the Heathen, that if any people are to be thoroughly en« 
lightened and evangelized, the prsbs must be resorted to as a very 
prominent and powerful instrumentality. Hence we find there are 
not less than forty printing presses in connexion with Missionary 
stations iq pagan lands. The living teacher finds it essential, not only 
to instill his instructions into the ear of the pagan, but to embody them 
permanently on the printed page, where they may be daily examined 
and riveted in the mind. 

The teaching of the young in schools, which can only be done effi* 
clently through the medium of the pr^s, is one grand means of ac« 
cess to the minds of the heathen ; and the printed portion of truth, by 
being distributed at festivals, and on other public occasions, may be 
conveyed to thousands and hundreds of thousands who can never be 
brought within the sound of the missionary's voice. The few pages 
of a Tract also, are found, in multitudes of instances, to arrest the at- 
tention, where the entire volume of the Scriptures would lie neglected. 

Your Committee cannot but consider farther, that the work of dif- 
fusing the Gospel among the millions of the pagan world is one of 
such magnitude as to demand the united energies of the Christian 
church, and that Bible and Tract, as well as missionary Societies, 
should take part in it, each in their appropriate sphere. An interest 
in the conversion of the Heathen will thus be more universally diffus- 
ed, and each of these institutions may share in the blessings of la- 
boring for their good. In accordance with these views, the British and 
Foreign Bible Society has been, from year to year, lending a most 
vigorous aid in the evangelizing of pagan nations. Its appropria- 
tions for this object, the last year, exceeded $60,000; and the whole 
number of languages vand dialects in which it has aided in printing 
and circulating the Bible is now 146. The American Bible Society 
has, in a similar manner, extended its operations abroad, though less 
the last year, on account of thenoble efibrt in which it has been en- 
gaged in our own country. The Religious Tract Society of London 
extends its aid, by grants of Tracts, money and paper, to all the prin- 
cipalfritish missionary stations among the Heathen. It appropriated, 
the last year, 900 reams of paper for India, and in all not far from 
$14,000 in foreign grants ; and has aided in publishing Tracts in forty- 
eight different languages. 

The American Tract Society has, since its formation, appropriated 
$450 for Tract operations in Greece, $200 for Ceylon, $600 for Bur- 
mah ; und has printed 640,000 pages in Hawaiian for the Sandwich 
Islands ; and the Committee are not aware that any portion of the So- 
ciety's funds has been more usefully expended. 

Communieations from Foreign Missionary Societies. 

In answer to letters addressed by your Committee, the Society of 
the United Brethren have expressed their grateful acknowledgments 
for the aid this Society has already afforded in small grants to th'^ir 
missionaries, especially of Tracts in the English, Spanish, and Crer- 
man languages; and though unprepared immediately to define the 
amount of aid which will be needed in connexion with their stations. 



1830.] REPOET ON FOUSien OPERATIONS. 1S5 

they will most heartily embrace the co-operation of this Society in 
their arduous labors to disseminate the Gospel. 

The Domestic and Foreign Missionary Society of the Protestant 
Episcopal Church express their grateful sense of the kindness of this 
Society in the inquiries proposed to them by your Committee, and 
have made application for grants of Tracts in various languages for 
Liberia and the Mediterranean, which have already been delivered, 
to the amount of 150,000 pages, and also for a further appropriation 
in money for their mission in Greece. 

The American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions have 
communicated the following definite information relative to the prin* 
cipal stations under then: charge. 

" At the presses in Bombay" says their communication, ** there 
were printed, during the year 1828, besides portions of the New Tes- 
tament, Hymns, &lc., 284,000 pages of such works as would come 
within the province of the Tract Society to distribute. The two presses 
there might probably print 3,000,000 pages annually, of which, ex- 
cluding portions of the Scriptures, one half would properly come 
within the sphere of the Tract Society ^s labors. The missionaries, in 
their last joint letter, express their sense of the importance of distri- 
l>uting Tracts, the wide field open for their distribution, and their pre- 
sent inadequate supply." It is estimated, that, with the aid of the 
three additional laborers, who have recently embarked for this mi*- 
aion, in translating and distributing, " there might he annually circu- 
iated fVom that station 1,600,000 pages of TractSj the expense of 
which would be not far from $1,600.'' 

In respect to the mission at Ceylon, the same communication says, 
'* The population on the island, and on the adjacent continent, speaking 
the Tamul language, is very great, (estimated at 11,000,000,) and easily 
accessible. They receive Tracts readily, and to a considerable ex- 
tent with eagerness ; and there seems to be a state of mind prevalent 
peculiarly favorable to their receiving benefit in this manner. The 
njissionaries can prepare Tracts, and the members of the seminary, 
the teachers and superintendents of the Free Schools, and the native 
church members generally, furnish great facilities for sending them, 
under favorable circumstances, to all classes of the people. Probably 
$1,000 annually might be usefully appropriated for Tract operations 
in connexion with this mission." 

A communication from this Mission, addressed to your Secretary, 
fully confirms the above statements; expresses great gratitude for 
your donation of $200, and states that it arrived at a time when their 
press was on the point of being stopped for want of funds. " No me- 
thod of doing good in Ceylon, or India,** they add, "mm promising, 
with the same sacrifice, as the distribution of Tracts. They are better 
adapted for general circulation than even the Scriptures, among such 
a population as we find here, who read but little ; and they feel not 
the sun, and sink not under the climate, as does the living missionary." 

*' The missionaries at the Sandwich Islands say they can prepare 
matter for printing 600 reams, or 6,666,400 duodecimo pages annual- 
ly, of which one half at least will be matter proper for the Tract So- 
ciety to print. The desire of the people for religious books, and the 



1S6 REPORT 09 PORBION OPERATIONS. [Nov. 

cxtenBive and extending ability to read are well known. JVb Tracts 
or hooks renuUn in Vie Dtposiiofy there— 4hej are immediately distri- 
buted and read. The people are prepared to receive and be bene- 
fitted by a whole circle of religioiu reading. Appropriate, say, $1,600 
annually for Tract operations." 

** As to the Mediterranean,^* the same communication says, " there 
was published at the Malta presses during the year 1829, 2,793,000 
pages, of which 2,073,200 pages were suitable matter to be published 
by the Tract Society.'' More than 60 Tracts in Modem Greek, more 
than 40 in Italian, and " 21 in Turko-Armenian have already been 
printed, and it is expected the way will be opened by the contem- 
plated mission to Armenia for extended distribution there. By the 
revival of the mission in Syria the way is opened for commencing 
the printing and distribution of Tracts extensively in Arabic. The 
adjustment of the affairs of Greece, and the stipulation for a tolera- 
tion of all forms of Christianity, will probably afford opportunity for 
greatly increasing the circulation in that country. We have no hesi- 
tation in saying that the American Tract Society might advanta- 
geously appropriate $1,600 annually to this mission." 

The Rev. Jonas King, in a letter to the American Tract Society, 
dated Tenos, February 16, informs, that he had then distributed 
200,0CO pages of Tracts, chiefly in schools in Greece ; having received 
from the Malta press Tracts to the value of $134 furnished by the 
funds of this Society. 

As to the Cherokees, Mr. Thompson, missionary at Carmel, in April 
last, wrote as follows : — " Why could not a few thousands of small 
Handbill Tracts be printed for distribution among this people? If 
the friends and supporters of missions could see with what avidity the 
copies of Matthew's Gospel and the hymns were received and perused 
by them, I am sure they would say. Give them more. Such Tracts 
would cost but little, and thousands of them could be put into the 
hands of as many thousand Cherokees, who could and would read 
them. I think the minds of the people are prepared to receive in- 
struction with great facility from small portions of Scripture and 
other appropriate matters printed in the form of Tracts." Probably 
8 or 10 Tracts might, to good advantage, be printed and circulated 
among this people in editions of 1000 or 2000. Appropriate, say 
$300." 

The Board of the Baptist General Convention, to which $600 has 
been recently appropriated by this Society for Tract operations in 
connexion with their mission in Burmahf among the 17,000,000 of 
whose population it is a most interesting fact that the ability to read 
is generally diffused, express great gratitude for the aid which has 
already been afforded to that station. They do not now specify the 
amount of aid which will be required at that station in future, but 
request supplies of English Tracts, to be distributed in connexion 
with their missions at Liberia, at the Sault de St. Marie, and among 
the Cherokees, which have been granted to the amount of 45,000 
pages. 



1680.] REPORT ON FOREIGN OPERATIONS. 1S7 

CHna, Hamimrg, and South America, 

The two missionaries from this coantry laboring in China, to whom 
40,000 pages were appropriated at the time of their departure, will 
doubtless need additional aid in their Tract operations. 

A communication from the Lower Saaony Tract Society y located at 
Hambtargf representing the severe civil and ecclesiastical tyranny 
with which that Society is called to contend, under which a member 
of the committee was compelled to pay 56 marks as the penalty for 
meeting at his own house about 20 friends to read the Bible and sing 
and pray, expresses their great want of pecuniary means, and adds, 
** How would our hearts rejoice if our transatlantic brethren could 
give us, in any way, some assistance V* 

The Rev. William Torrey, of Buenos Ayrea, has for two years cir- 
culated there, in English and Spanish,, near 100,000 pages of this So- 
ciety's Tracts annually. In a late communication, accompanied by 
a Spanish translation of the Young Cottagert he states that many 
thousand copies of the Tracts of the London Religious Tract Society 
have also been circulated there, and adds, '* It is now quite com- 
mon for those who have received some Tracts to return for more, 
and for those who have read one of each kind to inquire for new ones. 
No dissatisfaction with the Tracts has come to my knowledge from 
any quarter, except with a Tract containing the decalogue, which was 
by one family denounced as heretical, because it embraced the second 
commandment." 

The Rev. Mr. Thompson, who has for some time been laboring in 
Mexico, states, that 6,000 Spanish publications, chiefly small books 
for children, received by him from the London Tract Society, and 
advertised in the principal newspapers, toere all sold in Mexico in a 
single toeek ! In a letter addressed to the London Society soon after, 
he requests them to send to Mexico 4,000 copies of each kind of Chil- 
dren's Tracts in Spanish which that Society had then published. 

The Rev. Messrs. Torrey and Thompson both represent, that Nar- 
rative Tracts, and especially if neatly printed, with engravings, and 
in a large type, and sold at a reasonable rate, would find an extensive 
and an increasing circulation in South America. 

Summary Result cf the abooe It^formation. 

If we assume the above estimates of the appropriations needed in 
connexion with the several missions, as far as specified, to be correct : 
viz. for Bombay, the Sandwich Islands, and the Mediterranean, 
$1600 each ; for Ceylon $1000; and for the Cherokees $300; and 
add to these, for missions connected with the Moravian and Episcopal 
Churches, each $600 ; for those connected with the Baptist Genera) 
Convention $1500 ; for China $300; for South America $500, and for 
the West India Islands, British America, and other fields for Foreign 
distribution $400, we have a total of $9,500 annually which this So- 
ciety might usefully appropriate for foreign countries. 

Your Committee are of the opinion that, though this amount may 
be greater than would be actually employed within a year, if imme- 
diately appropriated, yet were it known to our brethren who are la- 
boring at the various stations that such an amount could be annoally 

II* 



13t USEFULNESS OF TRACTS. [NOT 

appropriated, they would immediately ^oilarg^e their Tract operations 
and find useAil opportunities to employ the whole amount and more. 
And were this Society to en^er with energy on this work, your Com- 
mittee believe it might thus be instrumental in very widely diffusing 
the Gospel among the Heathen, awakening a spirit of inquiry, pre- 
paring the way for the Bible and other missionary labors, and of do- 
ing a work which in the day of judgment would tell in the salvation 
of a great multitude of souls. 

The Executive Committee have referred this important subject for 
consideration at their next meeting. Their only source of embarrass* 
ment is the ward ofpeeumaiy means. We entreat those who desire 
the conversion of the pagan world to make those contributions to the 
Society for foreign operations, without which these important open- 
ings cannot be occupied. 



USEFULNESS OF TRACTS, 

If any friend of the Tract cause has had a less vivid impression of 
its usefulness than in months past ; and has been left to become re- 
miss in his endeavors to conrey these messages of salvation to every 
family and soul, we pray that the cheering facts which follow may 
arouse him to duty, and that kindred results may be found to accom- 
pany his own exertions. 

TRACT BLESSED TO A GENTLEMAN IN GEORGIA. 

A merchant in Georgia says, As an Influential man from an adjoin- 
ing county was passing our store, somewhat disguised with liquor, I 
gave him Kittredge's Address. He recently called on me, adverted 
to the circumstances, and said he had since not only drank no ardent 
spirit, but the Tract had been the means of bringing him seriously to 
think of his soul's great interest. 

THE TRACT "HEAVEN LOST." 

The Secretary of an Auxiliary in Clinton Co., N. Y., thus writes r 
'' A young lady, whose mind had been previously excited to reflec- 
tion on her lost condition as a sinner, realizing her utter helplessness, 
was almost in despair of mercy, considering her state unalterably 
fixed, when the Tract Heaven Lost came to her hands. She was much 
impressed with the sentiment contained in the second r>erse of the hymn 
on the cover; and with a desire that the request contained in it might 
be granted her, she read the Tract. While reading, her feelings were 
greatly changed. She discovered that she had previously had no just 
views of God's mercy, nor of herself as a sinner. She now believed 
God to be both able and willing to save all that would come unto him. 
She resolved to give herself up to God and plead for mercy, and she 
then experienced that love to God and Christians which she before 
knew nothing of; and her heart was led out in prayer and praise to 
him for his mercy. She has since united with the church in this vil- 
lage, and appears to be an humble and consistent Christian.'' 



^ 18^'***^*^ U8EFULKK8S OF TKACTS. 189 

TH£ TRACT " TO A PERSON ENGAGED IN A LAWSUIT." 

A gentleman in Connecticat had become engaged in a legal con- 
test, from which neither the persuasions of friends nor the entreaties 
of his wife could induce him to desist, when a pious neighbor received 
a letter for him from his attorney. Presuming it was on the subject 
of the pending controversy, he inserted the Tract To a person en- 
gaged in a lawsim within the folds of the letter, and presented it with- 
out comment. A few days afterward, meeting the man to whom he 
had carried the letter, he took him aside, saying, <' Now tell me how 
that book came to be in the letter you handed me. I supposed my law- 
yer sent it, but he denies knowing any thing about it. I now think it 
must have come from you. It was precisely adapted to my case. / 
went the next day and paid the smn required-^the contest is at an end — 
and I feel much better than I did before,^' 



19 



THE TRACT " MORE THAN ONE HUNDREP ARGUMENTS," &c: 

About six months ago, says the Boston Recorder, a pious lady in this 
city sent the Tract '* More than One Hundred Arguments for the Di- 
viniiy of Christy ^ to a friend in a neighboring state, desiring that he 
would give it a prayerful perusal. He has informed her that the Spirit 
of God has blessed it to the opening of his eyes on the glorious charac- 
ter of our Lord Jesus Christ and the great atonement through his 
blood for perishing sinners. 

The same lady has since received a letter from another friend to 
whom she sent the same Tract^ saying that he should have cause of 
everlasting gratitude for what God had done for him by the reading 
of that Tract : that he had heretofore looked on the Savior as merely 
man, and consequently with a guilty indifference, biit now he sees him 
to be God over all, God manifest in the flesh, for his redemption, and 
humbly hopes he has been brought to love and adore him with his 
whole heart. 



CHILD'S TRACT BLESSED TO AN AGED SINNER. 

Within the bounds of every religious congregation, says a clergy, 
man in Connecticut, there are some who neglect the means of grace, 
and come to maturity without hope and without God in the world. 
They can scarcely be allured to the house of God on any occasion, 
and spend the Sabbath in idleness and sin — haters of religion, and 
persecutors of the saints. A man of this description, who had a piou» 
wife, carried his enmity toward religion so far as to enter the praying 
circle and drag her forcibly away. He remained in this desperate 
state. of mind tUl a Sabbath School was formed in the neighborhood, 
with a small library. Yery unexpectedly he permitted his children to 
attend. One of them brought home a small Tract in miniature shape, 
containing the History of the Conversion of a Little Child. This Tract 
lay on the table, and one rainy day, to the astonishment of his wife, 
(for he never read a book of a religious kind, not even the Bible,) he 
took up the Tract and sat down to read. Before he had finished read- 
ing he arose in an agony of feeling, and left the house. He was in 



/ 



A 



J 



1^ USEFULN£8S OF TRACTS. [Ro^. 

great digtress in riew of his past life, abandoning at intervals the hope 
of mercy, for a number of days, when he was released from the bond- 
age of iniquity, and found all things new. On learning the tidings of 
his marvellous conversion, I called one evening to see him : it was the 
hour of evening prayer. The sound of his voice, mellowed by peni- 
tence, humility and joy, as it reached me on the threshold, while read- 
ing a portion of Scripture applicable to his former condition, I can 
never forget. It is about two years smce, aAd his life has been that 
of a humble and sincere believer. 



TRACTS PRESENTED TO A FAMILY OF GERMAN EMIGRANTS. 

A gentleman in New-York city, says, Just as the steam-boat had left 
the wharf for Philadelphia I stepped into the steamboat office, where 
I observed two or three families, men, women, and children, who had 
arrived a day or two before from Crermany, but were detained from 
want of the requisite funds from pursuing their journey. Most of the 
children were walking the room in the habit of their country ; but one 
lay sick on a bed carelessly thrown on the floor. Having one German 
Tract only with me. No. 32, '' To aU who Wotdd be Saved^" 1 pre- 
sented it to a woman about forty years of age standing near me» She 
gazed on it and on me. All was silent, as neither of us could under- 
stand the other. The title caught her attention and she began to read. 
I watched her ; she sighed and turned her face from me, wiped away 
the tear that stole in her eye, and again proceeded* It was more 
than she could bear ; the Tract fell from her hand and she burst into 
a flood of tears, and continued sobbing until I left her. My friend 
who was then with me visited them again a few hours afterward ; she 
was still reading the same Tract. He presented her another; ** 7%6 
Siwur directed to the Savior.** In reading this she was, if possible, 
more deeply affected than before. Whether she was convinced of sin 
and felt her need of a Savior, eternity will disclose. 



TRACT "BLIND ELLEN" BLESSED TO A YOUNG LADY IN VIRGINIA. 

Mrs. E., an intelligent and pious lady, says an Agent of the Ame- 
rican Tract Society, informed me of a young woman in Virginia who 
was much benefited by the perusal of a Tract. She was very much 
alarmed at her condition as a sinner, but knew not where to seek re- 
lief. Information of her state of mind was communicated to Mrs. £. 
by a negro servant, through whom she sent her several Tracts, and 
among them SUnd Ellen. About six weeks after this Mrs. £. received 
a letter of thanks from Miss C, stating that the above named Tract 
had been the means, as she hoped, of bringing her to the knowledge 
of the truth as it is in Jesus, and of leading her to trust in him ^ her 
Savior. 



TRACT BLESSED TO A MAN FISHING ON THE SABBATH. 

A minister and a student of divinity, in going on a Sabbath day to 
visit the inmates of a hospital, observed on a bridge, which they 
crossed, &n illiterate foreigner, to them a total stranger, engaged in 



K" 



1890.] AMBBICAH TRACT SOCIETY. 141 

fishing. They presented him a Tract. He said he could not read. 
One of them proposed reading it to him ; 'to which he assented. It 
was a Tract of four pages. By the time it was half read, accompa- 
nied by a few passing remarks, the fisherman began to haul up his 
book out of the water ; and when the reading was finished, although 
not a word had been said directly against Sabbath-breaking during 
the interyiew, nor was the Tract on the subject of the SaU>ath, he 
said spontaneously and feelingly, ** 1 will never fish again on Sunday.'' 



AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 

The Report of the Committee on the openings for the Society's 
operations in foreign parts, though occupying a considerable space 
7n our present number, will repay the attention of the reader, and 
cannot fail to convey an impression of the magnitude of the work in 
which the Society is called to labor. 

In our next we hope to insert some very encouraging facts, show- 
ing the usefulness and importance of the Monthly Tract distnbulion. 

The Rkv. Ctrus W. Allen, the Society's devoted Agent in Mis- 
souri and Illinois, having been suddenly attacked with a fever, which 
brought him to the borders of the grave, the excellent missionary in 
whose family he was received and treated as a brother, has made a 
communication, showing that his sickness was occasioned by exces- 
sive labor and exposures, and stating that, from June to September, 
Agents in that part of the country must not ride under the burning 
sun at noon, nor in the heavy damps of the night. 



MUST THE WOBK MOST HAPPILY BEGUN, BE NOW RE* 

LINQUISHED? 

The followers of Christ, in laboring for him, are bound to pertevere, 
even amid gloom, and discouragement, and persecution and death. 
And shall it ever be written of Christians of our day, when God is 
blessing all their exertions, " They were prompt in beginning noble 
enterprises, but their seal did not endure. Objects grand and attrac- 
tive were eagerly commenced; but, with their novelty ceased the 
efforts for their promotion. One vigorous impulse was given at the 
onset-— the work called done— and deserted!" 

Followers of Christ, if there is any danger that this shall justly 
be said of us, there is not a dollar of aU our substance — ^not a nerve 
of our arm^nor an emotion of our hearts, that must not immediately 
be put in requisition for that cause for which alone we live. There is 
great responsibility somewhere in reference to suttaining, as well as 
commencing, benevolent efibrts; and it rests on every Christian. It 
rests upon him now — ^it rests upon hinuelf—he cannot transfer it to 
others—it challenges now, his own pertonal laborSf and pecuniary con^ 
trilnUiont, and imceasing, wrestling prayen. 



14£ LEGACIES. [Nov. 

Th««e remarks have a forcible application to the state of the exist- 
ing efforts of the Ameriean Tract Society in the VaUty of the West. 
Much of that wide field has been explored — the activity of Christians, 
where they exist, on the one hand ; and the moral wants, on the other, 
of the multitudes inhabiting the New Settlements and living without 
the Gospel, are ascertained — ihere are but few families comparatively 
in which at least some one member cannot read — ^Tracts are very gene- 
rally received with much thankfulness and joy— God is blessing them 
in the conversion of many souls— and yet it is the opinion of those 
laborers in this cause who have been longest in the field, and have 
had the best opportunity to judge, that not more than one fourth part 
of the population West of the JSUeghany mountains have been yet sup- 
plied uM so much as one TVac^ to a family. 

And the question now recurs, shall this work, in this stage of it, be 
relinquished, or suffered to decline? The haad of God is manifestly 
in it. Every thing conspires to animate the churches to carry it for- 
ward. Four new Agents have just entered the field, two of them, it is 
hoped, as permanent laborers ; and the only obstacle that now presses 
upon the Society is the want of pecuniary means. These, for some 
months, have been unequal to the Society's expenses, and must be 
^ery much increased, and that speedily, or the labors of the Society 
l>e greatly abridged. We appeal to those who can feel for the wants 
ef Zion — ^who have a heart to pray, and to contribute and to labor for 
her advancement, and ask whether this Society shall fail of support, 
now when its prospects of usefulness are greater than ever before* 



LEGACIES. 

An able commumoation has been received from JDr. J, ScuidsTt American Mis* 
liiOBaffy in Ceylon, urging upon every Christian the duty of giving some portion of 
his earthly substance, by legacy ^ to the principal Institutions of the day, for spread- 
ing the Gospel i and annexing, as an incitement to Christians in his native land, a 
list of ths sums which the respective members of the church at Panditerpo, consist- 
iDg chiefly of converts flrom tibe Heathen, have agreed to bequeath to the cause of 
benevolence at their death, amounting in all to 414 rix dollars ; each engaging that 
they wiU» on that account, give nothing less for the same cause during the& life. 



NATCHEZ, (MI.) AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETY. 

The First Annual Report of this Society is published, in connexion 
with a rich and valuable discourse in favor of the Tract cause by the 
Ret. George Potts, of Natchez. If clergymen in our other large 
towns would, on the occasion of the anniversaries of Tract Societies, 
thus publicly advocate their claims, a very great good would be ac- 
complished. 

The Natchez Society has 10 Auxiliaries, which have remitted, dur- 
ing the year, the noble sum of $792 79. Donations from individuals 
during the year, $ 680. Total receipts 9 1,667 87. Sold, during the 
year, 448)520 pages ; besides 633 bound volumes ; 2,653 Children** 
Tracts; 3,90i3 Broadsheets and Handbills; and 4,000 Christian AU 



/ 



1850.] 



PREMlUlf TRACTS. 



14a 



manacs; gratiiitouily distributed 65»859 pages to boatmen, wagoners 
from the interior, &c. The Board bear their testimony to the excel- 
lence of the system of MorUMy Diitiibuiionf which has been prose- 
cuted for several months in Natchez. 

Would to Qod every Auxiliary in the country were as active as this 
has been during the past year. 



IfETHODIST TRACT SOCIETY. 

The Fourth Report of the Tract Society of the Methodist Episcopal Church, was 
presented in the city of New-York, July, 18dO. New Auxiliaries recognized duruig 
the year, SES; making the whole number of Auxiliaries, recognized since the forma- 
tion of the Society, 175. Number of pages issued during the year, 3,065,507. 

A writer in the Christian Advocate and Journal shows, that the Rev. John Wesley 
was active in the distribution of Tracts in 1754, and was the author of several ; and 
claims that the gratuitous circulation of Tracts originated with Wesley, and not 
with the Infidels of France. 



PREMIUM TRACTS. 

The undersigned hereby gives notice, that a benevolent individual has placed at 
his disposal the sum of fifty doUars, to be awarded by Rev. Charles P. M'ljvainei 
of Brooklyn, and Rev. Joel Parker and Rev. Joshua Leavitt, of New-York, to the 
author of the best Tract, " To aUper9an» engaged or inter uted in thenavtgatum 
and trtauportoHon upon Ctmalo and Rml-roadt ;" which shall not exceed eight 
pages in length, and shall be presented on or before the first day of February next. 
It is desired that the Tract shall have a special bearing in favor of the observance 
of the Sabbath. 

The manuscripts should be each accompanied by a sealed envelope containing the 
name of the writer, and may be addressed (poet paid) to 

WILLIAM A. HALLOCK, 144 NaseaiU'StTeet, Nem-York. 

A premium of $50 is also offered for the best Tract On Prayer^ to be awarded 
by Rev. Dr. Fay, of Charlestowu, and Rev. Dr. Edwards and Rev. Mr. Green, oi 
Boston. Tha manuscripts to be presented on or before January 1, 1830, and to be 
addressed to Mr. Aaron Russell, 25 Comhill, Boston ; or William A. Hulock, 144 
Nassau-street, New-York. 

A premium of $50 for the best Tract for ServonUf has been awarded to the ma- 
nuscript with the initials S. W. 

The manuscripts on the Importance of (A« Gespel, its 3fmMtry,«(« Sabbath, &.e. 
are now under consideration. 

No one of the manuscripts on DueUing was considered of such decided excellence 
as to merit the award of the premium offered. 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OP THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

> 

Dnring the month ending October 15, 1830. 
FROM AUXHJARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 



VER.—Middlebury, E. Brewster, Ag. 

MASS.— Monson, Young Men's, Dr. George White, Sec. 

Do. Fern. Miss Olivia Flynt, Sec . . . . 

Pittsfield, Fern. Miss Amelia Danforth, Tr 

Springfield, Sotomon Warriner, Jun. Tr. 

Stockbridg e, Bloses Fairchild, Tr 

R. ISL.— Newport, B. S. Cahoone. Sec 

CONN.— Brooklyn, (Windham Co. Anx.) Edwin Newbury, Ag. 

Huntington, William Mills, Sec 

JewettCity,Fem. Mrs. Maria P. Morgan, Sec. . . . . 
N. YORK.— Bainbridge, Fem. Mrs. Cynthia Mtfu^er, Sec. 
Bridgehampton, Rev. Amzi Francis, Pres 



For TV. 


Don, 


4S45 




16 00 




14 58 


4 85 


400 




S5 23 




175 




2 47 




10 00 




15 10 


700 


200 




4 80 




1 07 





144 



RECEIPTS. 



INOY. 



BuAlo, Orlando Allen, Tr 

Deposit, Delaware Co. (New Soc.) H. Dusenbury, Tr. 

Govemeur, Fern. Mrs. Lucina Parsons, Pros 

Jamaica, L. I. James Rider, Tr 

New Rochelle, Fem. Hannah Brewster, Sec 

NeW'York City Tract Society, Alfred Edwarde IV. . 
Do. by Fem. Aiu. Mrs. J. R. Hurd, Tr. 

Rochester, Monroe Co. Levi A. Ward, Tr. 

Rochester, Ulster Co. S. School Aui^ Rev. B. B. WeitAU, Free. 

Stockton, Miss Sarah Johnson, Tr 

Troy, Charles Lyman, Tr. ........ 

Utica, Edward Vernon, Sec 

N. JER.—Ba8kingridge, Horace Sheldon, See 

Bloomfield, Juv. Robert R. Kellogg-, Sec 

Kingston, Fem. Sfiss Jane K. Comfort, Tr. .... 

Mendham, Fem. Miss Ruth Dayton, Tr. .... 

NeW'Brunswick, A. Suydam, Tr 

Prine«ton, Nassau Hall, E. Pieraen, Sec 

Ramapo, David C. Chrystie, Esq. Tr. 

SomerviUe, Fem. BIrs. Sophia Talmadge, Tr. 

PENN.— Erie, Fem. EmUv Wight, Sec 

Philadelphia Branch, Frederick Erringer, Tr. 

VIR.— Buffalo, Fem 

Prince Edward Co. Union Theol. Seminary, Aristides S. Smith, Sec 
Shady Grove, Brunswick Co. Burwell B. Wilkes, Pros. . 

Winchester, Daniel Gold, Tr 

Do. by their Fem. Aux. Wickliff, 
S. CAR.— Charleston, S. Car. Branch, Rev. John Dickson, Gen. Ag. 
OHIO.— Columbus, Rev. James Hoge, D. D. Ag. 
Granville, Rev. Jacob Little, Pres. ...... 

Vernon, (Trumbull Co. Aux.) Rev. Harvey Coe, Sec. 

MISSOURI— St. Louis, W. S. Olmsted, Tr 

MICH. TER.— Tecunueh, Lenawe County, Fem. Mrs. Mary D. 

Finch, Tr. 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 
CONN.— Warren, Temperance Soc. Lucius C. Rouse, Tr. . 
N. YORK.— Dunkirk, Union Ti*. Soc. J. Van Beuren, Tr. . 
Orange Co. S. School Union, J. Wells, Ag. .... 
Tracts sold at the Depository to individnab, .... 



[ForTr 


Don. 


25 OC 




13 14 




SOC 




4« 


1 43 


IM 


300 


70 001 


53 75 




100 00 




13 20 




ea 




15 00190 00 


50 00 


1 


3S5 


7» 


5 30 




18 31 




300 


900 


333 




39 07 




300 




635 




479 




1000 00 






390 


16 10 




10 00 




40 50 






3 00 


50 00 




30 00 




16 00 




31 00 




30 00 




3 12 




3 16 




340 




1 60 




304 34 





Members for Life, 

CONN.-rGlastenbury, David Hub- 
bard, (in fhU of 130,) . . . flO 00 

N. YORK.— Govemeor, Mrs. Lu- 
cina Parsons, SO 00 

Montgomery, Orange Co. Miss Han- 
nah M. Caiidit,by her fhther. Rev. 
R. W. Condit, (in fall of |30,) JO 00 

New. York City, Edward S. HiU, 30 00 

Southampton, L. I. Rev. Daniel 
Beers, by Ladies of his Church 
and Congregation, 30 00 

Vernon, Oneida Co.- Rev. Aaron 
Garrison, by Ladies, .... 30 00 

VIR.— Wmchester, Miss Anna D. 
HoUiday, by a Friend, (in part 
of $20,) . 5 00 

OHIO— Mary Ann, Licking Co. 
David Moore, (in pttrt of ^,) * 10 00 

Annual Director, 

K. YORK.— New-York City, Dr. 



Other Donationt, 



1 00 



BIASS.— Pern, Oliver Nash, . . 

CONN. — ^New-Haven, Jeremiah 
Atwater, S 00 

N. YORK.— East Bkxtmfield, La- 
dies, 900 

New-York City, B(r. James Roose- 
velt, in part, for perpetuating 
"Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, 100 00 

Owego, Tioga Co. Wm.Phitt, Esq. 10 00 

MO.— EwingsviUe, Rev. Finis Ew- 
ing, for Lower Saxony Tract So* 
ciety, Hamburg, ..... SO 00 

The above list contains donatiMi»-> 
For aiding the Lower Saxony Tract 
Socie^, Hamburg, .... $90 00 



In part, for perpetuating Bunyan's 
Pilgrim's Progress, ... 



Whole amoont of Donations, 
Received for Traets sold. 



100 00 

$346 93 

3,003 71 



J. R. B. Rodgers, 9 00| 



Toml, $3,349 63 



THE AMERICAN 

VOL. Y.] DBOSaKSBR, 1830. l^O. 12. 

I ' ' ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ' h . ■ f 

«UIDB 

TO THE SYSTEMATIC 
asONTHZiT TJEUSlCT DZSTAZBUTZOXr. 



The systematic Monthljr Distribution of Tracts, in connectiop with 
other labors performed by the Distributors for the spiritual welfare 
of the families Tisited, has been so successfully adopted in numerous 
places in our country, and has so extensively arrested the attention 
of Evangelical Christians, that the Committee of the American Tract 
Society have been induced to prepare this document as a guide and 
encouragement to such as engage in this work. . 

3%e work mart ardwmt and more uteful than vfiUpn^hfy hjf num^ at 

first, he apprdiended. 

We have no hesitation in saying, that this work claims the serioua' 
Attention of all the followers of Christ, and to be viewed by them in 
its various and immensely important bearings. Especially should ht 
nature and influence be faithfully examined and considered by alt 
who are to he engaged in U; that they may bring to it qualifications 
and efforts corresponding with its magnitude, and which, by the bless- 
ing of God, shall ensure success. 

Nature of the Work Explained, 

It is a first principle of the Gospel, that it is a mbssaos to bb cab* 
KiBO AVD TEHDBRKD " TO sviRT CREATURE." The public preach- 
ing of the commissioned Minister is doubtless the promineat means 
of its difiusion ; but great multitudes, even in Christian lands, attend 
on no stated preaching of the Gospel ; and to many who do thus at- 
tend, it is the undivided testimony of the devoted ministers of Christ, 
that personal reUgious eonveroation at the fireside a the means blessed 
by the Holy Sp'urit in bringing them to God. It is generally agreed 

YoL.Y. 12 WHOLxNe.67. 



146 eUIDE TO THE SYSTEMATIC {DjCC^ 

•Iso, in all Protestant Erangelical chnrches, tljiat .every professor of 
religion has personally important duties to perform, both in commu- 
nicating the tidings of salvation to those who are far from God, and in 
the iNiilding up of Christians in their most holy faith. The filling up 
of all this great department of labor is involved, to some extent at 
least, in the work now under consideration. 

Three dittinet depcaimenXs of usefulnus involved in ihis'tpork* 

1. The good accomplished by the Tract itself, ** By this method of 
distribution/' as has been remarked by one of the most intelligent and 
Active clergymen of the age, " that great object is effected of bring- 
ing Divine truth into coniaet wi^ men." In the miscellaneous me- 
thods of dbtribution, a great portion of the population receive no 
Tracts at all ; and many who are supplied, receive them in circum- 
stances fiur less favorable to their being read, than if presented in the 
peace and quiet of domestic life. 

'* The method,*' as another very eminent man in the churches has 
said, " is admirable, as it gives out successively small portions of 
truth at intervals: one Tract this month, and another the next, an4 
anothJBr in the month succeeding : always new, and never enough t<> 
satiate" — ^like the ".Tree of Life, bearing twelve manner of fruits, and 
yielding her fruit every month ; and the leaves of it are for the heal- 
ing of the nationi." 

2. The good done hy the DisirUnUor inddentaUy ; by personal re- 
ligious conversation, and the various other means specified on a sul>- 
sequent page, under the head of '* Duties of the Distributor/* 

3. Tht spiritual ben^ to the Distributors themselves. No greater 
blessing can come upon the churches, than that all their members 
should be brought, with prsyer to God and earnest longings for the 
eternal welfare of men, to engage actively in labors for their salva- 
tion. This system of effort enlists many . in such a service. It calls 
them to the exercise of Christian self-denial ; acquaints them with the 
spiritual wants of the souls around them ; causes them to feel their de-. 
pendance on God, and to plead with him for the gift of the Holy 
Spirit to attend their efforts; rouses them from their supineness 
and inactivity ; and trains them for glorious warlare, as a host of 
God's elect. 

7%e work commended to Auxiliary Tract Sodelies, * 

On the Officers of Branch and Auxiliary Tract Societies, wherever 
tiiey exist,, derolves appropriately the responsibility of conducting 
thisL work; and to it we would invite their special attention. If en- 
tered upon and prosecuted with proper energy, in dependence upon 



18S0.] XONTBI.T TKACT DI8TB.IBt7TlON. lit 

God, there will be few places io which ft sufficient number of Distri- 
butors and an adequate amount of funds cannot be obtained. 

Ladies may praucuie ike work wccenfuUy. 

Except in large cities and towns, there is ho obstacle to the entire 
prosecution of this work bjr Ladies ; as their efficiency and success in 
sustaining it hitherto, in numerous places in our country, abundant!/ 
testifies. 

Concentraiion of Be^ponsJibxlity. 

It is an important item of this sjstem of effort to assign to each in- 
dividual his own appropriate sphere of labor, in which there shall be 
no division of responsibility. Hence each Ward, or division, is as* 
signed to one Superintendent, each District to one Distributor, &c., 
who is alone responsible for the duties referred to him. 

Neeetnfy of System and PunctuaUly* 

. In this work to many wheels are set in motion that unless the 
system of efforts be well digested and arranged, some of them will 
fail of moving, and the whole machine become disorganized. To 
proceed with system will also, beside securing success, greatly 
abridge the labor required. We cannot therefore urge too strongly 
upon all who shall engage in this work to mature their plans, to 
bring every part of the system Into operation under thcf mosf favor- 
able circumstances, and sustain it with the strictest punetoality . Witk 
this view we hope the following hints may not be without their use* 

PUTIES OF THE SOCIETT, OB. BOARD, OR COMMITTEE BY WHOM 

THIS WORK IS UNDERTAKEN. 

I. Appointmeni of SuperiniendenU. The first question to be deter- 
mined is whether the portion of countiy to be occupied is so large M 
to require more than one superintendent! and if ao, how many. In 
supplying a town or village, embracing within ftt limits but one or 
two thousand souls, only one superintendent may be necessaiy ; in 
supplying a county, one will be required to each town or village ; and 
in large cities, one to eactf Ward. The requisite number bemg de- 
termined, faithful and qualified individuals should be appointed to 
this office, to constitute, if more than one, the " Monthly Distribution 
Committee"— « service which may well command the efforti|ofthe 
best men In the churches, and from which none should excuse them- 
selves unless imperiously forbidden by Pforidence, or conscious that 
others, whose efforts can be secured, are better qualified for its suc- 
cessful discharge. Every consistent maMore should alto be taken 



14ft ftlll»S VO TBE STSTBUATIC [DeC* 

that Mch Sttp€date»deol nay full/ undcrfUod and apprtciata th« 
work tt> ba perfarm^d, aad fcal iU rasponMliility. 

2. AppaUUmifU of a CtrnmiUee far sekeling the Tra^. It hat been 
coDttdered aa eueotial kem of this tystem of eflbrt, to distribute co* 
pies of the same Tract id each month, throughout each citj, town, or 
village. This being done, the distribution may be continued, from 
year to year, without presenting the same Tract twice to any. The 
appointment of a Special Committee for selecting the Tracts will be 
useful, as particular Tracts may be, at different times, more especial- 
ly appropriate to the state of a people, and as it is indispensable that 
the Tracts for successive months be ordered and procured In time 
for the distribution. To secure this object it will be advisable for the 
Committee to select and order Tracts beforehand for several montba' 
distribution; especially if they obtain them at the Depository of ft 
Branch, which may be nnaUe to Aimish them without ordering a 
fresh supply from the Parent Society. It will often facilitate the pro- 
curing of Tracts to specify several, from which the proper number 
may be fiirwasded of such af the Depoeitoiy of the Braacb nay 
contain. 

8. Froeurwg of CM4t t/ in$truUi(m for the DutHbtOare, Mcnfe ito* 
ports, ^c. On the cover of this document may be found a copy of • 
Card of iostroctions '* to a Monthly Tract Distributor;'* blanks of a 
Pistribtttor's and Superintendent's Report ; and a blank notice for a 
meeting of Distributors; all o( which may be obtained at the General 
Depository. The first mentioned Card it is especially desiraUe shoaM 
be placed in the hands of every Distributor, as many will be liable to 
perform their work superficiUly, from a partial view of the duties it 
involves. 

Each Superintendent should also be furnished with a blank book 
in which he may keep apermanent record of his procecdinga. 

4. Mutings to hear the monthly results. The appointment of a stated 
religious meeting at which the results of each month's distribution 
may be presented to the friends of 2Uon, will do much to excite a 
general interest in this work, and to stimulate those engaged in it to 
punctuality and faithfulness. 

Dimes OP THE "MONTHLY DISTRIBUTION COHMTrTEE." 

This Committee should meet statedly at the expiration of the time 
designated for each month's distribution, to receive the reports of the 
respective superintendents, whiv h should be brought together by the 
Secretary of the C-ommittee in a suitable form to be presented at a 
meeting of the friends of the cause, or to belaid before the public in 
auch manner as may be (iipoght expedient. This Conuaittee, in view 



1850;] 



UOSntr TRACT DISTRIBUTION. 



T49 



of the factf oommunieated in tbo floperiotendent't reportf, shoiild 
constantly devise means for rendering the work in the highest degr^ 
successful; and see that it is faifhAiUy prosecuted throughout the en- 
tire field committed to their charge : that no Tracts placed in the bands 
of Distributors may remain undistribnted, and no families fail of be* 
iflg supplied. 

DUTIES OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF A WARD OR DIVISION. 

1. The territory explored and dimded into Distriett, — ^The territory 
assigned to a Superintendent should be carefully explored and divided 
lAto Districts; each of which, in its location and the number of families 
it embraces, shall be convenient and suitable to be occupied by one Dis- 
tributor. These Districts, in the dense population of a city, may em- 
brace 50 or 60 families each ; in a more sparse population, a less 
number. 

2. I%e Ditlriett numbered and iK^/Saeil.— The Superintendent should 
draw for his own use a map of his entire Ward, or Division, on which 
the several Distributors' Districts should be accurately defined and 
numbered. Small maps of tbe Districts may then be drawn to be 
placed in the hands of the respective Distributors, each numbered as 
on the Superintendent's map, and having its boundaries so accurate- 
ly defined that the Distributors shall not be exposed to mistake their 
appropriate fields of labor* 

8. Superintendent* t Booft.— In the blank book furnished the Super- 
intendent, he should insert, in a legible form, to be always convenient 
for reference—- 

(1.) A map of the Ward or Division, with the Districts defined and 
numbered. 

. (2.) A tabular list of the Districts, their boundaries, and the Dis- 
tributor to whom each is assigned^ thus : 



No. of the 
JXttrieL 



Boumdarf of 
the DiMtrieU 



JfXoiHimiar's Nmm und JUoidemce. 



(3.) A tabular list of the Districts, with the results of each month's 
distribution, as reportea by the Distributors, thus: 

Jurauy, • 1€3 fl Feb. 183 



J9o, of the 
DUtriet. 



Wh»lo No. 
ofFomiUeo. 



No.efFi 
ouppUetL 



Ifo.ofFi 
refuting. 



No, 

Fam, 



Fam. 



riifuoimf. 



N 

I 



I 



The Superintendent's Book, thus prepared, will show him, at a 
glance, how many male and how many female Distributors are em- 
ployed; where each Distributor resides; by what Distributor aOy 
given District or family is supplied ; how many Tracts each Distrilnt- 
tor will require for his District on a succeeding month ; and the re- 
sults of the DIttribtttOTS* ReporU befaig added together, he will have 

12* 



150 «UIBK TO THB STITSMATIC [OcC« 

the whole avnibtr of Auailiet m tlie Want or DtvUaon, tte^hofe 
aamber luppUed, and the whole nuBiber refusiog. 

Some Superioteodeotf, it is feared^ will think it too tedious to pre- 
pare tuch a book as we have described, but it can be prepared in m 
single evening; and the results of the Reports of each month being 
accurately entered^ it will tare bim much time, labor, and in- 
convenience. 

4. i^mUifteatimSB reqttUm in 2Ki<rihtferr.-*The SuperinteBdent 
•hould consider that the ultimate success of this work must depend, 
in a very high degree, upon the qualifications of the Distrii>oton. 
They will be called to address persons of every grade and character 
in the community, and, in some sense, to represent before them t^e 
Tract cause and the cause of Zion. If qualified for their work and 
faithful, they may do very much to allay prejudice and gain an ac- 
cess for the Gospel to those who have hitherto rejected it. They 
should possess a good degree of intelligence, some acquaintance with' 
society, a spotless reputation ; but above all should be persons who 
have drunk deep into the spirit of Evangelical piety ; who have a 
knowledge of the Scriptures, a heart full of love to the souls of men, 
a spirit of prayer, and humble dependence on God for direction in 
the path of duty, Christian self-denial, mildness and forbearance ; 
that they may be an example of the meekness and love of the Cros- 
pel they commend, and themselves an <* epistle" to be "known and 
read of all men.'* It will be a bright day to the Christian church 
when all those, whether male or female, whom God has distinguished 
with gifts and qualifications, shall account it a privilege and a duty to 
be found faithfully engaged in such a service. 

6. Obtaimng the DittrSbutori.^^ln no place are fkithful and quali- 
fied Distributors more likely to be found' than in the pray er-meetinga 
connected with the several Evangelical churches. The Superintend- 
ent may attend these prayer-meetings, and with the aid of the Pastors 
of the churches with which they are connected, present before them^ 
the nature and usefulness of this work, and the duties to be perform- 
ed, particularly as described in the Card '* To a Tract Distributor ;*' 
and may then take the names of such suitable persons, male or female, 
as are willing to become Distributors ; usually referripg to Gentle-- 
men such Districts, if any, as embrace a very vicious and profligate 
population. In some eases it may be judged preferable to invite a 
special meeting of those who may be expected to become Distributors, 
or to call on such persons individually at their own places of abode. 

6. Monthly meeting of the Dittrilmtorsfbr prayer. — It will be found 
eminently useful to obtain a meeting of the Distributors each month, 
either immediately before commencing their distributions, or imme- 
dietely after the expiration of the time in which the distribution is to 
be performed, for prayer and mutual edification and encouragement 
in this work. Here each individual may freely express the impres- 
sions on his own mind; the spiritual satisfaction or benefit derived ; 
the most successful methods of performing the distribution, JSic. Such 
meetings which, if thought desirable, may be held in connection with 
the meeting above referred to for receiving the monthly results of the 



1890.] uomtULt vtuLCT niSTftrBUTio*. 151 

distrilmtioii, wHI be fmind rery pleasant end profitable, andcsiciitial* 
1/ to promote the eaecew of the work. 

7. CondeM$tsdview tfikt nwM^ r«iiitt««— *Thi« thoald be prepared 
by each Superintendent in time to be presented at the meeting of 
the " Monthly Distribution Committee/' •or at such other meeting 
4s may be held to receive the results of each month's distribution ; 
embodying the statistical results of the several Distributor's reports, 
ftuch interesting facts as shaU have been commvmcated faj them m 
writing or verbally, and whatever eke nay haveoccarred to his ow« 
mind as important to be communicated. 

8. P m i dw a gi fy in tht Sajrentif eaienf .-»This will be essential, as the 
Distributors will be likely in this respect to look to him for an ex- 
ample. He should see that the Tracts are furnished on or before the 
first day of the month, and Ikil not to obtain a report from each Dis- 
tributor immediately after the 15tb, that all may understand that tha 
dbtribtttion emmo^ %€ poB^pomid beyond Ibe time appointed. 

DUTIES OF THE DISTRIBUTOR. 

The success of this system of effort, as already intimated, depends, 
more titan upon any other one pohit, on the manner in which each 
Distributor occupies the District assigned him. If he merely leaves 
a Tract at the door of the several families in the District, without ex- 
plaining the nature and design of the distribution, or doing any thing 
further for their spiritual welfare, the grand objects for which be en- 
gaged will, to a great extent, be lost; and it might have been better, 
had he never assumed the responsibility of becoming a Distributor-, 
and filling a station which, if occupied by others, might have been the 
lAeans of incalculable g^od. 

Before commencing the work, the Distributor should see that hu 
own heart is duly impressed with the worth of the Gospel and the value 
of the soul; and should become familiar with the Tract he is to distri- 
bute, and with the instructions contained in the Card " to a Monthly 
Tract Distributor.*' He should see the heads of families and explain 
to them the richness and excellence of these publications ; that tha 
object of their distribution is purely benevolent ; that the distribution 
is gfia/at/oiif / that It is made to all willing to receive Tracts ; and that 
the heads of Christian families and those in aflluent and easy circum- 
stances, should receive and read them, not merely for the benefit oC 
themselves and their households, but as an encouragement and an 
example to others. He should avail himself of the opportunity afforded 
by the presentation of the Tract for introducing religious conversa- 
tion, as Providence may permit ; recommending the perusal of the 
Scriptures, attendance on public worship, placing the young in Sab* 
bath, Infant, and other schools; and in every way promoting the 
welfare of the families visited, for this world and the world to come.^ 
Especially will such opportunitietofnaefiilncai occur in Tlsitiag tliaae 



152 eniDE to the ststeuatic [Dee. 

in the humble walks of life— the poor, the ignonmt, and the tnffer- 
ing^— who should be sought out with great care, howeyer obscure their 
condition. To such as cannot read, the Tract, or portions of the Bible^ 
may with great profit be read ; and with many opportunity will be 
afforded to engage in prayer. The object, in respect to all, should be 
to proclaim to them *' Jenu ChrUt and Him crucified,^* as Me imfy. 
Savior ofsinnert, and persuade tkem to give their hearts wUhoui dday 
to Hun. In this view of the duties of Tract Distributors, what, in the 
great day, will appear to be the responsibility of those who suffer the 
Tracts, procured by sacred charity, to lie in their hands undistributed, 
or send them by the hands of some one utterly unqualified for these 
duties 7 Every Distributor should be careful to present his report in 
time, that the work may not be incomplete through his means, and 
should add a notice of such interesting circumstances as have oc- 
curred, the value of which will be much enhanced by their being pre- 
sented tfi wriling. 

■• DUTIES OF HINISTERS OF THE GOSPEL IN RELATION TO 

THIS WORK. 

It is confidently believed that every minister of the Gospel who is 
watching for the souls of men, when the nature and influence of this 
work are fully understood, will not only give it his cordial approba- 
tion, but feel that, in the omission of it, one grand means of good to 
the souls around him is neglected. He will see many living far from 
God, whose attention might be arrested by Tracts ; many who absent 
themselves flrom public worship, on whom he will wish the. monthly 
Tract Distributor to call and invite them to attend ; many whom some 
Christian should converse with relative to their souls' salvation, and 
toward whom his multiplied engagements forbid himself discharging 
the duty. And he will also see around him many a professor of reli- 
gion, whose soul is languishing and mouldering in inaction, and 
whose spiritual good might be greatly advanced by his engaging in 
such a service. He will be ready to instruct his flock as t6 the nature 
and usefulness of this work, and the best methods of its performance ; 
to animate them to discharge it faithfully ; and plead with God for his 
Spirit to direct and bless their endeavors. Such a co-operation in 
this effort, it is hoped, every minister of Christ will feel it to be bis 
duty and privilege to give. 

THIS SYSTEM OF EFFORT EQUALLY ADAPTED TO BE USEFUL IN 

CITY AND COUNTRY. 

This work, though commenced in one of our large cities, is found 
equally adapted to be useful in other portions of the country. Souls 
are as precious where the population is more sparse, as in the crowd- 



USP.J MOffTaAT TIUCT Pl8TllIBI7TiaK. 19$ 

e4 citj ; and ^;ciicr«|lj, we apprebeajd, are more susceptible of iaoral 
and religious impression. The Distributor must, indeed, travel far* 
ther, and occupy more time, in visiting sn equal number of families } 
but in our most sparse settlements, famiUes are not so distant that it 
is not our duty to carry them the Gospd ; and it is in such settle«> 
ments especially, that the stated ministrations of the sanctuary are 
not enjoyed. It is doubtless our duty to convey the Gospel to the most 
distant Heathen, and suiely we may reach those comparatively in our 
own neighborhood. Our Savior came down from keaven to htmg us 
the tidings of salvation, although it carried him to the cross, and sunk 
him into the grave ; and who of his followers shall account it too great 
a sacrifice to go a few miles to carry the same tidings to his fellow^ 
men, and tender them to their acceptance with earnestness and tears-l 

BRANCHES ANQ AUXILIARIES OWNING DEPOSITORIES. 

Branches and Auxiliaries owning Depositories may further this 
work by ordering, from the General Depository, a large supply of t^ 
number of Tracts appropriate for the monthly distribution, and givim^ 
notice to their Auxiliaries that copies of stieh Tracts may bo obtained 
for this purpose. 

OBJECTIONS ANSWERED. 

There are two ol^ections that may be raised against this system of 
effort which are, perhaps, worthy of notice. 

Objection 1. the pre$mMiim qf m Ttaet Mm^kfy U CkruHan fih 
milies involves a ttaste of fwndi^^-^To Mt ol^ectlon we reply > 

(1.) That the Monthly Tract, presented by tbe hand of a faithful 
Distributor, haa, in multitudes of instances, arrested attention in 
Christian families, and been read, when the Tracts already in theur 
possession, have been neglected. " In my own family," said one of 
our most eminent Clergymen, *< that little monthly Tract has gained 
more attention, and been read more, than all the Tracts lying on our 
shelves." Several instances have already been reported in which 
members of Christian families have been evidently eonoerted to Go4 
by the reading of the monthly Tract. But we reply farther by asking^ 

(2t) Where is the waste in Christians contributing funds by whicb 
12 Tracts every year shall be brought and presented to their own fa- 
milies 7 If any families professedly Christian purchase no Tracts, and 
have none, the objection probably would not be considered as apply* 
ing to them ; but all families who supply themselves with Tracts doubt- 
less purchase far more than 12 in each year ; and what is the loss to 
the cause of benevolence, if of the sum contrilmted by such families 
annually for the Tract cause, the value of one Tract in each month be 
returned to- them from the hand of the Tract Distributor, to be read 
and preserved, or distributed as oppottuoity may offer T 



151 GUIDE TO THE STSTEllkTIC [DeC. 

Objection 2. BypretewHng Trtutt toihate who are far from reUgUm, 
ire are UabU to gwe offence* To this we reply, 

. (1.) That this syitem of effort does not inTolve Ibe obtrwinmoi 
Tracts upon those who refiue to receive them. Like the message 
with vhich the original disciples of our Lord werecomnisstoned, they 
are opiered to all ; but if any will not receive them, the messenger pro« 
ceeds and tenders them to others. But we reply, 

(2.) That to adopt the principle that the Gospel may not be offered 
in any form to those who are not now its fk-iends, is to eut off the 
Christian church from the entire work of spreading the Gospel. 
Christ's command, on the other hand, is clear as a sunbeam— to pub- 
lish the tidings of salvation through his blood to " every creature.*' 
The message is to be offered to all, while with each to whom it is con- 
veyed rests the awful responsibility of accepting or rejecting it. We 
must, therefore, tender it. In kindness and love, to our fellow-men who 
are far from God. And we must present it again and again,^ and 
never sit down in discouragement of winnung over Christ's enemies to 
him, till the whole world is brought into suQection at his feet, or our 
powers of persuasion and entreaty are palsied in death. Many in- 
stances have occurred in which those who, for many successive 
months, have declined receiving Tracts, have then received them 
with gratitude and the most subdued feelings. 



CHEERING RESULTS. 

• - ■ ' ' 

* Many very gratifying results of this system of effort have, from 
time to time* been published in the American Tract MagaKine and 
other religious publications. Want of room permits us here to add 
only the few brief extracts which follow. 

TesUnumsf ^f ^ Clergjfman. 
A devoted clergyman in a town of 300 fiimilies in Massachusetts, 
where the monthly distribiltion has been 8 months in operation, after 
stating that its influence has been very apparent, that he " knows 
of a number of persons who have come to the house of God in conse- 
quence, and that he had just seen a yoiing lady on a sick bed who 
spoke of the Tract Do you Want a ^Viendf with tears, saying it ex- 
actly met her case," earnestly recommends the selection of the best 
qualified individuals in the churches for Distributors, and adds : 

I consider the system as invaluable to the church. If it did no 
good but to keep the church in motion, that would abundantly pay 
forall. Our churches are dying from inaction. The only deficiency 
in this system is, tjiat it does not employ half enough. There is no 
describing the difference between a church in motion and the same 
church in inaction. In the one case it is the giant carrying off the 
gates of the city ;^ in the other, it is the giant sitting down asleep. 
Every church for its own sake ought to adopt the system of Monthly 
Distribution immediately. 



1899«] MORTUT TR4CT SIST&IBUTIPIT. 15$ 

The t!/item %$ at importanl in the eowUrjf a$ in the eUy* In twetj 
town there are out-skirts where the low floating part of the popula- 
tion lire. They will not come to meeting— will not hear the Gospel. 
Tracti win reach them and nothing else will ; and then it is of vast 
importance to stir up the puUic mind once a month, and keep it alive 
on the subject of religion. The results will be great. I do believe 
that within three years every church in this country, in which there 
is a breath of spiritual life, will be organized for the monthly distri- 
Vition ; and then will thousands and thousands of minds now rusting, 
be roused into Action, and then will the whole nation have their atten** 
tion statedly and wisely called to the subject of religion ; and the 
effects, I have no doubt, will be seen, by the blessing of God, in great, 
continued, and powerful revivals of religion. 



From the Report of the PUtdmrgh T^ract Sodetif. 

Within the short period " since the Systematic Tract Distribution 
has been adopted,*' says this Report, '* more of the effective force of 
Zion has been brought into action than in half a century before. 
Since the church has adopted this scriptural system of doing good 
hundreds of her private members have been summoned to her ser* 
vice, who until this period scarcely deemed that their active services 
were either needed or, if offered, would be accepted. Multitudes who 
before felt no uneasiness when the summons to missionary devoted- 
ness and missionary activity were sounded, or the imperative obliga- 
tions to ** preach the Gospel to every creature*' were urged, begin 
to feel a personal interest in that summons, and tremble at the recol- 
lection of their unfulfilled obligations to speed the march of the Gos- 
pel. Ntfw, multitudes of Christians who have long sheltered them- 
selves under the excuses of Moses, ** O my Lord, I am not eloquent; 
but I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue,** have found no heart 
any longer to plead such excuses ; as the Tract cause has put into 
their hands powerful appeals on every important subject. 



Noble Examples for Imitation. — Geneva Pre^tery-^ Orleans County, 

New-York, 

A benevolent individual, several months since, proposed to the Ge i 
ntva Presbytery, N F. that he would furnish half the funds requisite 
for supplying every family unthin the bounds of the PreAyttry vnth a 
Tract monthly for six months, provided the Presbytery would furnish 
this balance of the means and perform the labor requisite for carrying^ 
the work into execution. The Presbytery extends over three and a 
half counties, embracing about 12,000 families^ which is the number 
of Tracts ordered for each month's distribution. The first half year 
has now nearly expired ; but althougl^ the labor of obtaining dis- 
tributors in numerous destitute towns has been found very great, yet 
so deeply are the Presbytery impressed with the importance of this 
work, that they have resolved to prosecute it another half year v and 



Hi ' MIOB TO THiB SfSTZHATIC ' [DeC. 

Membert hAve ezpret ted the liope, tint h^fhre ike dote of thai period 
ihe ijfiUm wUl be generally adopted throughout the country, 

Anotber iadiTidaal hai undcrtakeii th« work of tupplybg tho en- 
tire couniy of Meant, Jf. K eo/idoiomg not far fr^ 3000 fianiKew, 
monthly fitr a year— dmdiog it into Districts, obtaining distributors, 
and furnishing the means, so far as efforts to raise them in the coun- 
ty, which is very destitute, shall prove deficient. Tracts are already 
ordered ior several montlif , and the work commenced. 



ConvertUmt to God through thit tyttem qf fjfort. 

The Utica Tract Society in their last annual Report say, « We 
think there is satisfactory evidence, that from forty tofifly indiMuals 
have been made the subjects of renewing grace, whose first impres- 
sions of divine things originated in the bfessing of God on the Month* 
ly Tract Distribution." 

The Rev. Mr. L., of C, N. Y., says, that as the Tracts Heaven Loti 
and Sumer ForewaimBd were circulated there, one of them was pre- 
sented to a very high-spirited woman, the wife of a merchant, who 
thought herself too good to be called an impenitent sinner. It proved 
an arrow in her beait— she tras brought under very pungent oonvic- 
tion of sin, and at length found peace and rest in Jesas Christ, the 
Savior of sinners. 

Rev. Mr. R., of P., N. T., states, that two females in that place 
attribute their conversion to the blessing of God on the monthly 
Tract Worth of the 8ouL One of them was a young lady whose parentt 
are both membert of the ekarehf and who had had many I^raett, but the 
reading of this led her to see herself a sinner, and at length to betake 
herself to Christ as the only hope of the perishing. The other is the 
wife of a deacon of a Baptist church,' who trusts she was led tu the 
Saviorby his tricssing on the same moatfaly Tract. 

At a most interesting public meeting recently held in New-York, 
Rt which $ 1,960 was contributed to sustain the monthly distribution 
for the second year, two very recent inttaneet ofconvertion were re- 
lated : one of an individual whom the Distributer had for some time 
found anxious on account of her sins, but who had recently obtained 
peace in believing :— the other the widow of an infidel, who herself 
avowed her rejection of revelation and scorned to receive a Tract; 
yet, when the faiO^ JDidributor kindly remonttrated with Aer, and 
entreated her not to doth the cup of talvaiion from her lip, she, after 
long gainsaying his arguments, consented to receive the Tract Poor 
Sarah, and to attend the next Sabbath on public worship. She was 
brought to a most heart-rending view of her condition as an enemy 
of God; and to give herself to htm, and now stands a candidate for 
admission to the church. 



1880.] T&ACT MBCTIim* tS7 

TRACT MEETING IN .NEW-TORK. 

A public meeting in behalf of the Tract cause in New-York city 
wai held at the Masonic Hall, Broadway, on Wednesday evennig, 
November 17| S. V. S. WILDER, Esq. in the Chair. The Hall was 
£Ued at an early hour. Prayer was offered by Rev. Benjamin Rice, 
and William A. Hallock appointed Secretary of the Meeting. 

The following resolutions were then moved and sustained by very 
able evangelical and spirit-stirring addresses from Rev. Octavius 
Winslow of the Baptist church, recently from England ; Rev. Erskine 
Mason, Rev. John Woodbridge, D. D., and Rev. William Fatten, vis. 

Reaolvedf That this ineetiii| reco^sise the obligation devolving on every Cliris>- 
tian to convey a knowledge of the Uospel to " every creatnre.'* 

Re9olvedf That in reference to the objects of this meeting it is the duty of every 
person present to feel his individual responsibility, and to act accordingly. 

Cards were then circulated, and the sum of $1954 47 was sub- 
scribed and contributed to aid the New-Toik City Tract Society ; and 
an impulse was given to Tract operations in the city, especially th% 
systematic monthly distribution, which must long be felt by every dis«- 
tributor and every individual of the numerous assembly convened. 

The Rev. James Milnor, D. D., recently returned from Europe, 
then moved the following resolution, which was seconded by Rev. 
Archibald Maclay. 

Resolvedf That this meeting desire to express their gratitude to God for the bless- 
ing with which he has crowned the work of Tract distribution both at home and 
abroad, and to derive therefrom a fresh incitement to its more vigorous and zealous 
prosecution. 

In supporting the Resolution, Rev. Dr. Milnor gave a most cheer- 
ing account of the present state of the Religious Tract Society and 
other Benevolent Institutions in England ; the Christian love and con* 
fidence in which they are conducted ; their fraternal regard to the 
kindred Institutions of this country ; the kindnesa manifested toward 
himself personally ; and expressed the assurance of his own mind 
that, notwithstanding the out breakings of Infidelity, and the insidious 
progress of error in various forms, both in this and the old world, the 
principles of the pure Gospel of Jesus Chris4 were prevailing and 
would prevail, till they shall be embraced and obeyed by the whole 
family of man. 

In the progress of his remarks on his visit ta England, he gave the 
audience the rare treat of reading to them an extract of considerable 
length from his Journal of his visit to the beautiful Ide of Wight^ the 
former residence of the Rev. Legh Richmond, and where lived the 
Dairyman's Daughter, the Young Cottager, and the African Servant. 
The Dr. visited the cottage where the Dairyman's Daughter died; 
saw her brother and her Bible ; followed the path in which her fune- 
ral procession went, to her grave, where a neat monument has been 
erected by Christian friends as a tribute to her memory ; visited also 
the grave of the Young Cottager, and the place where Rev. Mr. 
Richmond met and prayed with the African Servant under the rocks; 
and with the three Tracts of Rev. Mr. Richmond in his hand, visited 
most of the scenery therein described, and found it delineated at 
once with invnilaiblt aeeuraey andbtoHiy, 



1^ RSCEiTT rfJuiiKATioirs. [Dec 

TRACT MEETING IN PHILADEI^FHIA* 

An interesting meeting- was held in Philadelphia, Oct. 12, in behalf 
«r Tract operations in that citjr, and of the Pennsylvania Branch of 
the American Tract Society. Thomas Latimer in the Chair, and 
George W. Blight, Secretary. After prayer by Kev. Dr. Livingston, 
statements were made by Rev. O. Eastman, General Agent of the 
Parent Society for the Valley of the Mississippi, and spirited ad- 
dresses delivered by Rev. Drs. Livingston and McAuley, and Rev. 
Mr. Tyng; after which a subscription was opened, which was soon 
increased to $1,700. 

The premium of $250 proposed for the best Tract on the questions 
'' Whether the use of distilled liquors, as articles of luxury, or living, 
or trafficking in them, is consistent with a profession of the Christian 
religion ; and whether the churches of Christ can consistently admit 
as members those who persist in such use or tra$c V* has been unani- 
mously awarded to Rev. Moses Stuart, Professor in the Theological 
Seminal^, Andover. — 

In our next will be presented Rev. Dr. Milnor^s Report of his ser- 
vices, gratmloudy performed as a delegate from the American Tract 
Society to the Religions Tract Society of London. 

There was due ffom members of the Committee, on putting this 
sheet to press, the sum of $ 7,411 75, which must be paid previous 

TO THE FIRST DAT OF JANUARY NEXT. 



RECENT PUBLICATIONS 

OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 

No. 340. — Putnam AND the Wolf; or, the Monster destroyed. 
An Addresa origmaUy delivered at Pomfrttj Conn.y by Rev. John 
Jiof^. pp. St4* This Tract eminently unites interesting incident with 
pungency and force, and will be found one of the most effective 
Tracts on the subject of Temperance which have yet appeared. 

No. 241. — On the hope of future Repentance. From the let- 
ter of a Father to his Son. pp. 4. The Tract is a moving reply to 
the son's assertion, ^'I hope my heart is not fatally hardened, but that 
I shall yet come to repentance and the enjoyment of religion" — urg- 
ing the immediate surrender nf the heart to God as the only ground 
of safety. 

No. 242. — Argument against the manufacture or Ardent Spi- 
rits. Addressed to the DUtiUer and the Furnisher of the Materitds. 
By Rev. Edward Hitchcock, pp. 24. In this Tract, which strongly 
contested the premium awarded to Tract No. 239 on the same sub- 
ject, the author appeals to the persons addressed as a chemical philo- 
sopher-— as a physician-^as a friend to his country — as a neighbor 
and a parent, and in behidf of the drunkard's wife and children — 
and finally as a Christian. 

No. 248. — A Voice from Heaven, pp. 4. In which select por- 
tk>ns of Scripture are in a striking manner presented; showing 
man's depravity— condemnation by the law — the provision made for 
him by Christ-^and the awful guilt of rejecting him. 

No. 11. Occasional. Zuinglius, the Swiss Reformer, pp* 32. 
Containing the life of this eminent man — his conversion from Popery 
through the divine blessing on the study of the Scriptures, and the 



1 830.] 



RECEIPTS. 



Idf 



980 

6 

14 



connnaoding influence he wag enabled to exert for tli« diffusion of 
the pure and precious light of theGrospel. 

In the PresSf and will be issued before the close of the present 
month, a Diary for the year 1831 ; '64 pages to a sheet, containing 
a passage of the Bible, and an appropriate scrap of sacred poetry 
for each day, with a blank on the opposite leaf in which a brief diary 
or other memoranda may be noted. Also in the press, ** Pike's Per* 
suasives to Early Piety/' 

RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASdRT OF THE ABIERICAN TRACT SOCIETY 
During^ the wumth endimg November 15, 1830. 
FROM AUXn.IARY TRACT SOCIETIES. FwTr. 

VER.— Sheldon, Samuel Wead, Pres. 

St. Albaos, Fem. Horace Janes, Ag. 53 45 

Swanton, Franklin Co. Daniel Bullard, Tr 3 00 

MASS.— Boston, Anier. Tract Society, John Tappan, Esq. Tr. (in- 
cltttlinff $144 for perpetnatinff three Tracts for Jews) 

Pittsfield, David White, Tr 

Do. Fem. MIms Amelia Danforth,Ag. . 
Springfield, Solomon Warriner, Jun. Tr. . 
Washington, Berkxhire Co. Rev. Caleb Knight. Ag. 
R. ISL.— Pawcatuck in Westerly, George P. Maxson, Sec. 
•CONN.— Bethel, Fem. Mrs. Hannah Starr, Sec. . 
Brooklyn, (Windham Co. Auz.) Edwin Newbury, Ag. 
Hadlyme, Oziah Holmes, Tr. ..... 

Hartford, Conn. Branch, Charles Hosmer, Sec. 

Kent, Fem. Mrs. Slosson, Ag 

Lyme, First Soc. Oliver I. Lay, Tr. 

Middletown, Luke C, Lyman, Sec. .... 

NeW'London, Robert Coit, Tr. . . . , 

Norwich, Fem. MiM Sarah Backus, Sec. 

Salisbury, Fem. Julia A. Dodge, Tr. « . . 

Sharon, Charles F. Sedgwick, Tr. .... 

Stratford, Asa Curtis, Tr 

West Greenwich, W. B. Sherwood, Sec 
N. YORKw—Auburn, Clark B. Hotchkiss, Ag. 

Do. by their Aux. Aurora. 

Do. by their Fem. Aux. Genoa, . 
Bedford, Westchester Co. Fem. Mrs. Susan S. Nichols, Sec. 
Berkshire and Newark, Tioga, Co. Marcus Ford, Tr. 
Bridgehampton, L. I. Rev Amzi Francis, Pres. . 
Brooklyn, L. 1. JoReph Howard, Tr. . . 

Cairo, D. Johnston, Tr 

Chenango, Broome Co. Rev. Peter Lockwood, Sec 
China, Genesee Co. Selah Jackson, Tr. 

Coxsackie,A. Van Dyck, Ag. * 

i>elhi, in 2d Presb. Cong. William Broadwell, Tr. 
East Granville, Fem. Mrs. Lucy Savage, Sec. 
Elba, Genesee Co^ Pbineas Barr, Sec. 
Fishkill, Fem. Mrs. Sarah P. Dewing, Sec. 
FisbkUl Landing. Fem. Miss M. W. Teller, Sec. 
flat Bush, L. I. Fem. Mrs. Laura Johnson, Tr. 

Do. Ulster -Co. P. A. Overpough, Tr. 
Fort Covington, Rev. John A. Savage, Sec. 

Glen's FalU, Elias Hawley, Tr. 

Hopewell in Fishkill, Fem. Ann R. Swartwoat, Tr. 6 00 13 06 

Hudson, Fem. Mrs. Root, Tr 

Keeseville, Fem. Mrs. Ermima Prittdle, Sec .... 1100 fX 

Lodi, Joseph Plumb, Tr 

Marbletown, Ulster Co. Lewis J. Hasbrouck,Tr. . 5 57 3 43 

Montgomery, Orange Co. John F. Scott, Sec 9 34 4 OS 

Mount Morris, Fem. Mrs. Lucretia C. Sleeper, Sec. 

New Rochelle, Fem. Miss Sophia Brewster, Sec. . j 50 3 00 



00 
00 
00 
37 16 
3 15 
50 

5 00 
44 00 

1 90 
36 00 

3 50 
900 

100 00 
39 00 

6 00 
16 00 
12 00 

4 31 

5 14 
33 82 



696 
9 94 
1 07 

40 00 
1 75 

30 00 

3 35 
11 SO 

539 

4 15 

7 00 
3 00 
500 

37 75 
3 00 

5 33 

6 84 

8 00 
983 

11 00 

8 00 
5 57 

9 34 
3 50 

50 



Don. 
1 55 

40« 

644 09 



see 

35 
5 70 



4 00 

10 00 



500 
1 71 

1 50 
68 

3 31 



1 61 
885 

456 



1«0 



USCEIPTS. 



New-Windior, Silas Carwin, Tr 

Ferry Centre, Talcott Howard, Tr 

Rbinebeck, Fern. Mrs. C. Davidson, Sec. .... 

Troy/Charles Lyman, Tr . 

Walton, Del. CoT Fem. Miss Hannah N. Seymour, Tr. . 

Whitehall, James G. Caldwell, Tr. 

H. JER.— Bloomfield, Juv. Robert R. Kellogg, Sec. 

Hendham, Fem. Miss Sibyl C. Beach, Tr 

Parsippany, Samuel A. ftlarshall, Sec 

Princeton, Fem. Miss F. W. Morford. Tr 

Ramapo, David C. Chrystie* Esq. Tr 

Somerville, Fem. Mrs. Sophia Talmage, Tr 

Springfield, Abijah L. Dunnell, Tr 

PENN. — Montrose, Susquehanna Co. Jerre Lyons, Tr. 
Philadelphia Branch, Frederick Erringer, Tr. 

Pittsburgh, Rev. R. Pattcrtson, Ag;> 

MD.— Baltimore Branch, Carter A. Hall, Tr. ... 

Hagerstown, Fem. Mrs. Rebecca L. Martin, Sec. 
Worcester Co. Fem. Mit^s Maria E. Bredeli, Sec. 

ALA.— Uuntsville, Samuel Coltart, Ag 

TENN.— Memphis, (Shelby co. Aux.) Littleton Henderson, Tr. 

OHIO.— Granville, Rev. Jacob Little, Pres 

Jefferson, (Ashtabula Co. Aux.) Rev. Perry Pratt of Harpersfield, 
Sec. ........... 

MO.-^t Louis, Missouri t!pd Illinois Tr. Soc. W. S. Olmsted, Tr. 
MICH. TER.— Monroe, Fein. Miss Charlotte Lawrence, Tr. . 
UP. CAN.— Brockville, Loeds Co. Fem. Mrs. Philena Smart, Sec. 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 
N. YORK.— Orange Co. S. S. Union, J. W. Wells, Ag. 
Windham, Greene Co. Fem. Miss Elizabeth B Strong, Tr. 
Tracts sold at the Depository to individuals 



F4n'Tr. 
1 00 
600 
5 00 

3 58 
11 79 



6 94 




JDm. 



50 00 



S 00 



40 GO 
394 00 

30 00 

350 00 

119 20 

650 

aooo 

10 00 
5 00 

42 00 

125 00 

7 62 

10 62 

1 94 

1 50 

365 16 



Directors for Life, 

CONN.— New-Haven, E. F. Bac- 
kus, Esq. 100 00 

N. YORK.— New-York city, 
Richard T. Haines, in part for 
perpet. the "Pilgrim's Pro- 
gress," 100 00 

Mrs. Gerard Hallock, for Do. 50 00 
William M. Halsted, for Do. 100 00 

PENN.— Philadelphia, I st Presb. 
Ch. Rev. Albert Barnes, by La- 
dies, 50 00 

Memhtrs for Life. 

MASS.— South Hadley, Rev. Ar- 
temas Boies, by A. T. S. (in 
ftllof|20) . . .10 00 

CONN.— New-Milford, Rev. He- 
man Rood, by few individ. of 
his Ch. and Cong. . . .20 00 

Warren, Tertius Reynolds, by his 
ikther, (in full of $20,). . . 5 00 

N. YORK.— Binghampton, Mrs. 
Sarah Hawley, by a Friend, . SO 00 

N JER.— Baskingridge, Rev. John 
C. Vandervoort, by a Friend, . 20 00 

LOU. — New-Orleans, Mrs. Mc- 
Cullagh, 20 00 

OHIO.— Granville, Rev. Jacob 
Little, by his Bible Class, . 20 00 

Maiysville, Union Co. Rev. Dari- 
us C. Allen, by Rev. Thomas G. 
AUen, PhUa. . . 20 00 



Annual Directors. 

N. YORK.— Brooklyn, L. I. Mr. 

T. J. Chew, .... 

New-York city, George Hannah, 

Other Donations. 

CONN.— Brooklyn, a ^end, 

N. YORK.— L. Islandi^ member 
of Success church, . 

Dashville, few individuals, . 

Merideth, Individuals. 

New-York city, A Friend, Premi- 
um for a Tract to those interest- 
ed in Canals and Rail roads, . 

Mr. Hamilton, .... 

Warsaw, Mrs. Harriet B. Steele, 

N. JER.— Elizabethtown, three 
little girls, 



10 00 



5 00 
5 00 



1 00 



300 
50O 
1 31 


50 00 

68 

100 



38 



The above list contains donations— 
For a Premium Tract, . . $50 00 
In part for perpetuating ''Ban- 
yan's Pilgrim's Progress,*' . 250 00 
For perpetuating three Tracts for 
Jews 144 00 

Whole amount of Donations, $1,380 96 
Received for Tracts sold, 2,495 05 

Total, $3,886 01 






' / 



. .» 






^ t 



» 



