Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



[ 






nis' 



.^ V 



r 



/m 



k 



a^. 



0»€ 




\ 



x^w 




^ti 



> 



« • 



.. • 



AMERICAN 
TRACT MAGAZIN] 



FOR THE TEAR 183S. 



VOL, in. 



KXW-YORK: 

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETV. 



IMBBX. 



H Rer. J.aChiWmu ... IS 

1» mimliictaB, DcL .... 84 

50 IJmaDol tltHt. Tnn Sac. . Tt 

51 Bdli£v<,'liBl%.TTUt(<ac. 4D 



Rer. iHic Rml . . . . M 
LoDdon Ri^c. Tnci BmIMt 113 

A TOUnff CleTKTinU . . - 14t 

B«. W^UtunVoTRT . . . ta 

An Airnx f'T lk> "*■> ' - ^^ 

LInrpool BHlg. Tna BoctMr . . S7 

. . — London Rdli.Ti»eta«, IW, 113, 113 

Pmgrcunr . 13,14,05,109,139 tSlb AHhrnary . . . . lOS 

QDcnUia btlim IBS IdCMrin. Pmnlain Tnet oB . . 82 

Rcccipu m, la, M, IT, ^ 83, BS, lAibfDk, Kra. AaiHluj . . . fO 



(10«,llt.i3(tHi,lS IMB,TnatFaUli-. 

loOant lit, »!, 3S, M, ||Mri]iiMn,Vl.yHiiif Ha^Aui. 

'"■•— HtalHlpd, T'llrT of, Agent fin 

rftw.-Bi.in Female AmilUir . 



I1IH1,1W,I»,1» HiMlHJl 



AtMfkMTnctSiKtely.BiisUiii— lirw-YoA QUf tna Bt 

14tb Analfrrarj Kad Report 96 vrrnir uhI Report , . 

DuniUmi Crom .... 46 N.T.CIl;.Bit(Fr>SI.CIi.reB.Au. S4 
Do. (Or Kn-Orlriu. lUU, OOnnof AiiIllI>ila,(D ....!» 

■Bd SuKlwIdi Iilukli . . 31 Ohio Pr»r"-BoOk,Tr.fcB. "-«"■- ■* 

Do. 6w V«fcj of aiKtaiippI ?"■ — — ■» — .=— - 

Anedenl Tract Rr— — ^ 

Anru™"" *■ 

AnUlng 

Bwtlx HVomlTmet Social; . . U Fiemtain'TTUt'oD 'LMtfrta ! . '. 

Buin^ Sainti' RM IM On Feinslt Eaaaciiu ... I 

BlUr, Prf ndiim Tr. la tehalf of . IK In MtiK' o( tlie Bible . . l.» 

Boilmi CitT Tna Bodety . . , 41 PriB»Ed««il, Va. AniiUarT . . M 

Cu>da, Tour In IH Pr-iiidewE. R. I. AaiUlwr . . . 4T 



ChariHUn. 6 C. Bnnch '. 
V'mele, eitrlloDi of 



RlchiDOHl, R«. Leili 49 

Unliniinaf Ui 

. . . . iw RkbnisiHliTii. AmlliaiT . . . . SS 

BoeicCy . M "Hint end Pran™" blened . . itl 

I ... 31 Ruil, Rer. WlDbin « 

ctSocirl; 40 Snnirti CbUdirD^ TnKU wultd UI 

104,1m SplriiorchriMiaoObarily ... 30 



Otago*, R^iilotji Tnct Soc. 
QialeCul DasfUrr . . . . 
Qneca, auanwn (or Tneli ii 
IbirtAird,CoiiB.Brapch . . 
ladtanuMlb, lad. AuUuT ■ 
InMil^iib itiqinwl . . . 
Jablei ladf coaoerted , . 



:n>D>di7 .... «,iB,*a 



THE AMERICAIH 

DL. lU. J.&XrVAll'Z', 1828. NO 



{Conuniuikited bj a Ae«t of ihr Amrrku Tnct Badtty >■ Vit^ni*.] 

Od the 10th in«t. I called on Mrs. P. L., of A— county, 
whose remnrkable conversion I had understood was attri- 
buted to the hearing of a Tract rrad. Having requested 
a relation of name o( the circumstances of her case.< I was 
informed that she had imbibed the sentiments of infidetitv; . 
and for a succession of years the works of Voltaire aod his 
associates coastituted her delightrul study, and conHrmed her 
in the belief of their sentiments. She regarded Jesus as a 
good man ; the apostles as visionary enthusiasts ; and Chris- 
tians as objects of pity — as poor deluded creatures. Such 
was her aversion to the Gospel, that, when the subjectof re~ 
ligion was introduced, she would codeaTour first to conAite, 
then to divert the topic b^ ridicule, and, if not thus succeisfu), 
by GOncempt. Few ministers would ui^« the subject a se- 
cond time ; and few private Christians, who knew her, were. 

Vol. I»- 1 iWH0tENo.«5. 



£ {TfiE VRACT Aim THE IWVlt^EJ^ [Jafit 

wiUing to encounter her in argument She supposed keU tb 
be but a terror to weak minds. She would read (he Bible that 
she might refute the arguments in support of Christianity; 
but being rather . remote from places of worship, she seldom 
attended. Her sister, the lady of Dr. C— -*• is a professor 
of religion, and became a member of the Tract Society 
which I organized at M— — . Some of these Tracts Mrs; 
C. was reading aloud when Mrs. L. was present, on a visit. 
Mrs. L. urged her sister to desist from reading such produc* 
tions to her. Mrs. C selected, with particular reference to 
her sister, the Three Dialogties between a Minister and one of 
hiaParishioners. (No. 19.) Whilst she was reading; it, truth 
reached the heart of Mrs. L. whose convictions became deep 
^and pungent, and her distress aimost insupportable. She now 
believed there was a hell ; felt conscious of her exposure to 
the wrath of God, and thought that, could it be appeased by 
her enduring agonies for years, the pain would be light. 

Having no conception of the plan of salvation, and still igno- 
rant of the Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, Mrs. C. read to 
her the Tract, A Plain and Practiced View of the Doctrine of the 
Trinity. (No. 185.) The exhibition of Jesus as the Paschal 
Lamhf Was the portion of the Tract which the Holy Spirit 
employed to discover to her the Divinity and Mediatorial cha- 
racter of the Redeemer. Light beamed on her mind ; hope 
animated her soul ; and, in June last, she was enabled to re- 
joice in God her Saviour. 

Among the effects already traced to her conversion, may 
be named, the hopeful conversion of four, and the awakening 
and conviction of two other individuals.' I was so deeply in- 
terested during the narration, and so strongly impressed with 
the belief that a narrative of her life would be valuable as a 
Tract, and encourage the friends of Tracts in their efforts to 
circulate them, that I requested her to write her experience 
in detail, and forward it to you, subject to the revision of the 
Committee. This she has consented to do. Should the 
mannscript equal the verbal account, I think you will regard 
it as a valuable addition to our Tracts. 

Exclusive of the above cases, a younger sister of Mrs. L., 
Miss J. F— , by reading the Warning Voice, (No. 5.) be- 
came awakened to a sense of her condition as a sinner, and 
was led to seek an interest in the merits of Jesus, in whom, 
she now professes to have righteousness, and strength, and 
peace. 

Another Tract had been presented to a female servant, 
who, being incapable of reading, knew not its value. She 
dreamed that her Tract, (which contained but 4 pages) had 
become a book. This awakened a desire to know its con- 
tents. Misa J*i her young mistress, read it to her on the fol* 



18S8.3 Vll^IT TO THE HOUSE OF MOVaKlNG. ^ 

lowing day, when she became convicted; and, in a few 
weeks, she gave satisfactory evidence of a radical change of 
heart. 

I have been lately informed that a lady in C— — county 
was lately converted by reading two of our Tracts, but have 
Xiot ascertained particulars- 

You can better conceive tlian I describe, the satisfaction en- 
joyed from the recital of the above fact4. I bless the Lord 
^hat I have been permitted so soon to witness some of the fruits 
of my labours— of our labours. May they be but as the first 
fruits of an abundant harvest ! H. - C. T. 



« FRIENDLY VISIT TO THE HOUSE OF ]!HOIJRNING«»» 

[From tbe Lady of a Baptist Glergyman in Soutii Carolina.] 

. I have just been reading the Second Report of the Ameri- 
can Tract Society, and I will not suppress my desire of ex- 
pressing to you the lively interest I feel in the welfare of this 
Grand National Institution. The good arising from the dis- 
tribution of well selected Tracts, which I had witnessed, awa« 
kened in ray heart, some years since, a deep solicitude for the 
prosperity of Religious Tract Societies. I then felt the want 
of just such a Publishing Committee as the American Tract 
Society is'blessed with, not only to render the Tracts worthy 
of the attention of all classes in Society, but attractive also in 
every other respect* It is now matter of praise with me^ 
that more than my fondest wishes have been realized, and that 
my life has been spared to rejoice with thousands in the for- 
mation and progress of the American Tract Society ; but moise 
^specially in the ^loble, the truly Christian spirit, which has 
characterized all its proceedings. 

I commenced the distribution of Tracts, from a kind con- 
.cern for those who were not favoured with the many religious 
privileges with which 1 had always been indulged; but it was 
not until a season of great affliction that^ I fully realized their 
f^alue^ and that no advantages can place one beyond the reach 
of their benefit. 

The lifeless remains of a grandfather deservedly dear, were 
before me ; and beside this, my soul was cast down ; it was dis- 
quieted within roe ; for the Lord had hid as it were His face 
from me ; nor could 1 believe that I should again *^ praise Him 
for the light of His countenance." Not long before this, find- 
ing a dear friend sufiering under a similar affliction beyond the 
reach of the ordinary means of consolation, [ had silently put 
into her hands, ." A Friendly Visit to the Houfe of Mouming^^^ 
by Cecil, (Tract No.. 2.) It was blessed to ^er, and she was 
comforted ! In the same silent manner, she returned the same 
Tract to me. I had previously read it, as applicable to others ; 
} novf re^d lU as ftddresaed to myself s and I hui^bly trust I 



4 co^rvEfLSioy of a srabmiji. [Jan. 

was enabled thereby to riew the goodness of the Lord, even 
in the bitterness of my cup, and to say from the heart, " Though 
He slay me, yet will I trust in Him ;" " It is the Lord, let him 
do what seemeth Him good ;" " He hath not turned away my 
prayer, nor his mercy from me ;" " I will praise Thee for ever, 
because Thou hast done it ; and I will wait on Thy name, for > 
it is good before thy saints.'' 

From this and similar circumstances, T am inclined to think 
that, were the experience of those known who have distributed 
Tracts, it would be found that many of them can testify to some 
beneficial. effects resulting to ihtir ownsouls from reading them. 
"He that watereth shall be watered," as our venerable Carey 
has well said ; ^^such is the nature of the Gospel, that a fervent 
and persevering devotedness to the Redeemer's interest in 
the world, is constantly attended with the most important spi- 
ritual advantages to the individual ; nay, the thing itself is one 
of the graces of the Spirit, called forth to exercise itself upon 
the most important of all objects." 

Permit me to relate another little anecdote. My revered 
father, some years since, while paying his bill to the landlady 
of a house where he had put up for a night, gave her, without 
knowing her family history, and without any observations, the 
same Tract I have mentioned, " A Frirudly Visit to the House 
of Mourning." In 1824, I think it waH, I hud occasion to call 
at the same inn. Upon hearing myfwme^ the hostess invited 
me intp her private sitting-room, and related to me the manner 
in which the Tract had been presented to her. She told me 
further, that she had then very recently buried a beloved 
daughter, and was weeping over her loss in all the anguisli 
of that "sorrow which worketh death.'' At first, she was only 
anxious to know to whom she was indebted for the Tract ; but 
curiosity soon led her to examine the gift itself-— and God 
blessed it to her conviction, her conversion, and her lasting conso- 
lation. Then the Tract became her pocket companion— in- 
deed, she never parted with it, but when some friend or neigh* 
hour was in afBiction. In fulfilling such errands of mercy it 
had become much worn, and at last was lost, at least to its 
owner. Oh, how often have I thought of ^he earnest mannec 
in which she entreated me, if possible, to get her another ! 



EXTRAORDINARY CONTERSION OF A BRAHJUIIK 
TS BENGAL, BY MEANS OF A TRACT. 

[From the Latter Day Luminary.] 

Dr. Carey, in one of his last letters to the Rev. Mr. Ward, mentions 
the following case. The Hindoo ascetics adopt a system of austeri- 
ties known by the name of Jogue, which are intended to produce as 
great a separation as possible between the incarcerated spirit and 
matter, so as to prepare this spirit, which they consider as an iodivi* 



laftB.] tOKV£lt8t<>N OF A JAILOR* 5 

dilated portion of the Deity, for the final renunciation of its connexion 
with matter. One class of these ascetics is known by the name 
Mowfue, and these are distinguished as having made a vow of pei))e« 
tual silence. 

A Brahmin of t)ie order of Jfowraee^, and who had kept this vow of 
iiilence for four years, while residing at the famous temple of the god- 
dess Kalee, near Calcutta, has recently become the subject of Chris- 
tian conversion. This man, by his dress, (he wore several necklaces 
made of the bones of snakes,) his rank as a Brahmin, his vow of si-* 
lence, and the sanctity of his appearance, commanded the homage of 
the Hindoos to such a degree that he was worshipped as a god. When 
he passed through the streets of Calcutta, says Dr. Carey, the rich Hin- 
doos hastened down from the roofs of their houses, and threw them- 
selves in a state of prostration in the dirt at his feet. In these circum- 
stances, a man of the highest order in his countiy , secluded from all 
•human society, iu one of the most famous temples of India, and wor- 
shipped as a god—^who would have expected that such a man would 
have been brought into the Christian church ? If it might have been 
concluded that any mfm in India was out of the reach of the Christian 
Missionary, and of Christian means, this surely would have been the 
man; for, to the privacy and sacred nature of his retreat, to the eleva-' 
tion of his rank, and to the reverence in which he was held as an ob- 
ject of adoration, must be added the amazing obstacles to conversion, 
in the gross fanaticism and the immeasurable pride of such a being. 

And yet a Christian traetf in the Bengalee language, some how or 
other found its way into the hands of this man, who might be said to 
have taken up his abode beyond the limits of our earth ; and he had 
no sooner read this Tract, than by it his lips were opened, and " the 
iongue of the dumb began to sing." He left the temple, and has- 
tened to Calcutta to seek further Christian instruction. And, in a 
succeeding letter to Mr. Ward, Dr. Carey, after declaring his convic- 
tion that this man had become a true believer in our Lord Jesus Christ, 
adds, on such a day, ^' I expect to baptize the Brahmin who had made 
-a vow of perpetual silence." 



COIfYBRSION OF A PROFAXE SAILOR, BY MEANS 

OF A TRACT. 

[Coromanicated by a Student ia the Theological S^mhiary, Andover.] 

I lately had a very interesting interview with a Sailor, who was hope- 
fully converted a little more than a year ago ; and I communicate the 
same to you, as showing the usefulness of Tracts to that class of our 
fellow-men. About two years and a half since, this Sailor, though he 
had become so wicked that few would employ him, was engaged for 
im eighteen months' voyage. Just before sailing, he walked out one 
evening with a number of his companions, and passing the Bethel 
Flag, they concluded to stop. After sennon, the preacher gave them 
Kome Tracts, which they took without thinking or caring what they 
contained. They carried them to the ship, and soon after set sail. 

After having been some months at sea, this man, as he was walking 
41ie deck, feeling somewhat me ancholy, concluded he would look at 
■the Tracts which had I>een given him. He did so, and convic- 
'^on seized his mind. He knew not what was the matter, ile had, 

1* 



mever felt so before. He could not reit ; and in this state he contioaeA 
waiting for the end of his voyage, that he might return home, and find 
soBK one to tell him what he must do to be saved. He brc^e off hi& 
habits of profaneness and open impiety, and thus remained till he ar- 
rived at port ; soon after which he trusts the Lord Jesus Christ took 
possession of his soul. 

He has since made one voyage, during which he esUtblUhied a 
pra^ meeting on board, and won over a number to attend it, two ^f 
^hom hopefully experienced religion; and all disorder was banbhed 
from the ship. Speaking of some seasons he had enjoyed since he 
experienced a change, he mentioned one in particular which he had^ 
during bis last voyage, while reading the Tract, ** Memoir of Harriet 
Newell." (No. 179.) He said it seemed to him his tout wot wrapped 
up in Christ. I shall never forget the expression, nor the manner of 
his relating it. He attended a social prayer meeting with us, where a 
few of us met together. He led in prayer, and he seemed like one in- 
deed taught of God. After attending prayers in our chapel, he re- 
xdalrked of the one who led, ** He made a good prayer, but I hoped he 
^Quld remember before God the c€i^ of poor Sm/or«,as well as others.'^ 



AFFECTING EXAMPLE OF USEFULNESS IN 

POTERTY. 

The following narrative, writes an esteemed Clergyman, recently 
fliationed in one of the counties of New- York, near the Pennsylvania 
line, I think important, principally as an incitement to effort, in the 
case of those who are liable to feel that their poverty or obscurity of 
condition is an effectual bar to their usefulness, and excuses them from 
making any attempt to do good. 

There was a poor woman in the limits of my former congregation, 
the mother of five or six small children, whose husband was a notorious 
drunkard, so that the support of the family devolved almost entirely 
upon herself, which she accomplished, in part^ by going out to wash- 
ing several days of the week. She obtained, some years since, a feir 
Religious Tracts, and in reading them7 became warmly attached to the 
Tract cause. Before there was any Tract Society in the county, she 
provided herself with a subscription paper, and, taking a somewhat ex* 
tensive circuit, procured upwards of twenty subscribers, averaging 
about 25 cents each. Her own subscription was 50 cents. A part of 
the money was collected and paid to me for Tracts befbre I left the 
county, and I had opportunity to learn particularly how the subscrip- 
tions were obtained and the Tracts disposed of. It appeared tliat the dis- 
tance she must have traveled on foot, in first procuring the subscriptions, 
then collecting the money, and afterwards distributing her Tracts, must 
have been more than twenty miles. She lived in an obscure part of 
tBe town, where the religious advantages ^of the people were very 
small ; and the influence she has excited, through the instrumentality of 
her Tracts, is truly wonderful ! Numbers are influenced in this way 
to, think and act for eternity, whose minds were previously wholly ab- 
sorbed in the world. The people are so remote from any place of 
worship, that many spend their Sabbaths at home, or in visiting; and^ 
in order to take advantage of this state of things, the individual in 
question has, on the Sabbath, taken her Tracts, and calling upon her 
neighbours, begged the privilege of reading to tb^pi; apd» ti)ough ^\re 



• 

iim somettnies fomid them at first disposed to trifle, yet she ha8»iii some 
instances, melted them' into tears by the interesting narratiTes coataia* 
ed in these publications. In this way, she is doing most important 
good; and whoever shall tread in her steps cannot fail of being emi- 
nentty nsefiil, however obscure tfaeir rank, or low their circumstances 
ijQ the world. 

It is worthy of remark, that this woman has learned to read since 
she has been the mother of a family, Aid has never enjoyed any op4 
portunities beyond what almost every individual of our highly favoured 
country might easily obtain. She is truly poor in regard to all woildly 
attainments and temporal good things, but ''rich in faith," and, I 
trust, ''an heir of the kingdom." I gave her one of the volumes of 
bound Tracts which your Society sent me; and she now uses it as her 
sermon book, when she goes into the houses of her neighbours, to read 
to them these words of eternal life. 



coa&BsvomoBiroii. 

TRACT PRIIACHERS. 

A respected Clergyman, in one of the principal towns in Ohio, hav-: 
ing, in a letter to the American Tract Society, plead for the Society's 
lud in extending Tract operations in that part of the country, and men^ 
tioned that efforts were now making to establish a Depository, ap(|> 
that three Auxiliaries were already formed, thus proceeds : 

A grant to a Depository here, if /ou can consistently make it, Would 
be extremely beneficial ; and could you also direct to me some, as a 
donation for the three little establishments I have mentioned, it might 
be attended with good efiects. Even were the donations small, it 
would encourage, them ; it would be a kind of parental smile to them : 
and were it large, such are tiie character and circumstsmces of the 
|>eople, that it could be applied in no place where it would be mort 
needed. 

Tract Societies are, under God, the hope of this land; and will be 
for years. The inhabitants are so mixed and multiform in their reU* 
gions, that, except in a comparatively few favoured spots, there are 
scarcely enough active Christians of any one denomination to support 
ihe preached Gospel. Nor are they a reading people. A book is » 
huge thing. It is, to some, a longer and harder journey through it 
4han to New-Orleans. Tracts meet precisely our wants. They preach 
without pay ; and they preach without fear — and they preach by day, 
and at night— and thev pre&ch to parents and children — they preach 
short sermons and plam— and they can be changed frequently, and at 
«mall expense*— and they stop while the hearer is sleeping, or when 
he grows impatient, and begin again when he is ready to hear— 4md 
they can bear insults without repining, and favour without becoming 
vain— K:ontempt, and scorn, and poverty, present to them no terrors— 
they rest as comfortably in the unthatched cabin as in citizens' palaces, 
and live as happily with the poor as those that faresumptuously-!-they 
Jiave no ears to hearken to terrible reports of fevers and pestilences in 
the wilds of the West — ^their sympathies are not confined to them that 
£m best pay tfaeiB,.nor their efiorts ia sftTinSi t«L (h^% vh^ best enter- 



tain them. No. Thty go forth in the spirit of Gospel preacher8--t<r 
the broken-hearted— io the lost— 4ho8e wandering upon the mountains,- 
and in the wilderness— thej go— to preach the Oospel to the poor. 

Would to God you could send us out a number of living preachers 
possessed of such.qoalities I But what you can do, I know you will do ; 
and rest assured, that, although we cannot promise your Society do- 
nations in return, yet, what wUl afford you and the friends and patrons 
of the Society mor^ gratification, we will endeavour to distribute and 
apply them so that they may do good. 



From an JrUelligent Young Gentleman in the Southwestern Part 

. of Kentucky. 

I have long looked upon the American Tract Society as an admira- 
ble instrument in the hands of God of doing great good in building up 
the kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ in the world; but* 
I feel doubly interested in it, since I have travelled through this 
southern part of Kentucky. Here there are comparatively few effi> 
cient Evangelical Ministers of the Gospel, and all other means of 
grace are very limited/ Hence Zion mourns, and the churches lan- 
guish, and error and 'infidelity stalk abroad boldly through the land. 
In this state of things, I do consider the distribution of Tracts through 
this region immensely important. For this seems to be almost the 
only means of carrying a knowledge of Christ, in his saving benefits, 
to every cottage and stately edifice, to every peasant and polished man 
of letters. It is ascertained, from experience and fact, that these little, 
silent, yet cogent preachers, often ^ain entrance where the Bible and 
the Minister of the Gospel cannot; and thus they pave the way for the 
Sible, Ministers, and other mean| of grace. 



From an Agent where Tracts had been almost unknown. 

The Tract cause, I am more and more convinced, is intimately con- 
nected with the cause of our dear Redeemer. Yes, brother, I hope 
txiy visit, as your Agent in ' wiU soon be heard from, in the out- 

pouring of the Holy Spirit. In several places, a taste for your publi- 
cations has been created ; and though I know of no case of awaken- 
ing, yet I think I could see a verging to it, in many instances, by the 
reading of your Tracts. And, oh ! it did my heart good to see the 
least appearance of awakening in these churches, which have so long 
been slumbering. Many of them seem lulled into a death-like silence. 
Cannot much more be done for them? An Agent, competent to the 
task, ought to be sent to scour every nook and corner of this portion 
of tile country. Great ignorance of the real nature and character of 
the benevolent operations of the day prevails here. Some contend 
that they are a pecuniary, speculation ; some that they are designed to 
enslave the people, and unite the church and the state ; and some com- 
plain that the small pittance of money which they contribute is ex- 
pended out of their own neighbourhood. 

I have taken a view of their moral condition till my heart has sick- 
ened at the sight. Many I have beheld, with a name to live, pressing 
on, there could be no reasonable doubt,' to destruction, heedless of 
what should befall them. What ought we not to do for this people? 
And then, jiow are we to benefiit them? i should iinbesitatingljr 8ay> 



18^8»} BRANCH dOClEVIfi^ic' 9 

(hai almost the only possible way I can see^ is by sending them Tracts. 
They will read them, and who knows what God will accomplish by 
their instrumentality. Truth must have its effect. God will work by 
its exhibition, to the enlightening of the mind and the opening of the 
heart; and actire benevolence is sure to fbUow. 



TRACTS FOR MAI«TA. 

The ''Dairyman's Daughter," and " The Bible above all Price,*' to- 
gether with the Ten Commandments, and fQur Religious Cards, aU in 
Jialiany have been sent to ihe Committee by the Missionaries at Malta, 
Tflith a request that they may be printed for their own circulatipn in 
that Island, toithin which limits they are proscribed from circulating any^ 
thing jninied by themselves. The Tracts have been approved by the 
Committee, and nothing is now wanting hniL funds with which to pub- 
lish them. Those disposed to aid in this object, have therefore nonf 
the opportunity. 



ONE TRACT IN WESTERN ASIA. 
At Akbissar, which is the ancient Thyatyra, a Greek, in^mention^t 
ikig the visit of Messrs. Fisk and Parsons to that plac'e, informed Mr. 
King, that some of the Tracts whicfi they haddistnbvied, had been lent 
from one to another till they had been read by nearly 200 persons. 



SOUTH CAROXINA BRANCH. 

A special meeting of Clergymen and Laymen friendly to this So- 
Cletv, was held in Charleston on the 26th November, when addresses' 
having been delivered by Rev. Messrs. Brown, Mahan, and M'Dowell, 
it was moved by Mr. Coming that a subscription be immediately 
opened for the purpose of raising flOOO to provide the S. C. Brancn 
with Tracts for a permanent Depository. The subscription was at 
once raised to $690; and it was then moved by Mr. Fleming, that 
another subscription be opened for the purpose of raising $5,000, for 
the erection of a building to contain the Depositories of the American 
Bible, Tract, and Sunday School Societies ; and a large room for 
meetings of those and other Benevolent Societies in that city. For 
this latter object, $2,740 were immediately subscribed. The former 
amount of $1,000 has been since filled up. 

« Such spirited efforts show that the church is awaking to a sense of 
her obligaticfti; and, while they call for heartfelt gratitude to God« 
cannot but inspire all engaged in the glorious work of spreading the 
Qospel \^th new joy and courage. 



LETTERS 



JUuivtA Aering tie wunih tmding DeeeaAt 16, and neiihtr etuUiing rcm»f/anc«»j 

nor otherwUe adenowledged, 

# 

W« believe it to be t&e dvtjr of the eondtteton of every Benevolent Sodetv to 
enu^y ell its fands as economically as If the wbole consisted of tbe mites of the 
wmow ; and if those en wlK>m the active labours of sach an establishment de-» 
yolye, are iaithfiil, they will assuredly find equal necessity for ** redeeming time.^' 
The acknowledgment of tlie reeeipt of remitlaacet to the American Tract So- 
cfeiy, especjally small sums, is therefore usiviny aot made by maili but a copy of 



10 



RECSIPTd< 



[Jan. 



the BUeaclne eontalnlne the Mknowledgrment is sent to the donor. There *• ejfo 
• ctassof letters, not conteiulngr remittances, which requtro only an eeknowled^* 
aient of their reeeption. Letters of this class h«va« during the month ending De«' 
cember 15, been received from the following individuals: vix. ,„u--i^. 

C. B. Pixley, R.R.Qurley, C.WhitUesey, Samuei O. Purdy, W.G.Wh«-ier, 
& Martiodaiero. Hosmer. t S. Chapman, H. Howell, Wm.W. Colt, James Doug- 
las, SiUs WUder, D. L. Parmelee, Wm. G. Keil, !>*▼« Andrews J. TJIarshail, 
Sarcns Wells, Samnel Belding, WUliam H. Williams, O. P. HoyI, Ashbel Parmf <- 
lee, R. Patterson, P. H. Brown, Wm. F. Carry. 



RECEIPTS 

tNTO THE TREASURY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOOIETTi 
During Uie month enpng December 15, 1827. 



AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES 



MASS.— Boston American Tract Society, 
Pittsfield, David White, Secretary, .... 
Richmond, Berkshire Co. Jas. U. Dudley, Secretary, 
^ringham. Female, Miss T. B. Brewer, Agent, 

CONN.— Colchester, Coi. G. Bigelow, Treasurer, 
Greenwich West, Col. Ebeneter Mead, Treasurer, . 
do. for gratuitous distribution in Bombay, . 
Hartford, Charles liosmer. Secretary, 
Stratford, Asa Cbrjis, Treasurer, . . . . 



N. York*— Amity, Orange Co., Daniel Carpenter, Tr. 

Austerlitz, Columbia Co. Rev. Tkni Woodbridge, Pres. 

Uovlna, Lower Society, Delaware Co. John Hume, Tr. 

Claverack, Female, Mrs. Richard Sluyter, Secretary, 

Colchester, Delaware Co. Wm. tl- Downs, Treasurer, 

Delhi, 2d Presbvtcrian Oongreg. Wm. Broadwell, Tr. 

Durham, Female, Mrs. Eudosta Booth, Treasurer, . 

Harpersfield,' Delaware Co., Lewis C. Lockwood, Sec. 

Head of Delaware, Dugald D. M*Intyre, Treasurer, 

Huntington, L. I. Female. Mrs. Henrietta Smith, Tr. 

tsllp and Huntington South, 

9tIiadletown, in New Kingston, Del. Co. Christian Yaple, Tr. 

Monticello, Rev. Wm. M*Jirosey, Agent, 

Kewburgh, R. B. Williams, Treasurer, ... 

New Windsor, Orange Co. Silas Corwin, Treasurer, 

N. York City, R. V. Beekmao,Treasurer, . 
do. St. Geo. Church, Fern. Mrs. F.M. Hill, Treasurer, 
do. South Baptist Churdh. E. Plerson, Treasurer, 

Ridgebury, Orange Co. Jonathan Bailey, Treasurer, 

Setauket, L. I. Jesse S. Woodhuli, Treasurer, . 

Somers, John Owen, President, ..... 

Warwicii, Heniy Peltun, Treasurer 

Westnwn, in Mmlsink, Orange Co. Jonatban Sayer, Tr. 

N. JERSEY, Bound Brook, A. W. Cooke, Treasurer, 
Dutch Neck, Mr. D. Derwell, Agent, 
Jersey City, Female, Mrs. Olcott, Treasurer, 
Paterson, Juvepite, Rev. Mr. Fisher, President, 
Mendham, Female, Miss Ruth Dayton* Treasurer, . 
New Brunswick, Peter Dayton, Treasurer, 
Pennington, Female, Elha A. Rue, Secretary, ; 
Woodbridge, Female, Mrs. Elixa Ricord, Secretary, 

PENN.— New MUford, John Hawley, Treasurer, 

MAR.— Baltimore, Samnel Young, General Agent, . 

VIR.— Culpepper C. H. Richard Nprris, Treasurer, 
rredericksboig, John P. Little, .Secretary, 
Jefferson Co. Benevolent Union, James M^Murran, Tr. 
Priiice Edward, Union Theol. Seminary, John M-Ewett,Tr. 

do. by their Fem. Auz. Buffalo, Mrs. Berkley, Prrs. 
f3bej)berds(owo, John Matthewi^ D. D.Treasurer, , 



For Tr, 

9 08 
37 fiO 
11 2-5 

SOi) 

6 00 

500 00 

7 fiO 

900 

II 25 

6 53 

3 75 
2 40 
6 44 

2 25 

6 21 

5 45 

1 75 
92 

4 31 
15 00 
U 72 

7 SI 
833 00 

25 00 

4 76 

> 825 

3 76 

4 50 

6 25 
15 00 

350 

7 50 
3 84 
6 00 

2 00 



75 

8 38 

50 00 

16 00 

28 60 

11 25 

S62 

tfiO 



D<tn\ 

12 50 
3 75 

1 50 

6 00 
3 00 

soo 

2 50 

300 

3 75 
2 18 
1 25 

1 8! 
75 

2 07 
1 82 



1 44 

500 

2 44 



2 75 
1 25 
1 50 
1 75 
6 00 

1 16 
250 
1 1^ 

1 OQ 
6 OQ 

25 
1 IZ 



600 

3 75 

7 38 
7 50> 



18^8.] 



ftStElPT^ 



tl 



N. CAR^-^alcw, Stokes Co. H. e. Otauder, S«c t 
S. OAIL—Ohwle»ton, S. C. Branch, H. Otley, Agent, 
OEO— Avgnsta, Timothy Edwards, Trewurer, 
KEN.— DanTiUe, Michael G. Touce, Treasurer 
OHIO.— GhiUicodte, Rev. Josqib Olaybapgfa, Seeretaiy, 



988 Q<) 
438 80 

77 00 



to 



8dl9 



425 



Societies not AuxUianfifor Tmds^ 

V. YORK.— HaTcrstraw, Mtes Ann 
Macide, Treasurer, 

N. JER.— Hardwick,Mark8borough 
and SUIIwnter, Miss Elixabeth 
Sdueffer, Treasurer, . • '? JJ 
Trenton, Miss Juliette Rice, Sec. 6 GO 
Tracts sold at General Depositoiy 
t, to individuals, tc. . . 208 91 

JHreetor for Life, 

N. YORK.— Jamaica, 1. 1. EUpha- 
let Wickes, Esq. . . . fiO 00 

Jtfem^ers for Lift. 

MAINE.— West Macbias, Rev. 
Marshfield Steele, bgr Solomon 
Thayer, Esq. of Lubec, . 20 00 

VER— Rutland, Rev. O. Walker, 
• by Ladle 20 00 

MASS.— Great Harrington, Rev. 
Sylvester Burt, by Ladies, . 20 00 

CON.— Hadlymc, Rev. Joseph Vail, 
by Ladies, . . . . 90 00 

Hartford, Rev. Joel Hawes, by Fem. 
Tract Society, . . . 20 00 

Wilton, Matthew Marvin, Esq. (in 
full of 120) . . . .18 00 

N. YORK —Blooming Grove, O- 
range Go. Hetekiah Howell, (in 
part of JK20.) . . . 5 00 

Bridgewater, Oneida Go. Laurens 
HuU,M.p 20 00 

Elbridge, Onondaga Co. Rer. Ti- 
mothy Stow, by Ladies, . 20 00 

N. York, Horatio G. Onderdonk, 
for' perpetu. Tract ".Way to be 
Saved," (nan of 120) . .10 00 

Sacket's Harbour, Rev. Samuel 
Finley Snowden, by his sons, S. 
B. fe A. H. S. of NaahviUe, Ten. 20 00 

2St, JER — ^Woodbrldge, Rev. Wm. 
B. Barton, by rem. Anx. Tr. Soc. 
and Female Juvenile Soc. . 90 00 

YIR.^'nmberridge Gong.. Rock- 
bridge Go. Rev. Henry Ruffner, 
by Ladies, . 90 00 



Annual Members and Subscribers* 

N. YORK.— Jamaica, £. I. Jidia 

Ann Riley, for 1837 and 1828. 2 00 
N. York, Thomas Webster, . 5 00 
N. Jer.— Union P. 0. Mrs. Brant, 1 00 

Other Donaiiotis. 

VER.— Clarendon, Mrs. Rachel B. 
Hunter, coil, from a few Individ. 4 00 

MASS.— Conway, John Williams, 

for Sandwich Islands, . . S 00 
East Hampton, Samuel Williston, 6 00 

OON.— Goshen, Monthly Concert 
Collection, . . . . 6 00 

Hartford, Rev. Carlos Wilcox, a le- 
gacy, Seth Terry, Esq. Exec. 10 00 

Sharon, Mr. David Gould^s family 
school, 5 00 

N. YORK. — Aurora, Cayuga Co. 

Deacon Lucius Gay lord, . 10 00 

Durham, Greene Co. Mrs* Eudo- 

sia Booth, for Sandw. Islands, 1 00 
Lexington Heights, Rev. H. J. 

Lombard, . . . 2 00 

Lockport, Rev. Wm. F. Curry, 2d 

Wedding Fee, for Tracts beyond 

Alleghany, . . . . 5 00 
N. York. Abraham A. Campbell, 1 00 

do. >Mrs. Matilda S. How, for 
Tracts beyond Alleghany, . 6 00 

do. Lockwood De Forest, . 15 00 

do. Gentlemam, after visiting 
Society's House, ... 81 

N. JER.— Newark, Female Mem. 
2d Pres. Cb. for Sand. Isl. 10 00 

VIR.— King George O. H. Young- 
er Johnson, Esq. . . 8 50 

TENN.— NashviOe, Mrs. M. G. 
Hayesj . . . . ' 
do. , Mrs. Lawrence, 



6 08 
2 80 



The above list contains donations 
Far Sandwich Islands, . 14 OO 

For West of Alleghany, . 10 00 

For Bombay, . . . 8 OO 

For Tract ** Way to be SaveH,'' ») 00 
Whole am. of Donat. $494,14 
Rec. for Tracte soM, 82,383,45 
l^otsl, ■ ■ §2 ,877,^ 

Donation to the Ubrary, 

The Work* of Dr. John tiUotson, Archbishop of C«at8rbOI7> in 3 T9|lk feSUn, D^ 
Mrs. Aon Ripley, of BaugaiQck, Ct. 



OF TR> 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 

7he following Tracts have recently been stereotyped : viz. 

No. 208. CoNTBRSATiON WITH A YouNG Tratellbr. — ^pp. 8. Thl? 
Tract, which, it is understood^ was written by the Rkv. Dr. Mason, and 
does no discredit to his pen, contains a conversation that occurred lA 
a Stage Coach between a Clergyman and a sceptical young Traveller^ 
who had seen much of the world, and had become too proud of his 
intellectual acumen to be a believer in Christianity : objecting espe- 
cially to the nature of its proof s, as being subtle and distant, metaphy-< 
sical, and wrapt in mystery ; and insisting on mathematical dem^onstrOr 
iion, as the only proof on which the mind can rest with entire conviC'« 
tion. His able antagonist clearly shows that evidence must be of the 
same nature with its object ; that the evidence on which Christianity 
rests must be moral, not mathematical ; and further, that objections 
can be urged against mathematical demonstration more puzzling and 
Unanswerable, perhaps, than any objections against moral evidence^ 
In proof of this, he adduces as examples : the impossibility of satiS' 
fying a peasant of the truth of the Newtonian system of the world, 
and some palpable' absurdities growing out of mathematical demon- 
strations of the infinite divisibility of matter, and the eternal approach 
of the asyntote to the curve of the hyperbola without its ever meeting 
it. The conversation doses by recommending to the attention of the 
young Infidel that religion which shows us salvation through the Re* 
demption of Jesus Christ. The Tract is well calculated to be useful 
to a class of men who, it is to be feared, are lamentably nunierous, 
especially in some parts of the countiy. 

No. 204. A Scripture Help. Abridged from Bickersteth. — 

?p. 24. This Tract contains an excellent summary of the valuable 
'reatise of Bickersteth, inculcating the value of the Bible, the impor- 
tance of habitually studying i^, the necessity of Divine assistance to 
enable us to understand it, practical rules for daily study, and an ad- 
dress to persons in different stations, on the duty of studying it ha- 
tiitually and prayerfully. The Tract, it is believed, will be found very 
tiseful by the Instructers of Bible Classes, both as containing impor- 
tant hints for their own direction, and for the use of their pupils. 

No. 205: A Strange Incident. — ^pp. 4. This Tract describes a - 
criminal in chains, arraigned before the bar of justice, tried, proved 
jguilty of a capital offence, and sentenced to immediate execution; An 
Advocate appeared for him, to implore pardon, but, instead of joining 
in the request, he reclined his head, folded his arms, and sunk into a 
deep sleep. A royal herald was at length commissioned to offer hi 
a pardon ; but his senses were still lodged in sleep, and the season ( 
mercy was gone for ever ! ** Reader, hast thou ever wilfully and d 
Hberately slept in the house of God ? If so, * Vtou art tht man /' " 

CHILDREN'S BOOKS. 

A large vafiety of Children's Books, chiefly selected from those 
j^ublished by the American Tract Society, Boston, and the New*>Tork' 
Heligioas Tract Society, and revised and corrected 1^ (l^e Publishing 
Comnutcee, arc in pro^r^s.* 






THE AMERICAN 



rfisavAJR.T, isas. 



W Bet pcge 14, ' Wenli ef ■ DdHu." 

PROGRESS OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. ' 

Xbia Instinitiiip, thoagh on infant in yean, is now called on, in the 
pnn'kience of God and by the exigencies of oar great commanltj, to 
put forth the ^ortt af a Ji^l groan maa. And there it nothing in the 
■latare of the iDetitution to prevent its immediatelj f>o<iie>Bing the 
Streo^h and vigour of mBtuiilj, if it* real wauti ttre known, and luffi- 
cieDtiiie«i>andadeqiu.te personal exertions are prompt j ctmtributcd. 

"One chBTBClariMic of this cause," as the Committee of the Sodely 
ha-*ewell said, "which gives it eipecla] interest in tbe present Hale of 
our country , is ill rt^ptdily of moremeiiJ. II brings the orJ 0/ sfsreo- 
tj/mag, <""' '^ y^' po^f of the prut, of *hicb every body has 
gpaken, hut the extent of which perhaps no one has ever dul/ esti- 
mated, to bear, in all the perfection of their energy, upon the loord 
welfare of our CDUDtry- Aikd it ii scarcely too much to s^, that, nu- 
merous as our population is, wid rapidly tu it is increasing, Rtli^tu 
Trocls, tvith '>'' demand upon the treasures of the Christian pubiii; 

Vol. III. a [Wh(.l« No. 28. 



14 AMSBICA9 TEACT SOCIETY. [Feb* 



whkh would impoTerish them, with no sacnfiGei of ellbrt which woaM 

imbitter their peace or mar their eojojrment, and with benefit to erery 

otiier Benevolent Institution in our land, may loon be eent into ereiy 

family, and placed in the hand of ererj little child. Twelve milliow 

of inhabitants are indeed a great many ; but twehe miUiont of Tracts 

GUI be printed, and printed in one year, with no essential sacrifice to 

the community. Our population is indeed increasing with a rapidity 

that astonishes us; but the amount of Religious Tracts issued may 

soon be made to equal it, and surpass it And a little active efibrt of 

Christians, which would only render ibisAr lives happy, and, through 

grace, give them unspeakable joy in the great day of account, will pot 

them all into circulation." 

There is nothing to prevent those whose hearts and hands are now 

engaged in this work, from extending it almost beyond any assignable 

bounds. We are not called on to measure out our limited and feeble 

efforts, and wait for those who come after us to accomplish the work* 

It need not be delayed till the cause of Infidelity and sin have been 

strengthening through an age, and one whole generation of those who 

are' far from God have gone down to death and into eternity. The 

voice of Providence most manifestly calls us to great and noble efforts . 

now. Every facility for printing, and communication with the most 

distant parts, is afforded. The* call is on us, who now occupy these 

churches, and who have assumed the responsibility of urging forward, 

under the Divine direction and blessing, this glorious cause. On tis 

God has conferred this honour and privilege ; and we may not inglo- 

riously put them away from us, and ref^r them to those whom he shall 

raise up in future years. 

That the openings of Providence are far in advance of the Society's 

operations, the following facts indubitably show : 

The demands for Tracts have, from the formation of the Society, 

greatly exceeded the ability to publish them. In endeavouring to meet 

these demands, the Society printed. 

Tract c. 

During the year ending May 1, 1826, - - - - 097,900 

During the year ending May 1, 1827, - - - - 3,1 17,100 

In 8 nTonths, from MHy 1, 1827, to Jan. 1, 1828, - - 2,800,000 

This amount of printing has been done with a treasury rarely con- 
taining iVmds enough to bear the current expenses of two weeks, and 
often enthrely empty ; and with obligations resthig on the Committee 
for paper purchased, to an amount which at no time, for several months 
past, has been less than nine or ten thousand dollars. 

And notwithstanding this amount of printmg done, the whole amount 
of Tracts in the General Depository, January 1, 1828, very little ex- 
ceeded 400,000. 

This is not moi« than Que-third or one-i^urth the amoont of Tracts 



ISiSia.] AMEaiCAV TEACT 80CIBTT. 1$ 

which the General Depository ought to contain, in order to enable the 
Society to meet, without embarraBsment, the claims of the community* 
If twice this amount, or 800,000 Tracts, were added, their cost would 
be about $8,000 ; if three times this amount, or 1,200,000 Tracts, were 
added, their cost would be about $12,000. 

In this state of things, the Committee have also made grahdUnIt 
distribuHons of Tracts, chiefly to very destitute parts of this ai(d other 
countries, amounting, in eight months, ending January 1, to 1,200,000 
pages; and the calls for gratuitous distributions, especially in^nir ex- 
tensire New Settlements, are continually on the increase. 

We ask the friends of this Society and of the cause of Christian Be- 
nevolence, not to shut their eyes upon or slightly consider thue faeU. 
Most of them are of a nature which predades the possibility of m]»> 
take. Their general accuracy is certain. And if there is reason for 
faith in God, that the great work of diffusing a knowledge of theGo»> 
pel among men shall prevail, and if God is to continue to use the i»- 
atrumentabty of this Society, as his providence now clearly indicates, 
then it is certain, that the Society exceedingly needs, at the present 
hoarfdonaiioni to the amount ofmaany thousamda of dollars, 

Ttn thousand dollars would only enable it to discbarge its obIig»> 
tions for paper purchasedy of which it has now no more on hand than 
it should have at all times ; and ten thoiuand dollars more would no 
more than furnish means for supplffing the General Depository as it 
should be. And this would only meet the present wants of the Society. 
Its wants may.probably at no future time be so great ; but new fields 
of usefulness will doubtless open, and new calls be made, especially 
for the mUlioDs of the South and West, of South America, and other 
foreign countries. We dare contemplate no cessation of eflbrt in futvre 
yearf. These streams must continue to flow, and the personal efforts, 
now required, must continue to be made, tQl the grand enemy of souls 
is vanquished, and ** the kingdoms of this world have become the' 
kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ." There is no rest for a Chris 
tian of the nineteenth century, till he rests in heaven. 

And is it a great thing, that this Society, established for the benefit 
•f the millions of this whole W^tem World, should need donations to 
the amount of twerUy thousand dollars 7 Would it be a great thing for 
the Christian community to contribute this sum, to enable the Society 
to issue two millions of these portions of truth, and keep them in cir- 
culation from year to year 7 

Are there not benevolent individuals in our large cities, who will 
contribute $6,000, or more, for this object ? 

Win not the 500 Auxiliaries of the Society contribute $5,000 more 
in donations 1 

Are there not 100 chnrdMS which htTe ftieadi caiouf h af tb^ camt 



16 COKIUBSPOZrOEHCF' [Feb* 

in ^ch to contribqte $50, to constitute their Pastor a Director for 
life, and thus raise $5,000 more ? 

And are there not 250 other churches which will contribute $20 
each, to constitute their Pastor a Member for life, and thus raise 
$5,000 more? 

And is this a great thing for the friends of Zion to accomplish ? It 
cannot be thought so by any one who knows the value of an immortal 
soul, which one Tract may be the means of saving from p*erdition ! It 
caiftiot be thought so by any one who will look at the spiritual wants 
of our country till he shall see what they really are — how many mil- 
lions are djestitute of the means of grace— and how small provision is 
yet made for their supply ! It is not thought so by the Son of God, 
who left heaven and died on the cross for the salvation of sinners ; or 
by the Holy Spirit, who oAen, very oflen, accompanies these simple 
exhibitions of truth with his saving mercy ! 

If any friend of the cause shall observe these lacts, and shall feel 
moved in some way to give effective aid to the Society, we pray him 
to mark the facts yet again, till they shall be clearly before his view ; 
and if constrained to feel, that Providence calls him to do something, 
let him think, that the wants of the Society are immediate — that what- 
ever he can add to its funds will be apfuropriated by a Committee, 
who, in addition to liberal contributions, give their fkitiiful services, 
from week to week, with no earthly rewardr— t||iat it will cheer and 
encourage the hearts of those engaged in the cause— that it will con- 
YCJ spiritual light to many now sitting in darkness— that God will be 
glorified ther^, and the Saviour honoured-— and that, if he acts with 
an eye single to the glory of God, "be shall in nowise lose his reward." 



€<MULS0PoarBBiraii. 

The real friends of Christ and of the souls ,of men, on whom the 
cause of Benevolence rests for almost all its steady and certain sup- 
port, will chiefly desire, it seems to us, to be ascertained of these tw© 
jioints: that the moral destitution of our fellow-men is great; and that 
God gives success to the means employed for their spiritugl benefits 
On these two points those engaged in the cause of Tracts, like the 
labourers in all the other principal departments of Benevolence, have 
all that could reasonably he desired, to animate their prayers and 
their efforts. The destitutions of our own country are enough to affect 
every one who will look at them, to tears ; and the evidence of souls 
brought to repentance by mean? of Tracts, while it gives joy in Jiea- 
ven, is such as may weU impart some portion of the same joy to saints 
on earth, audi cause their eye to sparkle and their heart to swell with 
emotiopa of praise ai^d than^§i^ip£* 



'On eaeb of ihtu two pointg, new evidence u almost da9y comknu* 
tiicated; some of the most important of which, recently received, w^ 
How lay before our readers for their encouragement. 

UOUAJL WAHTS OF OUR COUNTRTt 

GEOReiA.' 

Tn the upper part of Georgia, writes a highly respected 
Missionary, considerable has been done by the Auxiliary 
7ract Society of Augusta, to prepare the way. for the intro<- 
duction of Tracts ; but there are still very many parts of the 
state, and probably of almost every county, where TractB 
have fitver been seen, and where the name ia utterly unknown^ 
Not a few have seemed much surprised, when I have men- 
tioned or exhibited Tracts to them ; but they have always 
been thankfully received. In the formation of Societies, we 
are often called to encounter much ignorance* and prejudice; 
yet several small Auxiliaries have recently been formed. One, 
in the western part of M— *-^ county, consists of about 7o 
members, many of whom are children ; and several, we have 
ascertained, have cheerfully denied themselves the use of 
sugar in their cofiee, on condition of being constituted mem- 
bers by their parents; and the. avidity with which they re- 
ceive and read the Tracts is most gratifying.* 

MISSOURI. 

Being about to take my departure as a Missionary west of 
the Mississippi, says a graduate of the Princeton Seminary, 
I wish as many Tracts as the Committee will give me— from 
10,000 to 100,000 pages, or more. Remember, I am going 
into a very destitute region. Give me a good number of 
licslie's Method with the Deists^ on the Doctrine of the Tri- 
nity, on Gambling, Sabbath Breaking, and all the prevailing 
rices ; and of all others as many as you can spare* Would it 
be asking too much, to request you to include a bound set ? 
I should want it for my own use, and for lending. I feel that 
I am about to enter on a warfare truly arduous, and one, ia 
▼lew of which I tremble lest 1 am not qualified. I am cer- 
tain, had I to trust in my own strength, 1 should fail; but 
God has promised, that bis grace shall be sufficient for me. 
To this promise I look for support. I shall gladly do all I 
can to further the interests of Tracts. I love your Institution : 
I feel convinced that it is closely connected with the advance- 
ment of the cause of the Redeemer. 

INSIANA AND LAKE E&IE. 

I expect soon to return to Indiana, writes a Clergyman 
who has laboured sereral years hi that itate; and I improve 

a* 



the present inoment« to request that the Americao Treef 

Society will furnish me the means of arousing the inhabit- 
ants of the New Settlements to the reading and procuring of 
Tracts. Many* might also be very usefully distributed on boara 
the Steam-boats and Schooners on Lake Erie. Those pas- 
sengers who make the whole length of the lake, have much 
time, in which reading- would be a pleasant amusement* 
When 1 lately came down the lake, there were about. 60 
passengers on board; but no books, except two norels be** 
longing to the steward, which were borrowed and kept hi 
constant use. There was no Bible ; there were no Tracft* 
If Tracts were put Into the hands of the captains or stewards, 
with the boat's name written on each, they would be weH 
received, and read with interest, and it might be hoped spi- 
ritual profit, by many. 

CONNECTICUT RSBBRVE. 

Through the circulation of the Annual Reports of the Ame» 
rican Tract Society, the American Tract Magazine, and some 
Tracts among us, writes a Gentleman in Portage county, there 
13 hegirming to be felt, in this part of the country, a great in- 
terest for the reading and distribution of the Society's publi- 
cations. One individual in this neighbourhood purchased, a 
few days since, five dollars' worth for gratuitous distribution, 
or to sell again at cost, intending to appropriate the proceeds 
for the purchase of more Tracts. His pecuniary means are 
very small, but he hopes in this way to do some good. Through 
his instrumentality also, a man more than 70 years of age, 
who perhaps never gave away a Tract in his life, has agreed 
to purchase and distribute 1000 pages. Those who have the 
means can do much for this cause, by furnishing funds for the 
purchase of Tracts ; and even those who can contribute no- 
thing, may do muckt by engaging in the work of distribution. 

I cannot but feel that there should now be a large Auxiliary 
and Depository of (Tracts in every considerable town in the 
United States; and such, I believe, there wiH be, in less than 
two years, if every professed Christian performs his duty. 

Could the friends of Christ in the older states, behold the 
moral wastes in almost all the New Settlements throughout our 
widely extended country; and could they know how manjr 
lonely Christians, who seldom enjoy the means of grace, might 
be comforted, warmed, and excited to action in the cause of 
Christ ; and coul4 they know how many impenitent sinners 
m^ght be saved from eternal death, by the distribution of 
Tracts ; it would seem to be impossible for them to refram 
from casting liberally into the treasury of the Lord. 

Do have a prayer-meeting for this country, says an ardent 



ISM.} vvjonr&fiTEiB 99 «mACT9« 19 

and intelligent friend of Tracts in the northern part of Ohio ; 
I could sit dbwn and weep over these moral desolations, if it 
would do any good. There is a great destitution' of the means 
of ^race; and profaneness and intemperance, Sabbath-break- 
ing and other vices, prevail to a lamentable extent. If ever 
a countrj needed Tracts, this is that country. When I look 
towards New- York, and see the dear friends of Christ en- 
gaged in preparing and sending forth these heralds of m«rcy, 
and feel that the Lord is overruling and guiding their opera*- 
tions, my heart rises to God, and prays^ Spare these thy ftwr 
vants, and make them faithful, and give them wisdom, and 
Hie people a liberal heart, until this vast wilderness shaH be- 
eome as the garden of the Lord, and the whole earth ahaH 
be full of his glory ! 



USEFULNESS OB TRACTS. 

From the lUv. Joseph S. Christmeu, Montrealf Canada. 

The large at lortment of Tracts, (100,000 pages,) received some time 
aince ttom your Depository, were a seasonable supply, but are already 
in a great measure gone. The reluctance, which was. perhaps f^elt by 
«ome in ordering Tracts from^e United States, has been, I trust, 
permanently counteracted, by w recommendation which your pub- 
Ucations carry with them in their very afptarance. And in pomt of 
malter, we know them to be unriyalted by any body of Tracts m the 
wor|d. 

In the prosecution of my pastoral labours, I am accustomed to make 
a constant use of Tracts : I selddm go out without having my pockets 
supplied with them, and very often dose my interviews with those 
.with whom I converse, by giving them a Tract adapted to their spi- 
ritual condition. I am not able to record any marked instances of 
their usefulness, under my own observation; but I doubt not they 
have borne their proportion, among other means which the Spirit has 
employed, and is now every week employing, in i^e conversion of 
souls. 

One iaet I must not omit, which occurred a i^hort time since, not 
very far distant from this city, which will not be considered unim- 
portant by those who have learned not to despise the day of smaft 
things, or who, in the Ibalanccs of the sanctuary, have weighed the 
value of the human soul. An acquaintance, a poor man, but, I trust', 
truly pious, handed a thoughtless young man, who lived in his neigh- 
bourhood, a small religious card, printed, I think, by your Branch at 
Albany. It was entitled, '' Whai must J do to be saved 7^' The good 
man probably thought little more of it, until, several days after, h^ 
called at the house of the young man, and found he had been indis- 
posed, but was then sitting in his bed. His first salutation, with tears 
m his eyes, was, '^ Oh ! that blessed little Tract you gave me ! It has 
been the means, I hope, of saving my soul." He then related the 
particulars of his awakening by that Tract, and how he was led, as he 
then trusted, in a very few days, to mnbrace the Saviour whom it re- 
vealed to him. 



iO OSSrVLlfittS OP TIACTSU [F<^. 



TRACTS BIiBSSED TO THREE TOUTHS IN 

BIASSACHflSETTS. 

tOontUMfiieatcd by a Glergyman to the American Tract Soolely, BoftOB.] 

Miss 3 was a thoughtless, giddy girl ; but, like many others, 
was f<md of reading, though not very choice as to what it was. She 
had one day put into her hands the ** Dairyman* s Daughter,** It ex- 
cited her attention. She was led to inquire what she should do tQ ob- 
tain that on which rested the hope of that interesting saint. She was 
enabled to put her trust in Christ, and now stancU an honourable 
member of this church. 

I mention also the case of a young man who had embraced the 
doctrine of " Unwtrstd SalvaHon" He was not of that class who are 
willing that ereiy one should think as they please. Those who differed 
from him, he opposed. And as £vangeU<^ truth was most opposed 
to him, he was the most strenuous In his endeavours to ridicule it, and 
destroy its effects, wherever he could. A lady handed him the Tracts 
by Rev. Andrew Fuller, on ** Universallsm.'^ At first, he treated It 
contemptuously; but afterwards condescended to give it a reading. 
He was then induced to read it again ; and it brought him under 
strong convictions for sin. This state of anxious solicitude was suc- 
ceed^ by a hope in the covenant of mercj, and he is now walking in 
newness of life. 

I would also notice the case of a y^oung woman, who had made a 
profession of religi<m in the vicinity of this town, three years previous 
to her residence here. She one day took in her band the iVact en- 
titled ** Self'Examnaiion.*\ The pungent nature of those questions 
reached farther than ever she had been before ; she found she was st^ 
** in the gall of bitterness and in the bond of iniquity." Her grief was 
excessive, being augmented by the consideration of her having made 
a profession of what she never experienced. She continues yet in a 
state of great anxiety ; which God grant may tenninate in joy and 
peace in believing. 

A TRACT BLESSED TO A LADY AND HER 
HUSBAND IN CONNECTICUT. 

An intelligent young merchant in Litchfield county, who has re** 
solved gratuitously to visit every town in the county, with reference 
to promoting the cause of Tracts, mentions the foUowing, among 
other encouragements he has received : 

' While in the town of — •~, he writes, I learned from the Rev. PiEistor 
the interesting fact of the' hopeful conversion of two of his congrega- 
tion through the instrumentality of a Tract. The particulars he au- 
thorized me to communicate, which are as follows : — ^The wife of a 
respectable member of his congregation had lived till more than 
thirty years of age, the mother of a family, but destitute of an interest 
in Christ. She had a sister in a neighbouring state, who became the 
hopeful subject of grace, and, under the glowing impressions of one 
just bom into the kingdom, wrote to her, urging and entreating her 
to attend to the concerns of her immortad soul— 4Mit the third solicita- 
tions of an affectionate sister were disregarded. At the close of the 
last winter, God, in his providence, laid her an a bed of sickness— but 



taft8.] BEAVCB£S JjrO AUXILlAftlSS. 91 

ibis Oill from hoftren, " PreiMure !'' was also digrmrded* ^hroo^h 
the Diritoe i&ercjr and forbearancersbe was raised from her bed of 
languishing, and restored to health. Seissing the occasion, a pious lady 
in the neighbourhood enclosed to her, in the form of a letter, that little 
Tract of four pages, No. 86, " 7h a Person recovered from Sickness,** 
She opened it, supposing it was a letter Arom a' friend, and felt disap- 
pointed and rexed in finding only a Tractf instead of a letter. But it 
was in her possession. She read it, and read it again, and again. 
The Holy Spirit accompanied it with conviction to her heart and con> 
science. Her husband, perceiving the grounds of her distress, became 
also alarmed for his own condition as a sinner. Both continued anxi- 
ously to inquire for the way of life, till the Saviour appeared for them, 
and they were enabled to hope in his mercy. Both have since united 
wHh the church, and give evidence of a saving change of heart. 

It is woiithy of observation by Tract distributors, that this is one 
instance, among many, of the special Divine blessing on a single Tract j 
adapted to tht condition of the individual, and discreetly presented. 



BRANCHES AND AUXIIilARIES. 

ConnectictU Branchf Hartford. — ^The Twelfth Anniversary of this 
Society ii^is held January 2, when addresses were delivered by Rev. 
Messrs. Hawes, Whelpley, and SprUig. Among the resolutions adopt- 
ed was the following : . ^ 

** Regolvd, That the success with which God, in his prpvidence, Itas crowned 
the efforts of the American Tr^f% fiQcieljr, sliouliLiUiiittate the UcfQtioo^of lU 
MMdS| aivd-awalien them to renewed exertions.*' 

Receipts during the year, $1,383 19. Circulated during the year, 
108,786 Tracts, including 9,000 Christian Almanacs. Whole number 
of Tracts circulated by the Society 479,496. 

Female Aiuciliary, New Haoenj Connec^tcii/.—- Paid to the Parent 
Institution during its first year $128. The report mentions some en- 
couraging incidents occurring in the local distribution of Tracts. 

T^act Cause inPhilade^kia, — ^l^e Philadelphia Branch of the Ame- 
rican Tract Society oonttnues its vigorous operations throughout a 
large pait of the state of Penns^vania ; it has recently appropriated 
80,000 pages for gratuitous distnlmtion by Missionaries, and has com- 
menced, with the present year, a Tract Magazine. A Philade^tua 
City Tract Society has also recently been formed; a^d appointed 
Committees for visiting the Shipping, Steam<-boats, Humane and Cri- 
minal Institutions, Sabbath and public Schools, Markets, Taverns, 
Hucksters and Dram Shops, &c. who have entered effidently on their 
work, and find every encomragement. At a late meeting of the Board, 
90,000 pages of Tracts were reported as having been drawn for dis- 
tribution ; and $160 were ordered to be paid over to the Philadelphia 
Branch. A Young Men^s Trati Society has also commenced spirited 
efforts in that city. 

Fetntde Auxiliary of Waskingtonf JMtsmftp/n.->-'First annual meet* 
ii^ November 20, 1827. Receipts $65. Amount of Tracto circulated 
70,000 pages. The Society has a Depository of Tracts at Washiagtoo, 
aad also one at Natehei. Its report is printed gratuitously by a gen-^ 
tlemaa of the latter place« 



u 



EECKIPTS. 



[Feb. 



BAFnSt GENERAL TRACT SOCIETY, PHILADELPHIA. 
Anniversary held January 2. Receipts, during the year, little short 
of $3,200. Issues, between 3,000,000 and 4,000,000 pages. The So- 
ciety has 130 Auxiliaries and 25 Depositories, and has stereotyped 
216 pages of Tracts. 

*«* A list of New Aoxiltariet, from which no remittance faas ret been feoeived; 
and alfo k list of letters not enclosing remittances, nor otherwise acknowledged, 
is inserted on page 3 of the cover of this Number. 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 
During the month ending January i5> 1828. 

AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 

VER.— Geor^a, Harman Loorais, Treasurer, * . , 
MASS — Boston, John Tappan, Treasurer, . . . . 
Greenfield, Female, Miss Eliza II. leaviit, Treasurer, 

Lee, H. Bartlett, Tieasttrer« 

00NN.~New Canaan, Joseph f illiman, Treasurer, 
Middletown, Auxiliaiy Depositorv, Gen. C.Whittlesey, Agent, 
New Fairfield, Seelye Barnum, Treasurer, .... 

Beading, 

Serhrook, 2d Society, Fern. Mrs. A. P. Oharoplin, Treasurer, 
NEW-YORK.— Bethlehem, Orange Co. Samuel Oakley, (Salis- 

buiy Mills P. 0.^ Treasurer, 

Canterbury, Orange Co. Samuel G. ^uriiyi Secretary, . 
FisbkUI Landhig, Female, Miss M. W.^dler, Secretaiy, . 
Florida, Dr. H.K. Chapman, Secretary, .... 
Qlen's Falls, Warren Co. Elias Itawley, Treasurer, 
llampsted, Rockland Co» Female, Miss Elizabeth Coe, See. 
Hopewell, (Searsville P. O. j Orange Go. £. H. Sears, Treasurer, 
Jamaica, Long Island, James Rider, Treasurer, . 
Keeseville, Female, Mrs. Mary S. T. Keese, Treasurer, 
Marbletown, Isaac D. Bloom, Treasurer, . . » 

Newburgh, R. B. Williams, Treasurer, 

Newtown (Western Auxiliary, Tioga Go.) . . . . 

do. by their Auxiliaries in Catharine, $4 40; Veteran and 
Elmira, $5 SO*, South Port, $8 12; Big Flat, $2 81, 
New-York City, R. V. Beekman, Treasurer, .... 

do. Female, Mrs. J. R. Hurd, Treasurer, . • 

do. African Fem. Mrs. Maynkrd, Dir. 

do, Rutgers*-street Church, Female, .... 

do. St. George's Church. Female, Mrs. F. M. mil, Tr. 
Westfield, Staten Island, ....... 

N. JER.— Freehold,' Lower, Dr. James English, Secretary, . 
Harlingen, Female, Mary Skillman, Treaf urer, . 
LawrenoeviUe, Female, Maria L. Phillips, Secretary, . 
Lyons Farms, Female, Mrs. R. W. Lambdin, Secretary, 
Mansfield, Warren Co. Miss Sarah M Sberrerd, Treasurer, 
Monroe, near Morristown, Eldwin Ford> Treasurer, 
Flainfieki, JuTenlle, George W. Shotwell, Secretary, . 
Readingtown, North Branch, Martin Wyckofl*, Secretary, . 
PENN.— Bethany, Wayne Co. Jason Torrey, Treasurer, « 
Dundaff, Snsq. Co. Rev. Ch. Thompson, Treasurer, 
PhOadelpbia Branch, N. Murray, Gen. Ag. . 
MO.— HagerstowD, Female, Mrs. Rebecca L. Martin, Sec. . 
VIR.*-Hartwood, Staff. Co. Col. James Briggs, Falmouth, Sec 

Jonesboro, Nelson Co 

Lyncbbarg, George Bagby, Treasurer, ; 

New Hope, Liberty, Bedford Go. Rev. James Leitwick, Fres. 
Nottoway C. H. RkhardK.Cralle, Treasurer, . . 

Richmond) William F. Micou, Treasurer, .... 

do. by their Anx. CartersvHie, W. R. Howe, Treasurer, 

do. do. New Canton, Dr. O. H. Bradley, Tr. 

Sock Spring, Ubertyi Bedford Co, Jesse Jeteri Secretary, . 



ForTr, 


Don. 




15 00 


3000 6o 




10 88 


5 12 


44 IS 


14 71 


18 00 


600 


60 63 




900 


aoo 


1 ts 




15 00 


500 


58 63 


12 24 


15 00 


500 


600 


to 00 


37 50 


12 50 


12 00 




t»84 


3 41 


25 50 


850 


12 00 


400 


3 75 


1 25 


4 40' 


1 47 


SO 00 




9 85 




20 63 




76 00 




114 77 




15 00 


5 0d 


2 50 




10 56 




066 


SOO 


15 op 


500 ' 


6 75 


2 25 


9 00 


SOO 


500 




000 


SOO 


950 


450 


1 56 


1 56 


10 00 




1« 


6 72 


512 00 




57 00 


10 00 


10 00 


500 




100 


«1 67 






1 00 


750 


250 . 


88 80 






ft 94 




1 69 




I IW 



1828. 



RECElfT6. 



2S 



N. OAR.— LauNl BIIL Mra. K. Buie. Seeretary, . 
OEO.— Aofotta, T. Edwards, Esq. Treftsurer, 
MISS— Wasblngton» Fem. Mr8.0arolin« M. Tbayer, Sec 
KEN.— DaoTiUe, Michael G. Yoace, Agent, . 
HopkingTille,(ChrUtian Co. Aox.) Wm. B. Atterborj, See. 
IND.—Corycloo, Alex. WilliarasoiH Secretary, 
Madison, lUv. J. H. Johnston, Secretary, 
OHtO. — Qreensbarg, Major Churchill, Secretary, . 



For TrA 


7 68 


180 00 


15 00 


15 00 


15 00 


SO 00 



Hen. 

S66 

500 

500 
500 

1 00 



50 00 



5 00 



Societies not AuxUvanfyfor TracU* 

N. YORK— New Faltz« Ulster Oo. 

R. Bogrardoe, Treasurer, . . 10 00 
9. JER.— Upper Freehold, James 

fi. Newell, Tr. . . . 20 00 

N. CAR.— Book Com. Rev. J. W. 

Douglass, Agents . . 70 00 

Tracts sold at tite Geo. Depository 

to individuals, «ec. . . 325 29* 

Directors for lAfe. 

CON Bridgeport, Rev. Franli- 

lin Y. Vail, by Ladies, . 50 00 

N. YORK.— N. Yerk City, Rev. H. 
e. Ludlow, (in full of $50.) by 
Mrs. NixoD, . . * 15 00 

do. James Roosevelt, . 100 00 

TIR.— Berkley Go. Rev. James 
M« Browo, hy Lad. of Garrardd- 
town, Tnscarora, and Falling 
.Water Congg. ... 

Members for lAfe. 

MASS^Pittsfield, Miss Nancy A. 

Inrersoll, (in part of $20,) 
B. ISL. — Providence, Stephen S. 

Wardwell 20 00 

CON.— Ooventry,(Soutb Par.) Mr. 

John Boyntou, 7 . . . 20 00 
do. John W. Boynton, Lean- 

der W. Boynton, and AUnaazor 

W. Boynton, $20 each, by their 

father, Joira Boynton, . .60 00 
New Hartford, Rev. Cyrus Yale, 

by Ladies, . . ... . 20 91 

Stamford, Rev. Daniel Smith, by 

Lad. 1st Eoel. Soe. . . 22 00 

8toDington, Rev.IraHart, by Lad. 20 00 
Torringford, Rev.Epaphras Good- 
man, by Ladies, . 20 00 
Winchester, Rev. Fred. Mnrsh, by 

Ladies, 20 00 

V. YORK.— Kiogston, Ulster Co. 

J.P.Jarvis, . .20 00 

N. York City, Mrs. Catharine Wil- 

bar, for Tracts for Malta, . . 20 00 
4^wero, Rev. H. J. Lombard, by 

Ind. On full of $20,) . .8 00 

MD.— Fredericktown, Hev. David 

F. Scbaeffer, by Lad. German 

Lutb. Gong. . . . 20 00 

do. Rev. John Johns, by Lad. 

of£pis.Ch 20 00 

du. Rev. Jonathan Helfen- 
itciii,byLad.Germ.Ref.Ob. 20 00 
Haffcrstown, Rev.Martin Brumer, 

by Lad. Ocrnk. Ref. Ch. 



D. C — WasblBgton OMgr* Walter 
Lowrie, Esq. Sec. Senate, for 
Sandwich Islands, . . . 35 00 

VIR.— Gloucester Co. Mrs. A. M. 
D. GarreisoD, . . . ' . 20 00 

Winchester, Mrs. Levis HoflT, . 80 00 

OHIO.--Je8'ersoo, Ashtabula Co. 
John Kent Hawl^, liy Rev. 
Aratus Kent, of N. York City, . SO 00 

Jbmuud Members* 

CON. — Xew London, La<7 M. 

Woodbridge, in full of $2, . 1 00 
Westbrook, in Baybroolc, Mrs. 

Nancy Lay, . . . , 2 00 
N. YORK^N. York, Dr. Samuel 

Akerly, 3 

do. Mrs. Mary Wilkes, . 2 



00 
00 



Other Donations* 

VER.-GuiidhaU, E^a. Erastus 

Cutler, ..... 
N;^RK.-N. York City, John 

Bingham, ..... 
do. Friend $35; do. 94 ett. 85 94 
do. for Tracts for Children 

in Buenos Ayres, . ' . 
do. "Widow's Mite," lefl at 
Sales Room, . . . 
Moriah, Rev. Isaae Reed, At. of 

sale of Tracts granted, 
N. JER — HarUngeo, Miss Mary 

SkUlman, for W. of AUegh. . 
Qoakertown, Hunterdon C^. Miss 

Margaret Opdike, 
Readingtown, John W. Hall, Maxw 

tin Wyckoff, $2 50 each ; John 

Van Llew, Andrew Hafcrman, 

$1 each; Aaron Lane, Tunis 

Cole, M. Wyckoff, Sea. 50 eta. 

each *, total by hands of Mr. M. 

Wyckoff, 

VIR — Fluvanna (To. Mn. Virgi- 

nia Carey, 

Harper's Ferry, And. Souillaxd, . 
U. CANADA.— Kingston, Individ 

duals, by bands orMiss BldweU^ 



300 
6 00 



1 00 
I 00 

50 

a 00 

1 00 



t 58 



s 

5 



75 
00 



300 



20 00 



The above List contains Dooatloas 

For Malta, SO 00 

For Sandwich Islands, . . 86 00 
For Buenos Ayres, . . . ] 00 
For West of Alleghany, . 1 00 

Whola Am. of Doaat. $896 85 
Rec. for Tracts sold, 4009 13 

Total, . , $4905 97 



There vcre not funds in the Treasury to pay the BiUi due Janoaiy IS, wantiae 
upwards of $000. A general view of the state of the Society's funds will be found 
in the first article in this Number of the Magaiine. The grrnds of Tracts, chiefiy 
to the dtstitote, during th« month endiof Januuy 15, KmQOiited to 354,178 page?^ 



maoamp waucoAvioini 

OFTBX 

AMERICAir TRACT SOCIETY. 

Tbe fbUowiiig Tracts hare been recently stereotyped : tib. 

No. 206. The ConVsrsion of Sikners a common Christiah Duty. 
— pp. 16. This Tract, which was undoubtedly written by the Rsr. 
Philip VtsuirfCTHon; Whklpi^et^ is a plain and pungent appeal to 
Christians, of all conditions in life, to labour for the salvation of their 
fellow-mren : urging the occasion and necessity for performing this 
duty, and pointing out the requisites and encouragements for its Ihith- 
ful discharge. We misjudge, if many Christians will not find it a faith- 
ful and searching Monitor, awakening in thcro, by the Divine blessing, 
repentance for iSieir past neglect, and new resolutions of active obe- 
dience in time to come. 

No. 207. Materhai. Duxr.— pp. 8. This Tract, written by the 
Ret. Alexander Proudfit, D. D., afiectionately and urgently enjoins 
on pious mothers daily to pray with their children, if family worship 
is neglected by the fa^er. 

No. 208. Tbe Worth of a Dollar.— pp. 4. This is a simple and 
authentic narrative of a pious man in Vermont^ who, having providen- 
tially called on an obscure family, in bidding them farewell, recom- 
mended the faithful, perusal of the word of God. The mother of the 
family confessed she had no Bible. The gentleman was many miles 
distant from home,- and had barely money sufficient, with rigid eco- 
nomy, to carry him there. He, however, gave her almost the only 
dollar he had, resolving to commit his wants to Providence ; who so 
ordered his journey, that none of all he called upon for refreshments 
or lodging would accept of any oompens&tion. But what is far more 
important, he learned that the woman, having procured a Bible, had 
sought in it, and found, the Saviour; and that, connected with her re- 
ligiouB anxiety and fidelity, were the hopefiil conversion of between 
90 and 40 individuals in the vicinity. 

LETTERS FROM DONORS.—^ New Year' t Gift, 
Another year of my short life, writes a pious lady in Massachusetts, 
is closed, and with it all my opportunities of doing and of getting 
good ; and as that kind Saviour who first disposed my heart to con- 
tribute to the spread of these little preachers of righteousness, has 
smiled upon my humble attempts at doing something to advance his 
cause» I send you five dollars, praying that it may be the means of 
salvation to many souls.. It rejoices my heart to see the enlarged field 
of useMness which your Society has attained. Few Institutions have 
been more honoured of God in promoting the salvation of sinners. 
Many instances you have recorded ; but there are many more which 
wiB never reach your ears, until that day, when he who has given a 
<< cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple, shall in no wise 
lose his reward.*' May the Lord continue to bless and prosper your 
Society, in all its efibrts for promoting the good of souls and the glory 
ofGodJ 

ITHmctftyn/vr SinAk ilmerica.— While reading, In the last Tract Magazine, that ot 
Baenof Ayres there are no other books from whidi the South American Irajs can 
acquire the rudiments of the English bmauage than soeh foolish stories as **Tbe 
House that Jack built," fcc I was induced to send you the enclosed oite, (jifl) to 
aid tiie Soeie^ In providing them with such books as are adapted to the instruc- 
tion of inieUieent and immortal l>elngs ; and I earnestly hope that more lienevo- 
lent hearts and more able hands may oe opened for thb object, that no lack of 
books may binder the progress of improvement, or of Christian enteiprlsetio that 
interestlag part <tf the world. 



THE AMERICAN 

QL. m. BKA&OB, 1808. 1^0 



■■ mUlBf th« rock— tUiHUatlBE ■■WhT and mploji Fnbic J 



Tlie Tclation wbicb the Amcricui Tract Societj' giutaiiu to our dei- 
tHote popnlatioD preients one ortbemost ioterutlugpomtiof Tiewin 
wbicb it can be regw^ed' far, 

1.1 3%e dedituie pari ofmtrpepalalionimerggrtat. In acoantiy 
so eitrauTe and fertile, offering Bucb incitemeDti ta emigrBtuin, and 
inhabited by an active, intrepid and «iiter[iriiing people, nbo are ci>ii> 
ftautly crowding into the *ildertie>< to avail tfaenualtet of advantacci 
peculiar to the original occopien of tbe soil, fait multitndei, unleiu 
Cbriitiana are fkr more active than they bare hitberto been, muit al- 
most necenarilj be destitute of the Gospel. At the time of the Rctih 
lution, we were tAree mtllioiw of people — and now we are (vwfec mtt- 
' tiuu ! Almoit otir whole eountr; Eeemed then to lie east of the il- 
hgbany ; but Bow (he grekt Tallej of (be Mbtiuippi. extcndbig fron 

Vtn,. m, 8 [Waat* No.*?. 



S6 TO FBIEZTDS OF TRACTS Iff DESTITUTE PLACES. [Mar. 

# 

.the Alleg^hany onward to the Rocky Mountains, and from the Gulf of 
Mexico to the Northern Lakes, seems, of itself, a new world. It is a 
territory large enough to sustain the most powerful empire that ever 
existed. Already it embraces a million more than our whole country 
did, when she asserted her independence ; embosoms more than one- 
third of our present population ; and its numbers are still multiply- 
ing, with a rapidity that has scarcely had a parallel on the face of the 
earth.-^How partially these millions are supplied with the Gospel, is 
told in every day's report. And if you will survey the whole of our 
territory which makes the eastern boundary of the Alleghany, and 
all that which borders on Canada, you will see another vast extent 
almost equally destitute, to say nothing of the moral wastes which are 
found to exist even in many of the States most favoured w^th religi- 
ous privileges. But, 

2. Tracts can be sent to all these destitute places without dday. A 
large variety are now stereotyped, and they can be printed to any 
amount that shall be needed. Communications are open, by water 
and by land; to transport them. ' There is no duty to be paid, and no 
restriction to be surmounted. Nothing is wanting but the united 
efforts of Christians, to place Tr^|^ in every family. And, 

3. God has blessed these publt^ons to the salvation of souls, as 
signally, perhaps, in proportion to. the efforts and sacrifices made, as 
be has any other department of benevolence. And He has blessed 
these very Tracts which the American Tract Society is dow circulat- 
ing. Let them still be sent forth with prayer, and th^ir distribution 
will not be in vain. They will, by the Divine blessing, still bring sin- 
ners to repentance, arouse the lukewarm, excite a spirit of Christian 
Benevolence, and advance jmd strengthen every other effort to diffuse 
the savour of vital godliness. 

* We say, then, the r elation which this Society stutains to the deatitffte 
is peculiarly interesting. This, to the praise of Divine grace, we be- 
lieve the Committee of the Society deeply feel. They are almost daily 
sending Tracts to the destitute, and that even when the Society ^s 
Treasury is empty, and when under personal obligations for many 
thousands of dollars. And we trust they will still press forward, de> 
pending on God to incline the hearts of his people to sustain them. 

But, Brethren, scattered abroad in the wast£ pi.a(?|ls, the 
Society must have your aid, or this work <!annot be done. Atfd what 
is the aid which they desire ? They desire, first of all, that yoo fMik'e 
known to them the ioantt of those around you, and give all the infor- 
mation you can impart, as to the amount of aid which is needed ; and 
then, that you yourselves do all in your poto^r to advance this worlc. 
l*hat yo^u ga^ther together so many around you as l«ve the cause, wbe* 
tber mtife or female^ old or young; form Ass)»citftioiis^ \^S^ or smull y 



18£8.] ' e&RHfiSrpoirssnrcE; ti 

and obtain subscilben for Tracts, as far as possible, from every 
familyi whether professedly religious or not. That you tell all around 
you what is* the character of Tracts: how easily obtained, how in- 
teresting, how rich in Dirine truth, how often blessed by the Spirit of 
God ; and tell them of the benevolent wishes and efforts of the Parent 
Society ; and that, as long as those who are destitute make any pro- 
per exertions to supply themselves, and tbe Society has any ability, 
it wiU not deny them its aid. Tell them the Parent Society does not 
look to the destitute for donations, though they would not have them 
forget that *' itis more blessed to give than to receive," nor that every 
mite which can be contributed from any source is needed, and will be 
gratefully appropriated to advance the cause. 

Brethren, we verily believe, that, if Christians in destitute parts would 
but make krwtDn to the Parent Institution their wants, the usefulness of 
this Society might soon be thereby greatly increased. Most joyfully 
would your co^>peration be welcomed. The hearts and hands of the 
Committee are open to join you in every effort for this cause. And 
every passing month, and week, which rolls away, while they know 
not your address, nor what are the particular wants around you, nor 
how to communicate with you, f^eB them heartfelt pain. We would 
that the wants of all our destitute, ^ittensive and alarming as they 
may be, were brought clearly and 4efinitively to view ; that, in con- 
nexion with Evangelical Christian^ throughout the land, we might in- 
telligently and firmly enter on the great work before us, resolved, in 
dependence on Divine aid, never to relax our efibrtS; till it is fully 
accomplished. 



coBjiBsvoznoaxroa. 

From the Secretary of the Religious Tract Society of Liverpool, dated 

2lst November, 1827. ' 

It has given myself and co-labourers in the diffusion of Scriptural 
knowledge, ^eat delight to hear, from thne to time, of the progress 
your Society is making in furtherance of the Important work you have 
taken in hand ; and I beg to return you their and my united thanks 
for. so frequent and regular a communication of the source of that de«- 
light^ in your Monthly Magazine and the specimens of your publican 
tions, 

*' How can I make myself most useful, and thus best glorify my 
God and Saviour ?" is an inquiry which every sincere Christian must 
frequently address to his conscience. The answer must as often sug- 
gest itself: ** Next to my own individual exertions, by exciting to ac- 
tion the best energies of Christians around me : in my family, neigh- 
bourhood, and country ; — and through the world." This has been the 
course pursued by the founders of your Society. They are thus con- 
centrating and strengthening the energies of Christians of every name 
hi the Union, and giving an impulse to their generous zeal, the extent 
and consequences of which cannot be ftilly contemplated. But whilst 



yourself and friends around you naturally look chiefly, in furtherance 
of this excellent work, to your own country, you will ere long, I doubt 
hot, extend your views, more than you have yet done, beyond its geo- 
graphical limits, and will aim to give additional effect to the efforts of 
Christian zeal in dispersing moral darkness, and diffusing the glorious 
fight of the Gospel far and wide. I shall be most iiappy \ty in any de- 
gree, my correspondence should assist you herein. 

Our Thirteenth Annual Report, of which I send you a few copies, 
will not, I am satisfied, check your zeal ; and perhaps it may serve to 
encourage you. In the way of information it is too recent in its date 
for me to add any thing important to it. I feel pleasure, however. In 
sayuig, that .the interest always hitherto maintained at our Committee 
meetings is nothing impaired, but, on the contrary, seems to increase 
in intensity. As some evidence of this, I may state, that, though the 
place of meeting is full a mile and a half from my own residence and 
that of some other of our earliest and most constant attendants ; and 
though the time of our meeting (eight in summer, and in the four win* 
ter months, half-past eight) is an inccmveniently early one, there is no 
Society in Liverpool, nor do I know of one elsewhere, either Religious 
or otherwise, in which the attendance is more constant, or in which 
the interest of its meetings is more uniformly maintained. 

The Report of the Liverpool Religious Tract Society exhibits the 
Society as active in its labours, and expresses great joy in the pros* 
perity of kindred Institutions, especially the American Tract Society, 
and the Religious Tract Society of London. Receipts, during the 
year, $1,293. Number of Xr&cts circulated, 218,236. Number of 
Tracts circulated since the formation of the Society, 3,677,979. 



t^rwii a Gentleman in ike MUitary Tract in HUnois. 

Four years ago, there was not a white family living within twelve 
miles of this place; and now we have a Sabbath School embracing 
sixty scholars, and also a Tract Society, though it is very difficult for 
the people in this new country to agree to pay any thing annually ; 
and when they subscribe, it is so long before Tracts can be obtain^, 
that they become discouraged.. We wish the Parent Society could 
establish a Depository here, from which Tracts could be sold to all 
who are disposed to purchase. The Tract cause has here many ob- 
stacles to encounter ; but it has some warm friends. When those, who 
have been brought up in the midst of religious privileges, come in here 
and find themselves destitute of the Gospel, I cannot tell you how 
eager they often are to obtain Tracts. But the truly godly arc few 

rong us, and scattered, and poor. The enemy is very busy sowing 
es ; and unless the Lord incline the hearts of your Society and 
others to assist us, we can expect nothing but that the whole land will 
be overrun with vice. 



From Kentucky, 

We have reason, says a G^tleman in Kentucky, to bless God for 

what he is domg among us. Almost daily some are brought into the 

f(rid, of such, we trust, as shall be saved. Some who have recently 

been added to the church in this place« have had opportnnity to bear 



the Gospel for forty years or more; and indeed have heard it for 
years, as they now say, with heedless indifference, and ignorant of the 
precipice on which they stood. Their eyes htkve now been opened ; 
and this in part was accomplished by the reading of Tracts. May the 
blessed Spirit direct you and your coadjutors, and the Christian pub- 
lic aid you, in your great work of supplying our whole country with 
these portions of truth. 

From a Destitute Part of Ohio, 
FroQi our own observation, writes a friend in a destitute part of 
Ohio, we are convinced, that, in places destitute of preaching. Tracts 
are very useful. A few weeks since, we obtained 20 or 30 Tracts. 
They have been exchanged in the neighbourhood and read with avii- 
dity, by one and another, ever since they were received. People are 
anxious to get them. " Our meetings are better attended. Professors 
are aroused, and a few are inquiring what they must do to be saved. 
We hope God is about to. pour out his Spirit, and revive his work. 
So far as means are concerned, it appears that Tracts have been ua> 
strumental in produdng this inquiry^ - 

From a Young Oentleman in North Carolina. 
We are indeed thankful for the encouragement with which the XiOrd 
has blessed our feeble endeavours. We begin to see. in many instances, 
the good effects of Tracts di^riJbiq;t<^d by our Auxiliary, and we hope 
to meet with a continuation oPRie s^arae blessings. In an Academy in 
this place, containihg pupils from several of the Southern States, the 
teachers are in the habit of reading Tracts on the Sabbath, to which 
the utmost attention is given by the pupils ; and it is not unfrequent 
to see their eyes Streaming with tears of penitence, or tears of joi^, 
either In beholding their utter sinfulness and the danger to which their 
immortal souls are continually exposed, or in finding a Saviour, to 
whom they can fly for refuge, and who is ever ready to receive such 
as come to him, confessing their sins, and imploring his mercy. My 
constant prayer is, that the Lord will open the hearts of his people to 
aid the. American Tract Society ; that its labours and usefulness may 
increase daily ; and that it may bring salvation to thousands and mil- 
^ lions, who are now sitting in the region and shadow of death. 

From the Western Extremity of New^York^ 
In your last, writes an Agent of the Society, you say, ^- See to it, 
that, m continuing your agency for weeks and months, you do not 
let. yt>ur heart get cold, till you, and those among whom you labour, 
shall sink together into a state of lukewannness and inaction." There 
is reason, my dear Brother, for this remark } for my health having 
often been feeble, travelling over these rough roads, and meeting, in 
many places, but few feeling and active Christians, I find much that 
is calculated to depress my spirits. But I hope the state of my own 
heart is not altogether neglected,, and have reason to thank the Lord 
that he has not wholly hid his face from me. I have befbre me many 
incitements to efibrt, especially from a view of the great want of 
Tracts in these New Settlements; and though the Societies I here form 
are comparatively small, yet I am encouraged to. persevere. If I 
would preach the Gospel aii a Missio;ttfiry, I should, Ijcre, seldom 

♦3 



80 VSErULNSSS OF TKACTS. [MsU*. 

get mor^ tlyta 60, 6r, at mest, 100 hMren on the Sabbatli^ and a far 
leu number on week days. I believe that, at present, the Tracts cir- 
culated in a given period, preach to more indiyiduals ; and thong^h the 
advantages of the voice or a living teacher are wanting* in the first pre- 
sentation of the truth, yet these sermons are read over again and again, 
i think it my du^ here to urge all Auxiliary Societies in the more 
favoured parts of the country , to enlarge their donations to the Parent. 
Institution, that they may be enabled to distribute gratuitously in our 
New Settlements. Could their Officers and Members travel where. I 
have been, they would see that th^ need of their liberality is great, 
and would feel it to be a delightful privilege to send these heralds of 
mercy in great quantities to their dying fellow-men. 



VBanrunisft of vhacvs. 

A SABBATH TRAVELLER PR£SENTE;I> WITH A 

TRACT. 

'^ [Gommmiicated by a young Clergymtp.] 

Mr. S , a citizen of one of the principal villages of A^assachu- 
setts, and a professor of religion, though one who gave little evidence 
of its reigning power in his heart, was returning from the capital of 

that State on the Sabbath, and, passing through the town of B , 

had the Tract, ** Remember the Sabbath Day to keep H Holy" pre- 
sented to him. He had not proceeded far, before he had read the 
Tract, and resolved to cease his journey until the Day of Rest had 
closed. He attended religious worship in the evening; and next day 
proceeded homewards, convinced that his heart was not right with Gk>d. 

Soon after he returned home, he established family worship, which 
he had long neglected ; attended the social prayer-meetings, from 
which he had ab^lnted himself; was enabled to honour, by his ex- 
ample, the cause he had so long dishonoured ; and began to exert a 
decided influence for the spiritual benefit of his neighbours and those 
with whom he bad intercourse. . His wife, perceiving the change 
wrought in him, became awakened, and at length obtained a hope in 
Christ. His fiuthfiilness was also blessed to several other individuals 
in the neighbourhood, three of whom, together with his wife, have 
made a public profession of religion. 



THE << BARREN FIG«TREE*» BLESSED TO A VAN 

IN OHIO. 

[Oommunlcated by an tetelUgent Lady.] 

As you have been so kind as tp write two letters to us, I am Sorry 
that I have neglected so long to thank yovrfor them and the little par- 
cel of Tracts you sent us last spring. They were the means of our 
having a Tract Society formed among us, which we have cause to be- 
litve is doing much good. One man was evidently converted to God 
by reading " The Barren Fig'Tree^" and he has since gmie to his 
rest. We often see great effects from Kttle causes. The Tracts are 
read with much interest, and the people say they are a great deal 
better than they expected. I have no doubt but we shall hear of still 
greater good done by them, and we will endeavour always to commur 
nicate what may be for the good of the caus.e. 



18f8.] U8EFVX.NE88 OF TRACTS.^LIlUB&JlL O^NATION. 51 

THE TRACT, « QUENCH IfOT THE SniliT,'' 
BLESSED TO A LADY. 

During the late reviial of religion in Brighton, New-York, says the 
Rochester Observer, the following incident occurred. A young lady, 
after having withstood all the means of grace, for a peripd of more 
than three months, in th^ progress of the revival, became alarmed, at 
the close pf an evenra|^ conference, on hearing read.theTract entitled, 
** Qmench not the Spirit;** and, before the week e^ed, she gave good 
evidence of a renovation of heart; is now a -member of the church; 
and fills the place at the communion-table, which was soon after va- 
cated by the death of a pious mother. 

THREE SAILORS RECLAIMED BY TRACTS. 

A friend stales, that several Tracts on the Evib of Intemperance 
were presented to the crew of a vessel in Portsmouth, New Hamp*. 
shire, about six months ago ; uid that three of them have been re* 
claimed from intemperate habits. 



DEIST ALARMED BY A TRACT. 

[From a Qenttom&n In Indiana.] 

A Stranger came to this place, a tailor by trade, to pursue his busi- 
ness. He providentially put up at a house where our Tracts were de^ 
posited, and where he found ** The Swearer* s Prayer.** It proved fcg 
an arrow to his soui. He became alarmed, attended on public woi^ 
sh^, and his convictions became v«ry pungent. His distress was so 
great, for several days, that he could not attend to his accustomed 
occupation. He, however, left this place before he obtained a good 
hope, and what is the result I have not been able to ascertain. I have 
been afraid that he strove to drive away his convictions, though he 
was greatly humbled. He owned, that he bad been trying to be % 
Deist, and had lived a very wicked life. Joyful indJbed would be the 
tidings, that he has been brought home to the fold of Christ. 

LIBERAL DONATION FROM THE AMERICAN 
TRACT SOCIETY^ BOSTON. 

A kind communication has been received from the Secretary of this 
Society, eyressing their deep sense of the obligations devolving upon 
Christians, to extend a knowledge of the Gospel throughout our land 
and world. The numerous destitute of our own country, they fbel, have 
some peculiar claims, and claims which are imperious at the present 
hour. From our own country, 12,000,000 of imtaortal beings will go 
into eternity within the short space of 30 years. AH that is done lor 
ihefn nftut be done very toon; and the Tract cause presents us facili- 
ties for commvnicatiBg some portion of Divine truth to all without de^ 
lay. In view of the necessity of increased exertion, the Committee of 
that Society forwarded $600, as a donation to iud the AoMrican Tract 
Society at New-Toirk, in sending an Agent or Agents to New^rleans 
and the West, to form Auxiliaries, distnbute Tracts, and in every way 
promote, as for as able, the welfare of the cause. 

Wishing also to aid m sending the Gospel to the Heathen, they for- 
warded f^l 2&, for printing Tracts in the Bawaiian language, to aid 
American Missionaries at the Smdwi^ bhnde m tbev Tract operas 



si ITEW^TOUC CITT TRACT SOCIETT. [MaC 

tioiis ; and $175, for printiiig ItaKan Tra€U, to be circnUted by Ame- 
rican Missionaries in Malta. Whole amount of the donation, $906 26; 
whieh will be faithftiUy aj^propriated according to the designation 
made, as soon as the Italian Tracts can be printed, and a qualified 
Agent for the West can be obtained. 



NEW-TORK CITY TRACT SOCIETY. 

The First Anniversary of this Society was held in the Masonic HaU, 
Feb. 6. The weather was unfaTourable, but the large room was filled. 
The venerable Rev. Mr. Stanford opened the meeting by prayer ; the 
Report was read by Mr. Gerard Hallock, the Secretary ; and addresses 
were made by Z. Flatt, Esq., Mr. W. A. Hallock, and Rev. Mr. M'll- 
vaine, of Brooklyn. The collection and subscription taken on the spot, 
amounted to $459 30. Receipts, during the year, $2,114 86. Amount 
Of Tracts distributed, 2,368,548 pages. 

The Report presented a very animating view of the efficient labours 
of the various Committees, particularly of the large Committee for 
the Shipping ; detailed very numerous encouraging instances of the 
evident usefulness of the Tracts distributed ; and, together with the 
whole exercises of the meeting, left a very deep impression of the 
necessity of redoubled efibrts, in time to come. 

The Committee for the supply of Sabbath Schools, reported the fol- 
lowing instances of the usefulness of Tracts: 

" To two'families who had for yea«s neglected the house of God, a 
teacher gave some Tracts on the obligations and duties of the Sab- 
bath. They are now punctual attendants on public worship.— Another 
teacher gave a Tract to a man who was labouring in his shop on the 
Sabbath. He immediately left his shop, and returned to his family. 
•—The ' Swearer's Prayer' was given to a man who was uttering the 
most dreadful oaths. He soon after confessed the folly of his conduct, 
and solicited more Tracts. — A Distributor met a man one Sabbath 
morning, who was calling at different houses to dispose of a load of 
fruit, and gave him a Tract such as the occasion suggested. Having 
read a few sentences, he left his cart, overtook the distributor, and 
thus addressed him : * Sir, I ought to make an apology to you. 1 am 
very sorry to be found in such- business. I know that it is wrong. I 
thank you for the Tract, though it is against me : and 1 promise you, 
that if I live to return to New-Jersey, I will never be seen here again 
on the Sabbath. I wish I had some other Tracts, that I ifiight- carry 
them to my family.' Others were accordingly given him." 

The Report thus concludes : 

" And now, patrons and friends of the cause in which we are en- 
gaged, what think ye? — enemies, if any such are present, what think 
ye ? Have we done well, or ill, in thus giving wings to truth, and scat- 
tering it abroad among our destitute population, and to lands ocean- 
wide apart from ours. If well, then sustain us by your influence and 
substantial patronage : but if ill, tell us why. Why should not the 
40,000 seamen who dear from this port every year— some of them to 
be buried in unfathomable depths-— some to die in foreign lands — and 
9II to encounter privations and dangers ; why should they not be fur* 
nished with something to beguile the leisure hour, more befitting an 
immortal mind than profane jests and licentious songs ? Why should 
not the inmates of our Prisons-Placed there to repent and reform— 



1828.1 AUXILIART Ot AJJQVBtAi GEORGIA. 89 

never perhaps again to breathe the air of freedom—and it may be, 
doomed to a speedy and ignominious death ; why should they not be 
blessed with these means of grace and salvation 1 Why should not the 
poor tenants of our Hospitals — standing upon the very borders of the 
grave-«-be counselled and comforted and saved, ere they pass that 
bourne whence no traveller returns ? Why should not the throngs of 
accountable beings who saunter about our streets on the Sabbath, or 
h^unt the houses of dissqiation md infamy, or doze away the sacred 
hours at home, be roused from their slumber of death, and warned to 
flee from the wrath to come? Every year, more than 6000 soula tjr€ 
ramoTed fhnn thi. dtjr t» the bar o/cod; e«e>y week almost 100. 
How can we dear ourselves A*om the blood of souls, if, with all tha 
means we possess, we do not place in their hands these messengers of 
, mercy, and with them the Word of £temal Life 7 

" Members of the Society ! let us not thuik that our work is done. 
Our responsiUilides are not to be measured by our former remissness, 
but by the compass of our talents, our wealth, our influence, and what* 
ever else we possess. We are placed here as stewards of God : all that 
we have, we received from him ; and for all we must reader a strict 
account. How can we think of a cessation of labour in this cause, when 
our population is increasing at the rate of 10,000 a year, and when 
even those who have been once suppUed, require to be watched over 
eoQtinually, that the seed sown may be brought to maturity 1 Vice 
grants no cessation of its allurements—- time no cessation of its flighf-* 
death no cessation of its claims— and eternity no oeMsation of its UiM 



or wo." 



We would earnestly invite the attention of each of our large cities 
and towns to the importance of having snch an Insthution in active 
operation within their own limits. Such a one now exists iif Phil»> 
delphia; and one of sunilar character, we understand, has veiy re» 
cently been organised in Boston. 



AUXILIARY OF AUGUSTA, GECmiGIA. 

The Fourth Anniversaiy of thitf l^ciety wats held Dee. 28. Received 
into the Depository, during the year, &44,720 pages of Tracts, 172 
bound vblumes, and an edition of 14,255 copies of the Christian Al- 
manac. Amount paid to the Parent Institution during the year, in- 
cluding exchange, ^51. The Society has been very active ; ha!s 17 
Auxiliaries ; and is extending its influence through a large and desti- 
tute portion of the Interior. . 

** Bat,** Mjrs the Report, •* tbe ways of DiTine Providence lire mysterioiif . Oa 
the morning of tbe 2d July fatst, our DepctHtry, containing about 800,000 paget 9f 
TracU tmd 82 hmund twlume*, wM-«o«i«ttmMl hyj^'t leavingr us destitvTte, and at tlie 
•ame time vming ]€0 dollars to the Parent Inatitution. Qut, reljrinig on an aiUwIse 
Benefactor, who^has tlie hearts of all men in his bands, and turneth tbem whither- 
•never he will, your M anag^ers, although cast down, did not feel forsalien ; and 
through his goodness the liearts of hit children have been opened, to relieve oar 
wants in part. We Iwve received from our Ohristian brethren aitd. friends, as aa 
extra donation, tlw snm of 111 dollars*, and the Managers cannot but express their 
tbankSfto the Parent Institution, who, with a promptness that spoite tbe benevo- 
lent feelings of their hearts, aided us, when destitnle, by a grant of 200,000 pages 
of Traeti. The Managers could not but feel, that this was an extra call npon the 
fulloweri of tbe Redeener; and we trust it has been met with humility, meek- 
ness, and deUght, la devotliijg a part of their iobitance to this glorious cause." 



34 KiciiPTS. [Uar. 

AITXnXiBT OP TROT, TTEW-TORK. 

The Elerentli Aanivergaiy at this Society wu held Jan. 14. Re> 
ceipU, during the rear 1827, $391 40, of which fSO was made b do- 
nolioit to the Parent Society. Diitribuled, during the year, to Sloops 
ud Canal Buati, 21,862 pages ; to Sabbath Schoola, 8,038 ; to Com- 
moQ Schooli, 3,9410 ; to Auiiliariei, 76,222 ; to Societies not Auxili- 
ary, 40,206i: whole anioaiil distributed, 260,866 pages. Whole difitri- 
bulion in 11 yean, about 1.300,000 pages. The Annual Meeting wta 
full and inleresting, and the Report eonlaina much eDCOuragemeDt (o 
eSbrl. A resolution of thanks to the Board for their services tbe lail) 
year, was atgatived ! on the ground, we presuune, that all are " un- 
profitable serrauts," and that thanks belong to Qod only. 

Female AuxUian/ of Ritigernireel Chunk, Ntm-Vbrk. 
This Society, wbich has 313 members, at its Second AnniTersary, 
lield Feb. 8, ^propriated to the Parent Institution $239, Biarfonit- 
.; L._! ,, -'— -IS for Tracts. 



HECEIPT8 

IHTO THE TkEASDRt OF TBE VHERiajLtl TRAOT SOOIET!, 

Dmvi£ the aimUh aaiiag Ftbnary I5> 19£G. 

ACSILIART TRAOT SOCIETIES. 



1 8280 



HECEIPTS. 



RkbmoiMl, Madison Co. Fem. Susan H. Irvine. See. 
TENN.— HaryvUle, (Bloant Go» Aux.) James Berry, Sec . 
IM D.— Indianapolis, Isaac Co«» Agent .... 
OHIO.— GranTiUet Licking Go. Kev. Jacob Little, Pres. k Tr. 
Hillsborough, Wm. Keys, Agent,* 



35 

1 FotTr. Don. 
600 



IS 00 

44 tX) 

45 00 
9fl0 



Societies not AtucUiary,f(?r Traets. 

li. YORK.— Kew Utrecht, Long 
Island, Fem. Uible, Miss, and 
Tract Soc. Mrs. Berier, Tr. . 7 IS 

K. J £ R.— Wood bridge, M etuchen 
Soc. Simeon Mundy, Ag. . . 14 00 

Tracts sold at the General Depo- 
sitory to Individ vals. &c. includ- 
ing 1 15 dollars received of Sub* 
scribers, in New-Yorii City, for 
Tract Magazine, . . 296 09 

Directors for lAfe, 

N.TORK New YorliOity,Wm. 

M. Halsted, . . 60 00 

DEL.— Wilmington, Rev. E. W. 

Gilbert, by liis Church k Cong. 60 00 
DI8T. COL.— Washington City, 

Rev. Daniel Baker. 2d Pres. Ch. 

by Fem. Home Miss. Soc and 

by Rutgers' Juv. Aux. Tr. Soc. 

Mrs. H. K. H. Plumley, Dir. . 60 00 
VIRVOuIpepper C. U., Rev.Oeo. 

A. So^tb, by Ladies, (in part of 

60 dollVrsO . 80 00 

Wythe Go. Rev. Sam. H. M^Nutt, 

by Ladies, . . . . 60 00 

OHIO. Cleaveland,HannonKiDn- 

bury, Donat. of Horse, Saddle, 

lind Bridie, value 60 dollars. 



Members for lAfe. 

VER.— Cornwall, Rev. Jedidiah 

Bushneil, by Aux. Tr. (in p«rt 

ofaOdoUaraO • ' .10 00 

N.HAMP^-Oxford,J.B.Wheeler, 20 00 
MASS.— Blandford, Rev. Dorus 

Clark, by Ladies, . . 20 00 

do. Dea. Eli Pease, . . 20 00 
Hatfield, Rev. Jared B. Water- 

bunr, by Lad. BeWing Soc . 20 00 
PItUileld, Rev. Eliakiin Phelps,. 

by young Lad. of his Seminary, 20 00 
CONN.— KiUihgly,. Rev. Elisha 

Atkins, by Fem. Benef. Soc . 20 00 
New-Haven, Rev. Sam. Merwin, 

t^ Mr. Wm. K. Townsend, . 20 00 
north Ounford, Rev. Zolva Whit- ^ 

more, by Ladies, . 20 00 

PI. YORK.- New-York City, Wm. 

Henry Been, by His fisther, O. 

Beers, 20 00 

pleasant ▼*ilc7t &«▼• Nicholas 

Patterson, by Gong, of Pres. Oh. 20 00 
K. JER.— Orangey Rev. Asa Hill- 

yer, D. D* by dhnreb k Oong. 90 00 

TIR«--I'l^i^7<^df<"^ C^ Jamef 
X,eftwlck,Jun. . .90 00 

ryncbborgh. Rev. Wm. 8. Reld, 
(iiiAiUof20doUartO .9 00 

do. Rev. S.M*Oiiire, popart 
of20doilan|) . .12 00 



16 00 

I 960 I 1 69 

N. OAR— Harvey's Neck,Perqui- 

min's Co. Charles W. Skinner, 90 00 
Salem,StokesGe.Rev.G.Shober, 20 90 
OHIO.— Randolph, Rev. Joseph 
Meriam, by Fem. Tract Soc (in 
full of 20 dollars,) . .10 00 

Annual Direetors~^$5 each. 

N. YORK.— New-York City, F. 
G. Bull, James A. Burtis, John 
Oampliell. Joseph Foulke, Eie- 
kiei Oreen, George Hannah, 
Heury Jan>es, Mrs. Eliza Lew- 
is, John H'Gregor, Martin £. 

. Thompson, . . . . 60 00 

Annual Members-^^t each, 

N.YORK.— New- York City, Da- 
vid Andrews, Archibald C. Bra- 
dy, John Bremner, Dr. Thomas 
Onck.'John Crerar, Joseph W. 
Duryee, Robert O. Dwight, A. 
W. Gillett, A4ex. S. Glass, Mrs. 
Letty Hawkins, Stephen Holt, 
Inn. Geo.W. Hoarhton, Simeon 
Hyde, Moses Judah, Matthew 
Keeler, Miss Ann Eliza King, 
James Little. Daniel Lord, Jnn. 
J. Mortimer, jun. Mrs. Ann Blott, 
Obadiah Peck, Rev. Absalom 
Peters- Mr8.IIarriet Peter8,Ge0' 
W. Piatt, Joel Piatt, Stephen A. 
Rich, H n. Schieffeiin, John 
Wheelwright, David Smith, . 68 00 

OONN.— Washington, Fanny M. 
Gany, Ann. Sub, 1 00 



Oiher Donatiotts, 

CONN.— Oreent Farms, Monthly 

Concert Cd. . . . ' -. 
N. YORK.— Brooklyn, Nehemiah 

Denton, Esq 

N. York City, Dr. Thomas Boyd, 

do. Fem. Wall-street Cong. . 

do. William Holton, 

do. 0. R. Kingsbury, 

do. Friend to the Society, by 
hands of A. Van Sinderin^ 
Peterboro, Oerrit Smith, Esq. ■ . 
Troy, Friend, for Sandw. Islands, 
WatertowD, Moses Bacon, . 
PENN.— Braintrim,. Sussex Co. 

H. W. Nortiurop, . 



SOO 

10 00 
10 00 

5 00 

6 00 
1 00 

10 00 

11 ou 
1 26 

20 

60 



The above List contains Donations 

For Malta, 176 00 

For Sandwich Islands, . . 232 ,60 
For supporting an Agent at New- 
Orleans and the West, . . 600 00 

Whole Am. of Donat. |l8fl3 08 , 
Rec. for Tracts sold^ 1 8 1 6 60 

Toialf • . ifg 709 t4 

TBe Gnmtf of Tntcti, ehicfly to the dcftttuCei during the nonfh en^ifl^^^ru* 
ary t6, amounted Co U8)000page8« 



OF THS 

ABTERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 

I'he following Tracts have been stereotyped : vis. 

No. 209. W^T God xmflots fksx^s Mxaks to producs qesat 
Effects.— -pp. 12. The fact that God does this is first illustrated in 
the Tract by a multitude of examples, chiefly from Scripture; and 
the reasons mentioned why he does so, are-^ stain human glory ; 
ft dieck the propensity of men to ascribe their success to external 
means ; to encourage Christians to put their trust in God ; ito intuni- 
llate his enemies ; and to display his own glory. An argument is drawn 
ftur faithfulness in employing the humble means which God has ap- 
pointed; spch as distributing Tracts, giving good counsel, devising 
plans of usefulness, instructing the youn^, and prayer. 

No. 210L History of 'Jonathan Brown, the Barasman. By tfic 
kUe Rev, Dr. Calamy, qf London. — pp. 12. This is a Narrative of a 
plain honest man, who, at an advanced age, called on Dr. Calamy, to 
inquire after the way. of salvation; having long lived in most sur- 
prising igMvance of the Gospel — not even knowing any thing of 
Christ, except by the oaths of the profane. He at length entered a 
church with a crowd, unapprized of the object for which they were 
assembling ; heard the simple truths of the Gospel ; received them with , 
joy into his heart; and gave a bright evidence, m his life and death, 
•f sincere repentance, and devotion to the Redeemer's cause. 

Nq» 211. To Parxnts.— pp. 16. This Tract is from the pen of Bx^< 
Ebzniezjkr Dicxbt, D. D. of Pennsylvania. It is a sound, ptactieal, 
instructive Tract on the subject of training up the Rising Generation ; 
.showine the importance of this worle, the success whidi may be ex- 
pected m the discharge of it, the obstacles io be overcome, and the 
best methods of conductmg it. , 

SPIRIT OF CHRISTIAN CHARITT. 
heUtr aeeompavying a Donation from WUmingtonf Delaware. 

Sir— No Christian can contentedly suffer the American Tract So^ 
-ciety to lack means effeetually to execute its great purpose. The pro- 
positions in the last Number of the Tract Magasme, for supplyui^ the 
wants of this Society, will receive, it is hoped, immediate attention. 
It is hoped, too, that one will not wait for another ; but that every one 
will see his duty, not as a burden to be undertaken with reluctance^ 
bQl as a privilege to be enjoyed with gratitude, and will bt once per- 
ibrm it. '' He which soweth ^[wringly shall reap also sparingly, and 
Jhe which soweth bountifully shall reap also boontifiilly," is more than 
« mere form of words ; ** for God loveth a cheerful giver." 

Two of the propositions contained intheMagarine are thus expressed; 

"Are thvrc not 100 chorehM which b«Te friends eaongh of the cause la escb« to 
contribute 60 dolian, to conttltute their Pastor a director fot I4fe, and that rail e 
vfiOOOdoUarsf _ ^ . ^ 

•« WMl not the MO Ansllfarica of the Society coatribata flOOO doUan aore in db« 

BStiOBI f** 

In answer— Then Is enclosed, qq the part ef friends of the eaase hi the 94 TtflB* 
hyterian church in this place, the sam of M dollars, to eoailltate their Pasthr,- 
Bev. B. W. Gilbert, • Director for Life, 

There it also enclosed, on the part of the AaxlUary Tract Society of thisplac*, 
the sum of 10 dollars, as a donation. A FEIENO* 

This example, if followed throughout the country, would, fay th^ 
ttessing of God, enable the Society to do great things for the cause ot 
f^rangelical Religion^ especially as the VeHley of the Mii9iaij^\ vtS. 
«iur ffiktr exfieiisive New Settlem^nte* 



THE AMERICAN 



AP&Hi, 1828. 



TRAVELLING AGENTS. 

Ib the correipondence of the American Tract Societ?, ve verj fre- 
fiueiitly meet vith the ■uggestiod, " If the Parent Itulitvtian WOVld 
nnd ut an Agent, tee thitJc tomelliing important tcmitd be dene here 
/ar lite cauie of TVaett." We are always ifratified •rith the friendship 
10 (he caiue, implied in such b sug^atiDn ; and haie do question cf 
the deitrabtenesi, that able, pious, and deToted men, acquaintsd with 
tiie character and state of the Parent Inititntion, should be sent forth, 

the churches. We believe the presence ofauch men should be hailed 
asableiungby all the friends of Christ ; but, at the same time, tlwt 
no active CAruffun lAould uoil for their preaeact to itidle him to tx: 

It may require, in a common Christian, much fortitude, BOd self- 
■lenial, and energy , la arouse himself to action, and to enlist the efforts 
of those around him, when impelled only by a sense of obligation to , 
Christ and Ihe louls of men ; but on such vohintary efforts the pros- 
I'ciiiy of the cause Tilally depends. ETeri' visit of a travelling Agent 

Vol. III-. \ ' [Whole No. 2B 



88 TBATELLING AGENTS. [ApIlU 

ioFolTes the expense of a joumeyy and of much precious time and ser* 
vice ; and if he be a preacher, takes aaraj Irom the wide field of Mil • 
sionary and minigterial effort, One of those ** laboidrera" whom we are 
constantly ** praying the Xiord of the'liarrest to send forth into his 
harvest/* 

Suppose that every place in our country, where Benevolent Asso* 
Ciations might properly be expected to exist and continue in active 
operation, must be visited once every year by a travelling Agent i& 
behalf of each, of the principal d^Nutmentt of Benevolence; the ea- 
pense, allowing to each Agent the psual compensation of a Missionary, 
would probably exceed one third of the receipts of aU the Benevolent 
Institutions now in operation. We do not, indeed, attempt to decide, 
that, in. the present compa.ratiyely inactive state of the churches, such 
an amount of agency, could a sufficient number of qualified Agents be 
■obtained, would not, on tiie whole, be beneficial; but think it plain, 
that such inactivity on the part of Christians, as would render so great 
an amount of agency necessary, implies a criminal indifference. to the 
cause. 

-< Why should not every Christian in the land, whether mtSe or fe* 
male, old or young, seriously make the inquiry, " Are the funilies 
within the circle of my own acquaintance and influence supplied with. 
Helrgious Tracts ? Cannot I be the instrument of forming a Tract 
Society in the place where I reside, and in other places within the 
sphere of my knowledge, that shall be the means of putting some of 
these publications at least, into the hands of all who can read 7" 
Christians in this age must be expected to volunteer their efforts in 
the cause of Benevolence, without lingering in hope that otiiers, of 
more influence, or better qualified, will come forward to the work. 
That every Minister of Christ will be an efficient Agent of this causey 
wherever his influence can be exerted, is, in our most active churches, 
now expected as a matter of course. And if laymen would assume, 
voluntary agencies, for a longer or shorter period as \hey should find 
to be practicable, and go out and form Societies and excite others to 
action, their united efforts would prove of incalculable benefit. 

We recollect no more happy illustration of what one private Chris* 
tiaUf even among the destitute in the wDdeniess, may do for the cause 
of Tracts, tham ^e have just received from a Gentleman in one of the 
recently settled counties of Ohio. 

" A few days ago," he writes, " I came across the last Report of the 
American Tract Society ; and learning from it that it was practicable 
to form an Auxiliary, I immediately set about it, though in the midst 
of great opposition, for the enemy's emissaries are veiy numerou9 
among us. I soon found two persons, that felt as I did, and were 
ready to join me in my efforts. The same night, we called together a 
fc^ neighbours, and appointed a Committee to form a Constitution and 



Obtaia Subscribers ; und wttbin one week, an Aiudliary was formed, and 

SroTision made for immediately obtaining a supply of Tracts from 
few-York. 

<' We live in a part of thia state newly settled and very poor, and 

- iwe whadi. perhaps stands as miidi in need of tbe aid of the Parent 

Society as any other in the United States. The majority of the people 

have no means of grace, and by their conduct say they wish no means 

of grace. Many among us are arowed Atheists. 

** The influence of one Tract in encouraging our operations, I think 
it my duty particularly to mention. The night after we formed the 
Constitution, I attended a prayer meeting, and, at the dose, began to 
solicit those assembled to join our Auzilmry. Ignorance was the ge- 
neral ciy of all present. I began to explain to them the character of 
the Parent Society and the vahie of Tracts, when up rose a man, (Mr. 
O ' ',) and, as nearly as I can remember his own words, said as 
fallows: 

** ^l know what Tracts are ; for, a few days ago, I was coming from 
N. and met the stage, when a passenger held up a pi^er in his hand 
and shook it, that i might see it, and threw it off so far as to dear the* 
carriage, which was running very fast. I got off ray horse and picked 
it up, and to.my surprise found it the Stoeater*i Prayer ! it is Ae only 
Tk-aet I ever taio t 1 moonted my horse, and began to read, to see 
what kind of a prayer was a Swearer's Prayer, I read it over and over 
again. It was most excellent; and, my friends, if you knew the value 
of Tracts, you would not hesitate to subscribe.' 

" Mr. Q- immediately subscribed half a dollar; ajid all the men 

present came up and subscribed, without any further delay. Last 
sabbath, I was at meeting, and was informed by one of Mr. O *s 
near neighbours, that he thinks he is under the spedal operation of 
the Holy Spirit, and that he appears to be an altered man." 

While on this subject, we would remark, that, much as the friends 
of the cause in the New Settlements, and in all the destitute places, 
luwe it In their power to accomplish by sfHrited exertions, they have, 
in all respects, a claim on Christians in more favoured parts of the 
country, for their sympathy, and their prompt and efficient aid, what- 
ever expense of eiSnrt, or of iiinds, may be required. Without such 
•id, there is little fMrobabllity that the waste places, in general, will 
ever be supplied. FaitbAil Agents must be sent out to labour in these 
|>laces, to distribute Tracts gratuitously, and call up the attention of 
the people to their importance. 

We are deeply impressed with a conviction of the imperious duty 
devolving on the American Tract Society immediaUfy to send firik, 
Jor then jntrposes, a large immber of welf qualified tmd faUhfiU men, 
especially into the vast and populous regions west of the AUeghar^ 
fiowUains. That the Christian public would sustain the Sodety in 
such a measure, cannot be questioned for a moment. The calls from 
Christians dispersed through these moral Pastes, unblessed l>y minis- 
terial counsel and co-operation, far removed from the sympathy and 
e^oomgem^ of most of (heir Christimi brethren, and oOen pressed 



40 FOBEIGN CORRESPONDEACS* [Aprils 

down with pecuniary responsibilities pertaining to the tbbgs of this 
life, are constantly becoming more and more frequent, and more and 
more affecting and urgent The foUowiag^ from a Gentleman in the 
lower part of Kentucky, is a specimen of several communications 
from the West, just received; and we do not envy the man in whose 
heart they can awaken no desire to extend the hand of Christian be- 
neficence, and give immediate and effective aid. 

"We have here/' he writes, ** an extensive territory, say 160 nules 
in length and 100 in breadth, in whidi about 60 churches, of different 
Evangefical denominations, have been organised, 29 of which, of one 
denomination, have but three ordained ministers of the GospeL A 
large part of the population is totally unsnpplied with preaching. 
Vast' multitudes belong to no denomination of Christians, live out of 
the reach of any place of public worship, and, GaUio like, * care for 
none of these things.' This surely is a field that presents, to a lament- 
able degree, a moral waste, in which these silent but powerful preach- 
ers might, with the blessing of God, do much good. It will be long 
before these desolations can be supj^ied with living preachers; Tracts 
seem to be the only medium through which a knowledge of Christ,, end ' 
his saving benefits, can soon be conveyed to them^" 



roaiisazr ooBjiBsvovsairoii. 

TRACT OPERATIONS IN SCOTLAND. 

From JIfr. WiUiam JV. GrarUf Secretary, of the Religums Tract Soetety 
of Edinburgh^ 6 Eatt Register-ttreet. 

The Secretary of the Glasgow Religious Tract Society having for- 
warded to the Committee of the Edmburgh Religious Tract Society, 
a copy of your First Annual Report, and a few numbers of your Tract 
Magazine ; and having offered to find a conveyance to you, of any 
- communication we might have to make; the Committee of the Edin- 
burgh Religious Tract Society feel very great pleasure indeed, in 
offering to their American brethren theur most cordial Christian sa- 
lutations. 

it has afforded tP the friends oT religion in this country, the truest 
delight, to observe the seal and activity with which the cause of Christ 
is prosecuted in the United States of America. We pray that, by the 
^race of God being largely poured out upon all who are engaged in a 
cause so sacred and so beneficial, your Society, and all kindred So- 
cieties, maylbe enabled to persevere, and to abound yet more and 
more. " In due season, we shall reap, if we faint not." As the believers 
in Jesus are actuated by one spirit, and as their ends and aims are 
one, even to prepare the way for hb second coming to judge the 
world ; so there is nothing that strengthens our hands more, than to 
feel that i)ratemal bond which unites together believers of climes and 
countries apart from each other. Such is the feeling which influences 
our Committee in opening a correspondence with yours. 

Ton desire to be informed of the state of Tract operations in Scot* 
land. I beg leave to forward to you, copies of the two last Reports 
issued by this Society ; which will present you a summary view of the 
mfbrmation we have on this subject. The issues from our Depository 



t8i8.] FCAXIAN COAEESrOKPSNCe. 41 

have b«en continually i]icr«asiii|r* !■ )^^» ^ ^*^^s ®^ Tracts and 
small books were 303,661 ; last year (1826) they amoniited to 400,800. 
We eiqi>ect soon to issue a new Report t and when it is published, 1 
shall feel mueh pleasure in forwarding c<^ies to you; 

I beg leave, in the name of the Committee oi the Edinburgh Refi* 
gious Tract Society, to present your Committee with a set of the pub- 
lications issued by this Society. I also send a few numbers of a month- 
ly periodical Work published by this Society, entitled the ** Scottish 
Missionary and Philanthropic Register." In the number for Novem- 
ber you will find your firat Report noticed. This work has a large 
circulation in Scotland, the largest indeed of any periodic^ published 
here ; we shall, therefore, esteem it kind, if you will, from tune to 
time, favour us with any information connected with your own So- 
ciety, or with other American Societies engaged in spreading abroad 
the knowledge of the Saviour, that we may insert it in our Register. 
We shall transmit it regularly to you, if you will point out a channel 
through which it may be sent; and, in return, you will perhaps be 
good enough to send us your Tract Magaaine arid your Reports as 
they are published, and also Reports of any other Benevolent Socie- 
ties in America. They seldom reach Edinburgh, and therefore they 
would be highly prized, and would form excellent materials for our 
Register. 

From Mr. William Fergtuon, Secretary of the Religiout Tract Society 

of Glasgow, Scotland. 

On receiving your kind letter, accompanied by several copies of the 
Report of the American Tract Society, I wrote to the Secretary of the 
Edinburgh Tract Society, transmitting an abstract of the letter, and a 
copy of the Report ; and in return have received a parcel, which is 
herewith sent, containing a letter, and, as I understand, copies of their 
Reports and Tracts. These documents, together with what I send 
from this, contain all the information I can at present communicate 
respecting Tract operations in Scotland. 

The Glasgow Tract Society was instituted in March, 1803, and for 
a number of years continued very active. They published about 79 
or 80 different Tracts ; in'general very excellent. Its constitution was 
somewhat like that of the Edinburgh Society, the members being en> 
titled to a certain number of each Tract, and their distribution con- 
fined to their own publications. From causes which I cannot now 
ascertain, the Society became involved in debt, and gradually de- 
' duied, till it became entirely extinct. In 1820, its place was partially 
supplied by the institution of " The, Glasgow Youths' Tract Society.'^ 
It commenced on a small scale, having, I believe, nothing farther in 
view than the purchase and distribution of Tracts, in which they 
showed considerable zeaL Some of the active friends of the former 
Society thinking the plan of the youths not sufficiently extensive, pro« 
posed the revival of that Society, which was carried into effect, .28tfa 
April, 1823, under the designation of " The Rdigious Tract Societr 
for Glasgow and the West of Scotland," and which has been consU* 
tuted under such regulations as appear likely to secure success, and 
avoid the fate of the former Society. 

Our Committee commenced their labours by collecting a large num- 
ber of TracO, published by Tract Societies and booksellers. These 

4» 



4m ' ANGISNT TfiACT RECORD. [April, 

were subaaitted^ in succession, Co the priTate examination of eyery 
member of the Committee, aad a weekly meeting held, for the pur-^ 
pose of discussing their merits, and determining on what were to be 
adopted or rejected. And I am sorry to say, that, ii^ the course of 
that investigation, we were under the necessity of rejecting a consi* 
derable number, either from the impurity of their doctrine, the defec- 
tiveness of their statements, or the want of sufficient interest!; and 
some on account of their being only applicaUe to local situations^. 
Our meetings continue weekly, early on Satui/day morning, for the 
.examination of new Tracts and manuscripts*; and we proceed to press 
as our funds will allow us. These, I regret to say, have been hitherto 
but slender, ($560 the last year,) owing partly to the very great num<* 
ber of benevolent and charitable institutions in this city, and particu-> 
larly, of late, to the unprecedented stagnation in trade and manufac- 
tures. These, however, are now improving ; and I indulge the hope, 
that our means and our zeal will yet not only be maintained, but in- 
creased. , ' 

I have now the pleasure of sendiag you copies of our Reports and 
Tracts, which I shall be glad to fii^ meet the approbation of your 
Committee. I also send such of the Reports of the Toung Men's 
Tract Society as I can now obtain. 

Our friend Mr. Freeland was a very active member of our Com- 
mittee^ the loss of whose assistance I regret. He has gone to settle at 
Montreal, where I believe he will . have a wide field for his active be-> 
nevolence, and may probably become a useful correspondent to your 
Institution, which, I am happy to learn, is formed on such an exten* 
sive scale as promises, by the blessing of God, to prove a national 
good, and doubtless the means of salvation to a countless multitude. 

I shall be very happy to be favoured with your future oorrespon-v 
dence, and to receive copies of your Tracts, Reports, &,c.; and shall,, 
in return, furnish you with ours, and such further information as \ 
can procure. 



ANCIENT TKACT RECORD. 

From the London Theological and Biblical. Magaxine for Sept. 1804^ 
being the Year of the Formation of the British and Foreign Bible 
Society. 

The advantages and disadvantages of the press, in diffusing infor- 
mation throughout a country, were never more generally canvassed 
than when the political societies, which called themselves Constitu- 
tional, he. were in their most vigorous activity, a few years ago. 

We have some suspicion that with them originated the thought of 
circulating cheap Tracts in loose papers ; and if that was the fact, it 
must be acknowledged ''the children of this world were wiser than 
the children of light.*' But it pleased a gracious Providence to direct 
the children of light, at length, to the reJiigious benefits which might 
be derived from this plan ; and we have reason to think that it has by 
no means reached, as yet, that extent of good of which it is capable. 
Being desirous of tracing the origin of its religious application, we 
applied to the Secretary of the Religious Tract Society in Edinburgh, 
and have been favoured with the following authentic communication, 
which we insert, with more than usual particulars, because it may be 
a mean of exciting similar zeal in other tqwn beside those mentioaed 
in this pap^r. 



IH^.] TBACTS AT HALTA« 43 

This 'Society originated in the intimacy of two young men, whose 
conversation frequently turned upon the means of doing good. It 
Occurred to them, that the distribution of religious pamphlets might 
be particularly useful in promoting the spiritual interests of men ; and 
with that view they formed the idea of publishing, at their own ex- 
pense, one or two small Tracts. But reflecting, that their exertions, as 
individuals, would comparatively be of little use, they comx^unicated 
their design to a few friends, who readily agreed to join them in a 
Society for that purpose. A meeting was accordingly held, i26th July, 
1793,''^ when the Society was formed, and a Committee appointed to 
conduct the business. At this meeting there were only nine sub- 
scribers ; but before the end of the year, the number increased to 
sixty f and in a short time afterwards, to about two hundred, consisting 
of Ministers and private Christians of several denominations. 

Since the commencement of this Society, fifty pamphlets have \ieen 
published, consbting of about 129,000 copies. These publications 
have been extensively circulated by means of many of the members 
residing in distant parts of the country, and some pleasing instances 
of their usefulness have been communicated to the Society. In Octo- 
ber, 1799, a guinea was transmitted from Aberdeen, as a donation 
from a person who had been relieved from long and deep distress of 
mind by reading No. 14 of the Society's Tracts, entituled, ** Brief 
Thoughts concerning the Oospel, Sic." And the Committee were 
lately much gratified by receiving information from the late Dr. Er- 
skine, a short time before his death, that " several of the Society's 
Tsacts have been reprinted by Dr. Morse, of Charlestown, the cele- 
brated geographer, and distributed by him with considerable success 
in many of the American States." In consequence of which, a copy 
of all the Tracts on hand were given to the Doctor, to send to Ame- 
rica, with liberty to reprint all, or any of them which might be thought 
proper. 

There is. reason to believe that this Society was the first of the kind. 
Since its commencement. Societies of a similar nature have been in- 
stituted at London, Manchester, Darlington, Haddington, Glasgow, 
^c; and also in foreign countries, viz. Switzerland, Holland, Ger- 
many, the East Indies, &lc. Some of these Societies print their own 
pamphlets, but the greater part purchase them from, the London So- 
ciety. With any of them the Edinburgh Society will be happy to 
co-operate, by furnishing their Tracts on very low terms. Their pub- 
lications are very select, as the Committee, aware of the importance 
of sound doctrine, are careful that nothing is published but what, in 
their opinion, is agreeable to the unerring word of God; and they 
always take the liberty of making such alterations as they think ne^ 
cessary, on any thing sent to them for publication. 



TRACTS AT MALTA. 

In a communication recently received from Mr. Homan Hallock, 
printer at the American Missionary station at Malta, we have a com- 
plete list of all the Tracts tAere issued, from the establishment of the 
press in 1822, to November 1, 1827, with a statement of the number 
of pages in each Tract, the number of editions, and the whole number 

* The London RellgloiK Tract Society was lostituted In 1799. 



44 vsEitTLNSss OF TRACTS. [April, 

of copies issued. From this statement it appears that the whole 
amount printed is as follows : viz. 

Tracts. fklitions. Ko.ofGopief. No.ofP«fes« 

In Modern GKek, . . fi2 78 71^50 3,782,000 

InltalmB, ... 43 61 t6^ l^TOe^OOff 

In Grttco-Twkiflh, . . 1 S 1,500 96,000' 

Total printed, . . los 131 128,000 6,474,000 

Of the Greek Tracts, 2,680,640 pages hare been distrihuted ; of the 
Italian, 850, 1 12. Total distributed, 3,490,752. 

The Tracts are in part translations from the publications of the 
London and American Tract Societies, and in part original Tracts, 
more particularly adapted to the regions of ignortece, error, and 
superstition, for which they were intended. Several specimens of 
Tracts recently issued, both in modem Greek and Italian, are re* 
ceived, printed on a beautifid type, and the larger ones covered. 



vsBTir&xniss or tmjlotb. 

TRACT AMONG A COMPANY OF RUDE YOUNG , 

SABBATH BREAKERS. 

The following Tract anecdote, says the Rev. Herbert C. Thomson, 
late 'Agent of the American Tract Society in Virginia, was furnished 
me by a Lady, whom I consider as eminent for her piety as she is 
distinguished by her talents and standing in society. 

" A female of the village of , who was in the habit of distrilmt- 
ing Tracts, with earnest prayer to God for tfis Spirit to accompany 
each one of these little silent messengers with a divine power and 
energy, being detained from d^urch on Sabbath evening, was engaged, 
as usual, in instructing her children out of the word of God, when 12 
or 16 noisy rude boys collected near the house, just in front, and en- 
gaged in their accustomed games of play, which interrupted her chil- 
dren exceedingly. Annoyed with their noise, and distressed to see 
these young immortals profaning the Lord's day, and thereby calling 
down the curse, instead of the blessing of God upon their souls, she 
sent to them, by a servant, the Tract called ** Address to Sabbath 
BreakerSj" requesting the oldest boy to read it aloud to the rest. They 
soon gathered round him, and he read it aloud twice. After reading 
one oc two others, they dispersed. 

One of the boys, who had been very much addicted to profaning the 
Sabbath, notwithstanding frequent warnings and corrections by his 
friends, went to bed as soon as he got home, saying he was sick ; and 
continued to groan in the most piteous manner, as though he were 
extremely ill. An old servant, who was pious, came in, and asked 
what was the matter ; remarking, that he left hpme quite well, after 
dinner. He groaned, and said he was sick. She replied, ** I expect 
you have been doing something bad, and you are sin-sick." The boy, 
conscience-struck, jumped up, and asked, ** Who told you that I had 
been doing any thing bad ?" She replied, '' I am confident of it, from 
your countenance ; you look so pale." ^e then confessed where he 

had been, and that Mrs. had sent the party the above-named 

Tract ; and said, " O I while B was reading it, I felt every hair 

on my head rise, and put my hand on my head to feel if it was not 
all standing up. O, it is the most awful book you ever read. I wil} 
never break the Sabbath again.'' 



It 



18^8.] USEFULNESS OF TEACTS. 45 

[For the American Tract Magazine.] 
TRACT BLESSEP TO A YOUNG MARBIEB LADT. 

A young Lady in the city of New-York, who k actively engaged in 
the cause of Tracts, sent lately a few of these invaluable pioneers of 
the Sacred Word to a brother residing in N. in the same state, for 
distribution among his neighbours ; hoping that they might be useful, 
and excite a more liYcly interest Sp Tract Institutions. On a subse-^ 
quent visit to the city, her brother observed to her : ** One of those 
Tracts you sent us, we have reason to believe, has been the means of 
saving a soul." She inquired the name of the Tract, and what were 
the particular incidents attending the reading of it. He replied, it was 
enticed ** Solemn Iriquiries and Counsel to careless Sinners;^* and that 
he gave it to a young married lady, very gay, and thoughtless of every 
thing but what the world calls happiness ; who, however, promised to 
read it. 

The next day he met with her, and noticing an expression of anxiety 
on her countenance altogether new, asked her if she had read the 
Troc^ She replied that she had, but it had only made her unhappy ; 
and added, that she did not know that she ever before hid had a so- 
'lemn thought concerning her soul. After some conversation, he in- 
yited her to attend a prayer-meeting in the evening. She assented; 
and there had deep views of her situation as a sinner unreconciled to 
God. Her convictions did not leave her ; but she was soon led to sub- 
mit to the Gospel terms of salvation, and rejoice in God, as ** in Christ 
reconciling the world unto himself 

Blef t mecsenger of Truth ! baste on t^y way, 
Say yet to many a wand'rer, ^ Stop, and think !— 
Hast thou a soul f and is it on (he brink 

Of dread etarnlty ? Stay, sinner, stay ! 

And be the Sfiirit thy companion still. 
To press the solemn question to the heart, 
Awake the consclenoe with His piercing dart, 

And, with a power Hi* twnj subdue thy stubborn willi'' 



TRACTS READ BY AN INTEMPERATE PHYSICIAN. 

[From a Missionary at the West] 

A few days since, I went into a sick room in company with Dr. B., 
whose character was decidedly irreligious, and who had been quite 
intemperate. To my surprise, he soon asked me if I had any Tracts 
that I could part with, saying that he wished to get two or three hun* 
dred page^. I reminded him, that his wife was a member of the Tract 
Society, and would receive a quantity of Tracts ; but that he could 
have more, if he wished them. He proceeded to say, that he had 
become very fond of reading them lately. That, a short time since, 
he would not have given sixpence for as many as he could carry; but. 
now he wished to read all he could obtain. He then took from his 

pocket the Tract " On Repentance,'' which he said Judge C had 

given him that morning, and he was then going to read it. He now 
appears to be truly concerned for the salvation of his soul, and anxi- 
ous to obtain the pearl of great price. I pray he may soon find the 
Saiviour to be precious. Vfben professionid men, and men of inflti- 
' ence, take a decided stand on the Lord's side, the signs of the times 
Appear favourable. Of seven physicians and three lawyers in this 
pUce, otHy two are now profe8sedJ;|r on the Lord's side, 



46 AMSBICAN TBACT SOCISTT* t^pnlf 

THE TRACT, « SERIOUS THOUGHTS ON 

ETERNITY.^ 

A pious Lady in Virginia sent the Tract, Seriotu Thoii^tt on Eitr- 
mhf^ to a female whose conduct and deporttn«it had -^tea far from 
becoming, requesting her to read it, with sincere prayer to God to 
bless it to her souFs salvation. She read it, and the Holy Spirit <^eB- 
ed her eyes to see her danger: she read it again and again, and was 
brought under the most powerful convictions of her lest condition by 
nature and practice. She felt her need of a Saviour; cried to him 
for mercy ; and, in a few weeks, was enabled to rejoice in Him, as 
^* ail her salvation and all her desire.'* Her walk and conversation, 
for several months, have given good evidence, that she has realty 
** passed from' death unto life.'' 



AaOOBRZOAir traot socxbty. 

In relation to the progress of this Society, we have to mention, that 
the blessing of the Lord still manifestly rests upon it ; that the calls 
for Tracts af e increasing, especially from the destitute ; and that evi* 
denees of their usefulness are daily accumulating. More than /our' 
maUtoat c/ Traett have been published since May 1, in issuing which, 
very large obligations for paper have been necessarily assumed. Up- 
wards of $4000 will become due for that article early in the monih of 
May; and donations and remittances at that time, whfle by many 
they can be very conveniently transmitted, will be much needed, aiid 
very beneficial to the Society. 



Author of " The Swearer's Prayer,'* 

Thb Ret. William Rvst, of Hull, England, who recently departed 
this life, wte a (aithfol preacher, abundant in labours, and the author 
of several valuaUe publications, and among others, of ** The Swearer's 
Prayer" This Tract was occasioned, under Providence, by the fol* 
lowing circumstance :— A Clergyman having observed a group of 
sailors blaspheming, fai a seaport town, as he was on his way to his 
congregation on the Sabbath, remonstrirted with them on the wicked- 
ness of their course ; and in his sermon, alluded to what he called 
** The -Swearer's Prayer." Mr. Rust being present, caught the ex- 
pression, and immediately formed upon it that admirable Tract, which 
has done so much good in reclaiming sinners. 



DONATION OF $1000, 

From the Amariean Trmei Soekty, Boston, 

At a meeting of the Committte of the American Tract Society^ Bos- 
ton, March 14, it was 

« JiMofved— That, ia view of the prewing wants of the AmMiican IVaet Society 
at Mew-Y6rli, at communicated tu the pablic in the Ameriicaa Tract Magaxioe 
for February, 1838,— wants botli to meet the paymeot of their «MC«9««ry biUs, and 
to fumisli their Oepofitory.wlth an adequate tupplj of Tracts, one thousand dol* 
lars be remitted as a ionaiion to that Society.** 

, In looking, writes the Secretaxyi at your proposal to Auxiliajri^ W 



L8i8.1 



RECEITT^. 



4t 



contribute 9^000 in donations, we feh, that the request was reason- 
able, and that $1000 would not be more than our share ; and we hope 
all yonr AuiUianes will feel the importance of sustaining your Society 
in its operations, which God has so manifestly blessed. 

BOSTON CITY TRACT SOCIETY. 

At a meeting of this Society, Feb. 6, sereral addresses were deli- 
vered, a considerable interest excited, and resolutions formed to aim 
at a general distribution ofRttigious Tracts throughout the city. It 
was f3t, that they are among the most effectual means of cariying. 
the samng tryihi of the Gospel to multitudes, especially those who are 
perishing in igno^nce and yice. A subscription was opened, and $200 
immediately subscribed. 

HEW- YORK STATE BRANCH, AT AIJiAKY. 

This Society circulated, the last year, 935,776 pages of Tracts, 96 
bound Tolumes, and 4000 Christian Almanacs. Of these it distributed 
gratuitously 11&,384 pages ; -besides 304 broadsheets^ 1,904 liaadbills, 
and 913 small volumes composed of select Tracts. Between 30,000 
and 40,000 pages were distributed by a single individual, to Sabbath 
Travellers, on three principal turnpikes leading from' the city. The 
Society has 10 County Branches ; 5 of which have reported 44 minor 
Auxiliaries. It has discontinued its Tract Magazine, and transferred 
its list of subscnbers to the American Tract Magazine. The Report 
breathes a spirit of energy and determined perseverance in the work. 



AUXILIARY OF PROTIDENCEy U. I. 

This Society circulated, the last year, 41-,179 pages of Tracts, and 
raised a fund for a Depository, from which Tracts to the amount of 
$117 were sold within the space of two months. The Report has not 
yet come to hand. 

AUXILIARY of' WILMINGTON, DELAWARE. • 

Receipts, the last year, $88 50. Distributed, 79,370 pages. The 
Report, which is a truly interesting and encouraging document, men« 
tions one case of religious alarm, and two striking instances ofeonvet- 
sioUf occasioned by the reading of Tracts. 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OP THE AMERIOAW TRACT SOCIETY, 
During the month ending March 16, 1828. 
AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 

VER.—A1l)urg1i, Grand Isle Co. Robert Ransom, P. M.Sec. 
CONN'— BozrahvUle, James L. Thompson, Sec. 
Brookfield,.Abn«r Urunda^e, Tr, ^. 

Hartford, Conn. Branch, Charles Hosmer, Sec. 
Saybmok, Fern. Mrs. A. P. Cbamplin, Ag. . 
Stratford, Asa Curtis, Tr. . 
Winchester Centre, Hiram C harch , Tr. . 

N. YORK Almond, Allesr* Co. Stephen Major, 

Conewaaga, Cattaraupas Co. Luroaa Qeacli, Tr. 
£mcottTlUe, do. Artimas Blair, Tr. . 
Ellington, Ohatauqae, Zacheus Davenport, Tr« 
Vnnfclinvilie, Cattar. Co. William Phoenix, Tr. 
Hanover, Chatauqae, Harry Dewejr, Tr. . 




ForTr. 


S25 


14 44 


400 00 


3 75 


7 M 


30 S8 


3 00 


75 


1 59 


S 81 


1 88 


5 66 



Don, 
2 00 
2 W 
4 81 

1 25 

26f> 
10 12 

1 00 
25 
53 
&4 
62 

1 88 



Iliiu*tii;rasOt1ll« p. a) Onu«i O*. lUt. B.II. KmMi, 8*& 
Butecm, Fam. Hn. Btf I, Tr. 



kx.P.M' 



VtrT,. Dtn. 



: vVk.-Nbk 



JVcnlcn for Lift. 
VEft— Oonwill, Rei. Jnlldli 
Bnilisell, In Au.Tr. Sac. ( 

liiiLiirwdiJiuij . . 



CmutrT, BiHiili, IU>. C 
I>ukni,tt«.Ei 



BoMli, bf k HcmLw of lib CI 



eooIlilnEUmChi.RiiMnHiD, Eh). « 

». TORK— Jennie*, l. r„ lU.. 

"'--■" '■- -ie,ijjlliBl»i»«lr». 



Kllu 



'OH Oo. R» 

'ounr Ocnt 



:. sikiiob, 



■on Oo. Rh, JoIu Blocklon, bv 
nr OcntlrDien. . . .3 
AB — Eprinr OmTC Conf. 

Saiu^ b]! Ladln, la 

.lilRUilJ Dimttri — Jfi <acA. 
K. York uilT— Jnbn D. Holbrasli, 



Antttud SStmhrrt — Jt tttth. 

On. B«u. John Dadd, Iwg 

> dole, D, Cooltdt*, Riinu D(- 

D.dnham. Eh.. Lunulot Hy- 
(II. PiMi HcOtwr, Jt». BciO- 
Honimar, WlUiim D. UurpliT, 

Hclaii Noc, Aillii F>tltr»n, 
Jnhn Fanvt, Dr. W. F. Ptall, 
Hit. Sunn pDiI, TudIi a. Wd- 
dntn, OroTC Wrl[hl,. .39 1)0 

J Other Donalioiu. 

VER^-J(rlei>c>,B«TrAi>(ai>Rood, 3 00 

a CONN.-Dronblyn, A Friend, . E (O 
Corrnli?, Norib, AmsuJoDo, . 100 

do. Mr<.Dnu»,Jniiei, . ,i» 

rinDicelan, 3d SocJcl;, indlil- 
Lfmr, John A. HcmpiUd, ■ -13* 

} ^"do. ^D°^' di^dc' '. eao 

■J win ebeiur, A Friend, tit 

v. VOBK.— WenfonI, OUeeo Co. 

) DiTld WiUismt, P. H. . M 

H.JES.— UorrliuwihALkdr, .10 00 

1 PENN.— ErM.JndihOolt, . S <M 
) Zelianople, BaUeT Oo. Mn. Z. 

Pejurent, 3 » 

MD.— Bihlmnra, Rtt. Jobo Fio- 

] liij £00 

IHD,— Bethlehcni, Tbomu Sle- 
veal, » SO 

Tbr abon Llil cdbUIbi DouUou 

> For HBdiag: Truu brrowl Iba 

AJlacbanr ^l 99 

Wbole Am. ofDont. tM4 SO 

I TBlal, . , ~. 7~KSX a 



THE AMERICAN 



Villi to Uu cstugc of tlic Diiirnu'i DMgUer. 
RET. LEGH BICHMOND, 

AvUiot ef the Dmryman'i 

[Pnm (ke Lnadaa ETimEallcal Mifnbic.) 
Who did not feel, when k wai nHKntiiced that Legh Ricbniaiid <rai 
ne morel The mtelligence (reMed a uniTersal, most powerfiil gcnia- 
tioD. " It wu an emotioD to be fell, Dot mentioned," The charu:ler 
•f the inestimable deceased wai lo eicelleni and uiefat ; his ministe- 
rial qnalificBlioni were so divenified and peculiar ; his writings were 
K> eileniirely knotin and so jnilly appreciated ; hii eiurtioni in the 
came of God had been so TJgoroui in themselves, and so beneficial 
and important in their reaulfa ; and his sweet temper and disposition 
had secured for him so much attention, and won for him such pro- 
Ibond esteem and admiration ; thai, when it was announced that Legh 
Richmond was no more, the eiclamation of one of old, almost initiac- 
liteiv, and with great power, occurred to remembraDce — "Help, Lord. 
tat tba godly man cealelh, and the fahbfol fail from among the c^il- 
iben of men." 

Vol. ni. ft rw «. «» - 



GO ittv. LEGH KtcHsoND/ [Itfay, 

We all loved Legh Richmond as a man. The mild gUnoe of his 
ciye— 4he beamings of benevolence ip his countenance---the amiabte 
and lovely dispositions which the " features of the face" unequivocally 
and broadly expressed^— awakened our esteem and. admiration. How 
Commanding, but insinuating, was his eloquence, in announcing the 
truths of salvation ! How sweetly would he plead the interests of the 
Tract Society ! with how much energy and ardour would he come 
forward in support of the claims of the Bible Society ! and with how 
much beauty and effect would be advocate, with concentrated seal 
and affection, the sublime cause of Missions ! And yet he made little 
noise. No herald went before him ; no trumpet's blast announced 
his approach : he did not ^* tiun the W4»rld upside down." Wonders 
were accomplished, but without parade, without noise, and almost 
without effort. ''We saw, we heard, we admired; and more— we 
felt.'* Legh Richmond has left us, but he will never be forgotten. 
The place which did know him, now knows him no more ; but while 
Turvey HtmdSf the name and excellencies of Legh Richmond will be 
sweetly associated with it ; and " while its green oaks wave, and its 
yellow flowers bloom," the remembrance of Legh Richmond will be 
as fragrant ointment poured forth. 

Legh Richmond, as a writer, is one of distinguished and command- 
ing excellence. There are four properties in his writings, which I 
cannot but term their characteristic and peculiar features. 

Their simplicity is at once admirable and exquisite. It has been said 
that " they are as artless as artlessness itself." No pomp, no studied 
effort, no elaborate strokes or touches. Any artifice cannot be per- 
t;eived. They are the effusions of sweet simplicity, chastened, purified, 
and ennobled by the Gospel of Christ, 

The beaiUiful descriptions in which the writings of Legh Richmond 
abound, render them deeply and peculiarly interesting. His touches 
are exquisite for their loveliness, as well as for their simplicity. He 
is a fine painter of nature, and a striking painter of the heart. Nothing 
is more foreign from his writings than display,' and yet they are full 
of charming specimens of real eloquence. No man knew better how 
to bring "a rich and sunny tract" of country before us, than Legh 
Richmond : 

*' We see and we admire.*' 

The genuine pathos which the writings of Legh Richmond exhibit, 
renders them exceedingly affecting. I never read any writer who. 
makes me feel more senjsibly. It is impossible to suppress emotion, 
or to ** drive back the tear," when perusing the exquisite productions 
of this distinguished man. How frequently have I seen the eye. 
*' standing full," when reading that fascinating production, ** The 
Young Cottager;" and I think no pers<Hi, of genuine sensibility, much 
less of devout feeling, can refrain from weeping, whUe reading that 
most touching of touching tales. How a mother, who had lost a sweet 
girl, about the age, and exhibiting the disposition, of " little Jane," 
would feel with the tale before her ! It would be almost overwhelm- 
ing in the effect it would produce. It would almost occasion '* her ma- 
ternal heart to break ;" and yet there is no effort, ** no pomp or cir- 
cumstance." It 13 as simple and unpretending as naiUire or trutji it- 
self. " I never rea,d Legh Richmond)" observed one, " without weep- 
ing, because the strain of his writings is so unaffected and powerful 
•for its pathos ; and I can no more refrain from feeling most deeply, 



tbati 1 4»n 8t»t> the dreidation «fliiy blood, which flows freely and 
^iDceasingly throughout every part of the material system/* 

The writings of Legh l^chmond are also most admirable for the 
glotping piety which they breathe, and for the great design which 
they are specifically intended and calculated to produce. Who cannot 
WBf in the writings of Legh Richmond, the uniform and prominent 
features of the Christian character, most strikingly and fascinatingly 
exhibited ? Almost every sentence shows the man of God, and in 
every page there is the mind of Christ "beaming most clearly and 
r^plendently.'' Unless Lejgh Richmond had been distinguished fo 
his devotion— for his unafibcted simplicity of character — for his inti»« 
mate and most endeared communion with heaven, — he could never 
have written in the manner that he has. On all he wrote, 

^ There stands imprest, 

Oue truth conspicuons— Mi» Is not my rest/* . 

" He lived with men, but walked with God." He was ardently de- 
xtrous of training up the young for glory and immortality ; of point- 
ing the poor trembling sinner to the only refuge ; and of animating, 
directing, tmd invigorating the believer, as- he proceeded to the pro- 
mised land. And his wishes have been gratified. " He sows the seed, 
and God has blest the soil." I often think what an amount of good 
must have been secured by the pubfication of Legh Richmond's com- 
positions. Persons of every name, of every age, of ^very character, 
of every degree of attainment and intellect, have been riveted by 
them, unspeakably interested and blessed ; and, in " the day of awful 
doom," I have no doubt that thousands will arise to testify that they 
were directed by the " Toung Cottager" to the cr^ss. or sweetly led 
by the "Dairyman's Daughter" to the celestial paradise. It is de^ 
lightful to anticipate heaven, where we shall meet with such a man ; 
** mix communion sweet" with such a distinguished Christian; and, 
in conjunction with him, celebrate the unbounded love of the Lamb 
£br sinners slauB. 

" Farewell, blest spirit, till we meet 
In that unclouded sky, 

Where the tear will not distress, 
Nor dim the sparkling eye.** 



FROM RET. HERBERT C. THOMSON, 

Of the Baptist Church, on closing his Agency, of more than one Year, 

for the Society, in Virginia. 

After having, in his correspondence, communicated much Important 
information, from which many valuable materials for the American 
Tract Magasine have been gathered, Rev. Mr. Thomson, in present" 
ing the final report of his proceedings, thus writes : 

Having completed my tour, by visiting all the places which I had 
contemplated visiting, when leaving New* York, and not perceiving 
««ch new or special openings in Providence, as to indicate that it is 
my duty longer to decline entering fully upon my contemplated agency 
for the American Bible Society, I must now tender my resignation of 
the ofiice which your Committee have so long been pleased to confer 
(ipQH iQC. I am Qeither tired of the wor^^ nor in the work. My ^^' 



fitu has been my delight, Nothtogf bat my pre<«ngag;ement would in^ 
duce me at present to decline it. 

I sensibly feel, that I have been engaged in labouring for souls— for 
eternity-— for G>od. The Lord has been pleased, snice I have been 
thus employed, to bless my soul with frequent iemd copious efiusieng 
of his good Spirit ; and often to afford me unusual liberty, whilst en- 
deavouring to preach the unsearchable riches of Christ. I cannot be 
too humble, or too grateful, for tlie hope, that he has already made 
my agency, in the service of the American Tract Society, the meand 
of spiritual good to many, and that he will yet much more abundantly 
follow my past labours with his blessing upon thousands. » Though I 
commenced under the expectation of devoting but thret months in the 
service of the Society,, the object has been &e more interesting, as I 
have progressed in its prosecution, until now it seems like taking thc^ 
valedictory from a very dear and familiar friend. I feel greatly in« 
debted to you for the kind advice and constant encouragement which 
your letters have afforded. 



ro&azoxr oonassFOVDHxroa. 

From Mf. Levi ChanU^erlairif MUtionary at the Sandwich hUandt^ 
dated HonoMu, OahUf Oct, 17, 1827. 

The 25,000 pages of Tracts, mentioned in your letter as forwarded 
for the disposal of the Missionaries in these Islands, were duly re« 
ceived ; and fhey have all been distributed, and that mostly at this 
port, among seamen belonging to more than 40 different vesselsi 
Thus 25,000 pages of Tracts, containing truths of the greatest im- 
portance, and calculated to make wise unto salvation, have been 
placed within the reach of very many individuals from distant parts 
of the world; and these Islands, which have been the object of Chris* 
tian beneficence and prayer, have, through your boun^, in their tumy 
been dispersing, far and wide, spiritual blessings to others. 

I have not been able to learn that any conversions have been effected 
through the instrumentality of these Tracts ; but I have been repeat-* 
edly informed of individuals who have read with pleasure those which 
they have received, and of their lending them to their shipmates, an4 
even distributing them among seamen of other vessels fallen in with 
at sea. I cannot but hope^'tluit benefit has resulted to some immortal 
soul— I would fain hope, to many, from the perusal of these truth* 
fspeaking monitors. If immediate conversion has not been the effect, 
conviction may have seized the mind, and prepared the way for the 
Holy Spirit to make a conquest under other circumstances. 

Tracts from your Society, addressed to Rev. Mr. Stewart, at Lik 
haina, have also been received, of which a part only are yet distributed; 
but more wiU soon be needed, as it is highly desirable that we should 
be well supplied. We have very frequent opportunities of distributing 
such little publications with fair prospects of doing good. 

It will be remembered^ that application was, some time since, made 
to the American Tract Sodety, lor Tracts to be printed here, in the 
Hawaiian language, under the supervision of Mr. Loomis, late printer 
at the Sandwich Islands. No less than 65,000* copies were printed, 
to answer to this request, with funds contributed tax thi« speci&<; oU 



18£8.^ DOMESTIC CdRR£SP0NI)£9C£« 5S 

ject. The Tracts are already forwarded ; and a special vote of thanks 
has been received from the Prudential Committee of the American 
Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, for the encoaragemeidt 
tbns given to their Missionaries iti their responsible labours for the 
conversion of those Islands. 



From Rev. Josiah Brewer ^ American Mimonary on the Mediterranean-. 

Mr DEAR Sir — I leave my Cvfrn neglected correspondence, to anstrei* 
the call of that of our dear departed friend, Rev. Mr. Gridley. Your 
letter to him, of June 30, has been received, as well as the Reports and 
30,000 pages of Tracts, as a donation from the American Tract Society. 
I shall endeavour to give the Reports the destination you desire. Pi^t 
of the Tracts 1 have sent for distribution to Syra, where, as you know, 
the commerce of the Archipelago is centered. There, as in other 
places^ in the Levant, French Tracts ^eill be peculiarly acceptable. 
French being tht fashionable language, any French books are gladly 
received and read by learners. None of my Tracts have been more 
eagerly called for than French, and the few you have sent will be 
speedily exhausted. 

I should esteem it a great favour, could you send us forthwith many 
more Tracts, both in English and French. May I also ask a small 
'parcel in both languages, for a Lady now residing in Smj'rna, who j$^ 
lately from your own city ? As the officers from our vessels of wai' 
arc in the habit of visiting there, she has consented to act as the repre- 
sentative of her New-York tisters in the distribution of Tracts. I have 
left others with Dr. Korok, a German Missionary in the service of the 
BngUsh Society at Smyrna, and the remainder ! shall be able to turn 
to good accoimt here and elsewhere. 

In an^er to this request, the Committee granted to Rev. Mr. Brewer 
15,000 pages in French, and 15,000 in English ; and to the Lady re- 
siding at Smyrna, 10,000 pages in each language. 

From the Praijftr Book, Tracty find Sunday School Society of the 

Diocese of Ohio. 
At our Convention in S^tember last, a Society was formed, called 
* The Prayer Book, Tract, and Sunday School Society of the Diocese 
«f Ohio;" the object of wjiich is to supply the destitute, (especially 
those of our own communion) with books and publications in these 
three departments. Though Sunday Schools will probably obtain our 
chief attention, we have connected with them the distribution of Tracts, 
as tending to promote the same great object ; and our Society is so 
constituted as to allow of Auxiliaries in each department to be distinct. 
Such a union was made necessary, by otfr present limited means and 
small numbers. If it should hereafter prove too complicated, a sepa- 
ration may take place. The Depository will always be connected with 
Kenyon College, and accessible to a large body of students. This cir- 
cumstance, and the fact that we are situated in the midst of a popula- 
tion, a great proportion of which is not likely to hear the '' message 
of reconciliation '^ through any other channel, give us reason to ex* 

5» 



^ 



54 XWOMXSTIC COBftESFONDfTEVGS^ Ptfaf , 

pect considerable benefits will result eren from our weaiMezerUons. 
The want of funds to supply our Depository with Tracts^ is the only 
obstacle in the way of ahnost unlimited useMness. Our object is U^ 
form Auxiliaries iu difierent quarters of the State, and thus place our 
Tracts for distribution in the hands of responsiUe persons. In this 
way we hope to be furthering, according to our ability, the great and 
good ends which the American Tract Society has in view. Though 
now needy, and asking succour for ourselves, we trust the day is noC 
distant, when we too win lift up our standard and join the Uberaiin^ 
army in their march to more distant and still less favoured regions. 

If the present state of your funds will permit you to make us a grant 
of Tracts, we shall not be unthankful. 

In answer to this request, 25,000 pages were granted by the Com- 
mittee. 



Dittribuii^n «/ Tracts in KerUuekp and Indiana, reported to the^etnaiC 
Auxiliary at Lexington, by Rev, Isaac Reed. 

The Tracts entrtsted to me by your Society have been dispersed ift 
families, to indfvidusds, and to people whom I passed as they were on 
the way moving into, or from the New Settlements, These distribu* 
tions were made in Woodford, Franklin, Shelby, and Jefferson coun- 
ties, Kentucky ; and in Clark, .Washington, Lawrence, Monroe, Owen, 
Vigo, and Floyd counties, Indiana. In the general they were weH 
received — in some instances very thankfully and joyfully. In Owei^ 
county, upon White Biver, Indiana, I found in a new settlement a 
Sabbath School, which last summer had 60 scholars, many of whoni 
were young men and women. The managers were greatly in debt to 
their scholars in Tracts as rewards. To them I gave thirty-five— most 
of what I had remaining at that time. They were received with many 
expressions of thankfulness. In some places I have put Tracts into 
. the cabins where all things bore the look of poverty and wretched- 
ness, endeavouring to cast some rays of light into these abodes of 
darkness. I gave some to persons living far out in the New Settle- 
ments, beyond any of the counties I have mentioned, and sent a few 
into other States. I left some in public-houses where 1 either Stopped 
or lodged, and often presented an appropriate Tract to those whom I 
heard profane the name of Grod. Permit me to advise^ that you send 
Tracts4nto the New Settlements whenever you /wve opportunity, 'Hiere 
is little of able and faithful preaching of the Gospel — there are but few 
pious books, and the people are needy and poor. One church, whose 
members I supplied with Tracts, had not heard a sermon, from a Mi» 
Ulster of their own denomination,' for 15 months. Tracts are silent, 
but often, by the Divine blessing, very efficiewt preachers. Go on in 
your labour of love; do good as you have opportunity; and the 
world shall be blessed; and the church shall rejoice in her daughters. 
I bid you all hail, in your work of dispersing these messengers of 
mercy ; for thus you instrumentally preach the Gospel to the poor* 



From the Secretary of the Female Auxiliary of Worcester County, 

Maryland. 
Our little Society has not been altogether useless. The Tracts we 
have circulated, bare been, received and read with untt^ual atte^Uoft 



• - 

W all (sa iiMT as w6 know) to whom they have beeia presented ; and 
thus the only inquiry with us, as a Society, is, ** How shall we become 
able to supply all those places and persons within the sphere of our 
action, whose cases demand our attention 1" 

We are unwillingly constrained to say, that the moral aspect of 
some parts of the eastern shore of Maryland, though among the old- 
est of all the American settlements, and among the first that enjoyed 
Oospel privileges', is exceedingly dark and gloomy. And when we 
look around us upon these fields of ruin within our reach, and behold 
sections of country desolated by the ravages oif sin, containing groups 
of ignorant, thoughtless souls, and haunts of revellers, drunkards, 
gamblers, and Sabbath-breakers, less accessible by any other moral 
means than those fiimisbed by this Society, and yet find ourselves 
unable, for the want of pecuniary means, to administer relief, we fed 
much afflicted. And this moral des(^ation does not exist merely in a 
few families situated in remote corners, nor yet in a few noted haunts 
of iniquity ; but extensive portions of country may be found, almost- 
entirely destitute of the means of grace ; where the Gospel is rarely 
preached, where a Tract has never made its way, and where an eo-^ 
lightened prayerful family is scarcely known. 

This Society, in view of these facts, earnestly solicit all the friends 
of Christ, who have it in their power, to aid them in their laudable 
endeavours to emancipate their fellow-men from the bands of religious 
Ignorance, and to assist in moving forward an engine so powerful, 
'though silent, in its operations. 



Prom a Chwrehman in Vermont. 

We have the fairest prospect of the immediate formation of an 
Auxiliary in this place, which I think will be very respectable in num- 
bers and liberality. The Pastor of the Scotch Presbyterian church has 
engaged to take a collection in his congregation, for the benefit of the 
cause, as soon as convenient. The Society will embrace a union of 
Baptists, Methodists, Congregationalists, and (myself) a Churchman. 
It is only three days since the Tracts were received, but I rejoice in 
being able to say they have already caused penitential tears to flow. 
And God grant that every careless sinner in thir place may be, by 
them, caused to mourn, and that they shall find no rest, save in the 
arms of Jesas. 



VSBFV&XmSS OF TBJLOTB. 

THE TRACTS FOR MOURNERS, AND HEAYSN LOST« 

[From a Clergyoiin In Delaware, te the Editors of the N«w-York Ob«erver<] 

Tracts are still doing good. If all the cases of successful Tracts 
were reported, no doubt many a happy result would be known, which 
is now concealed from the Christian community. 

Two blessed conversions, I hope, have taken place, through their, 
instrumentality, in my congregation. The first was a case of adapta- 
tion, A pious Lady, a member of the Tract Society, left the Tracts 
** A Visit to the House of Mourning" under the breadtray of a woman 
who had recently lost a beautiful little child, a scholar in the Sabbath 
School. Sh$ wondered how it came there } i^t thou^t th«I<ord mus^ 



56 



i7&&iROii£l£$d or *aACl^% [W^Jf 



have ordered it to be put there. She read it with eagerucM. Hfer 
heart was broken. She became more anxious to be saved than to 
have her darling child back, and is now hoping in the Lord. She 
thinks every thing of the Tract, and would not part with it on any 
account. Her husband also is the subject of serious impressions; and 
we fully trust that both these wanderers from their God will be made 
acquainted with salvation, by the Divine blessing on the combined 
influence of the wound and the remedy— the affliction iand the charm* 
ing little Tract to the afflicted. I cannot describe to you the attach* 
ment of the afflicted in my parish to the Tracts suited to them. Cecil 
and Flavel, though dead, still speak comfort and happiness to the 
living, and awaken gratitude and love in wouia.dcd hearts. 

The most remarkable conversion is that of a young woman, who 
was a light and careless sinner, except when sick. Then she was al- 
ways alarmed— « always awakened — afraid of hell — always prayed 
and promised — and always forgot her prayers and broke her pro- 
mises. What repeated sickness could not do, a little Tract did in a few 
moments — ^brought her to genuine, heartfelt, pungent conviction of 
sin. It is called " Heaven Lost !" What an appropriate Tract to 
alarm a sinner! It happened to lie on the mantel' in the house of a 
pious old lady. Her eye fell on it: she took it up, and was told by 

Mrs. , ** You may take that Tract home with you." She took (t 

in an indifferent manner, went home, sat down and read it ; and be* 
fore she had finished the Tract, the arrow of 6od«ras rankling in her 

heart ! The family had all gone to bed, and there M was— <ilone 

with God, and of course wretched. " I felt," said she, *• as if heaven 
was lost to me." For a fortnight she lingered through sleepless nights, 
and troubled days. She read the Tract and prayed, and then read it 
again, but was still miserable. Her impenitent friends and trifling 
companions laughed and sneered at her. They laid snares for her ; 
they tempted her in vai'ious ways to rid herself of her foolish fears ; 
but no ! the law of God had too powerful a hold on her conscience. 
It was nine months before she ventured to hope in the Lord ; but she 
seems now to be strongly fixed on the Rock of Ages. That Tract is 
every thing to her. You may be assured it is well worn. There is but 

a tattered cover left to it. It has been moistened by the tears of M . 

It has oilen trembled in her hand. It has witnessed her sighs and 
groans to be delivered from the bondage of sin and guilt — I look upon 
her as a monument of eternal mercy — a monument that, I trust, will 
stand for ever within the gates of the New Jerusalem, sacred to the 
memory of 'the American Tract Society. I have had conversation 
with her at different times, which would be interesting in the detail, 
but my sheet is full. May the blessing of an innumerable company 
of ransomed souls come upon the Society ! Yours, he. 

TRACTS IN A REVIVAL OF RfiUGlON IN NORTH 

CAROLINA. 

I have just returned, says a Clergyman of North Carolina, from an 
excursion made chiefly in behalf of the Bible cause, in which I have 
distributed from 1000 to 1500 Tracts among a people to whom Tracts 
were almost entirely unknown. I have also, within a few months, 
availed myself of numerous other opportunities to distribute them to 
a ve^y destitute population ; and have just bad the satisfaction .fo 



laSd.] t7d£FVIJ!r£89 OF TOACTS' ^7 

l6arn, that tb6 Tracts I have circulated in one of our destitute coun* 
tics, have been, in the hands of God, the means of producing a revivat 
6f religion. It commenced in a family which had lived in the neglect 
of the means of grace, and thence extended to others.— My stock o|' 
Tracts 'is nearly exhausted, and unless the Tract Society can grant 
me a new supply, I shall soon not have a single Tract to distribute. 



TRACTS IN R£ViyAI<S IW CONNECTICUT. 

We have enjoyed a season of refreshing from God*s presence this 
winter, writes a Clergyman in Windham county, and more than 40 
individuals are indulging a hope that they have passed from death 
unto life. — ^The Tract " Common Errors^^ was given to a woman about 
56 years of age, whose attention had been arrested, with a request 
that she would read it. She complied with the request, and, when 
she had finished the Tract, threw it down, with the most agitated feel*> 
ings, saying to herself, ** What could Dr. H. mean ? Is it to insult me, 
hy giving me such a Tract ? I will never read it again." She kept tfa^ 
resolution for a time, but finally concluded she would look at it. She 
commenced reading it again ; her feelings became more interested— « 
they were softened down ; and, to use her own expression, she ** found 
the difficulty was not in the Tract, but in her own heart." She soon 
after gave evidence that she had submitted her heart to God, and was 
interested in his favour. Other Tracts, I believe, have been very 
much Uessed, as an Auxiliary, in promoting th6 good work of grace 
among us. 

The summer past, writes a Lady in Fairfield county, we have been 
blessed with the gentle droppings of that grace which purifies the 
lieart; and not unfrequently have I heard those who were inquiring, 
the way to Zion, refer to some sentence which they have observed 
in a Tract f as one that filled them with astonishiog solemnity. Again, 
those who felt the joys of sins forgiven, and could exclaim, " None 
but Christ: he is the chiefest among ten thousand, and altogether 
lovely," have often quoted some Tract, which they delighted to per- 
use, because it expressed bo entirely the language of their hearts, 
These things, with our own personal enjoyment in reading and circa-" 
Jating Tracts, encourage us to renew our exertions in the Tract cause. 



STRIKING EXAlHPIiES OF TH£ USEFULNESS OF 

TRACTS. 

** Much good," writes a Missionary in Pennsylvania, to the Secre- 
tary of the American Home Missionary Society, " has been done by 
our little church through the medium of Tracts. About 200 families 
fure statedly approached in this way by about 50 of our members. 
Considerable numbers have visited my Inquiry Meeting, in answer 
to the calls of these little messengers ; and at least two or three hope- 
ful conversions have recently taken place purely through this inslru- 
fnentaUty, Of these, one is a sailor, whose previous character seemed 
a pattern of the confirmed remediless profliga<7 of perdition, and 
whose attention was arrested by the Tract ** Friendly ConversaHon.^* 
A man and his wife have also professed a hope, having be^ C0QTic(9^ 
through the Tract " ^mch not the SpvrU:^ 



^9 USEFULITE^ Of TRACTS AVn AUXILIARIES. [May, 

TRACTS BliESSED TO A HAN IN A BBCIiilNE* 

[Frora a Baptist Olergymao in Rliode Island.] 

I lately visited a young* man, (the first I received into the church 
after my ordination,) who is in a consumption. He is in a very happy 
state of mind : there seems to be an exact coincidence between hU 
win and the will of God. As I was leaving his chamber, he said, *' O 
Sir, do lend me some more Tracts : the few you gave me before I 
joined the church, were very interesting and very useful to me^ I 
have read them again and again. * The Great Q^u^tion Answered,^ 
and the * Way to be Saved* were much blessed to me, and showed 
the way of God more perfectly than I before comprehended it." 

WESTERN MERCHANT CONVERTED BY A TRACT, 

Captain , a wholesale merchant in S , writes a Clergyman 

in Illinois, we believe has recently become an active and faithful 
Christian, by means of a Tract, '' Life of Cohml Chxrdinerf" which 
came to him from the Sabbath School. 



TRACT BLESSED TO A FATHER AND MOTHER. 

An Agent for the Americati Sunday School Union in New-Jersey 
states, that a Tract, given some time since to a Sabbath School child, 
was carried home, read by the family, and was the evident means of 
the conversion of both the father arid the mother. 

AUXILIARIES. — osEFuUTEss of tracts. 

New Auxilicary at Ralti^, N. C. Raised for a Depository, unme*^ 
<liately on its formation, $2A0. Ladies and Gentlemen have engaged 
with interest in the enterprise ; and the subscription was headed by a 
Gentleman who was hitnself hopefully converted by means of a Tract. 
Hon. DnifCAM- Camkroit, of £pis. Ch. Pres, Rev. Wm. McPhetehs, 
of Presb. Ch. V. Pres. Rev. P. W. Down, of Bap. Ch. Sec. 

Aiusiliary of Un. Theol. Sem. Prince Edward, Va. Distributed, dur- 
ing the year, 126,050 pages. The Tract Common Errors, and one or 
two others, have each been blessed as means of the hopeful conversion 
of an immortal soul to Chd. 

The Auxiliary ofRichnwndj Va. has recently made endeavours to 
raise flOO, as a donation to aid the Parent Society, of which $50 
have been remitted. Several striking instances of the usefuliiess of 
Tracts have been observed : the formation of a Sabbath School—- the 
erection of a House of Worship — and benefit to individuals. 

Uie Auxiliary of Indianapolis^ Indiana^ reports, that one head of 
a family, who has recently been admitted to the church, dates bis 
first convictions from reading a Tract. 

Auxiliary of St. Lawrence Co. N. Y. located at Potsdam. Circulated 
about 100,000 pages the last year, and is making vigorous efforts to 
supply the whole county with Tracts. 

Young Men^s Auxiliary at Middtebury, Ver. Distributed 37,460 
pages ; 9,196 of which gratuitously to destitute on the borders of 
Vermont and New-York. One intemperate man faas ap|itfeiitly been 
reformed-^ne abusive Inisband hopefully conveited— ^ne company, 
collecting around a card^-tabiet dispersed; by means of Trficts« 



eiiited in all plaeei where Celleges and AcHleniie* ai 






BECBIFT8 

MTTO THE THGUmtT OF THE AHEBIOAN TRAOT flOOIETV, 
J}ari»£ tht maath mcfitv ^F^ t6> IS^S. 

Ftr Tr. D<,n. 



AUXILIART TRACT BOCIETIEB. 
Am. Itah JuliD Wkkwin, Sec. 
iKcnm o( Vcnwnl, Fmtt Hltkcll, fire 
JWUBO, luwu nehl, 8«c- - 



IU8B.— niuAeld,I>(TidWbiu,Tr. . 
8u>i!lilirtdc*,MaHfFalrdilld,Tr. . 
H. 1BL--(f«lilaaai Swpbeo 8. Wu««cU, B, 
aam.—BnmjB, Rn. inbreH EiteDn, Ag 

HiuUanoD, rem. 

Msiinie,F>MeMOa.Cta>nfiB.C!uk,Tr. 

Mw HUTonl, BridgtMUi Hoc' Ljinin BalA 
ftalBtcM, F«|i. EulHr E. Babln, Tr. 
FaiDhvti AUneton Sac Unlit S. Drrtitn, Ag. 
Rabtrt, UttSUa Co. Findic Hacriun, Bh. 
ltalltbw7,LilcU(M0c>.TIni»tli;~ ■ 



Oodge, Ag- 



Paoo T«K, F»m. Mri. HFirlh* Ooold, S«. . 

fi^ohoric. C*t. JohD InffoLd, Tr. - . 

M. JEIL— LllUruin, HnrliOa. Si[>i B. CondJct, Jr. 

MIIUIOM, F«i. Kn. Feier SInU, Tr. ... 

P*nl;^n>,J>iiici IUniai>,Tr. ■ . . . ■ 
a«awiuia, Obwiuh Cnne, Tr. .... 
Waltcw, M. Go. Fmi. MlB Uuub N. Bermonr. Tr. 
FEHN.— Alheiu, F«n. Julia Adih P(rklB9, Tr. 
»D~Wor«n«r Co. F<id. HIu Ohnrlatlcetlbr, of Dei 
VDt.— Abla^oD.JnlinM. Pr«uii,Tr. , 



VTlDcbm^.itanitlBcld.Tr.kA?. '. 

do. br UieirAuiiiliWT iu OetiinliUiwii, 



MM 



B. Hud, Ac. .... 
11 JMiai. Ag- 
io. Rti. wil£a BMiitmi, Ag. 



« KhI*. Tr. 

F G.W.OMKlni 

tt Uk Oenofal DtpimHwj to 
loUin for uc of Gam. Roddi,; 



Directon fyr Lift. 'V Ifdie. of Id B^itin Olmrdi, 



SOD 



Pnul, EBq. . . 3) 00 

" mnTli. Lidleijinfull of »5(y 36 00 Jnnual DinttDT. 

•S;2=.-Hfri2S»K: ^"r;i!'"t^»'"^ 

did of OnmlMrtftnd Goi« > AO 00 Tomott AddboH^ Rdn Aiinuni 

|>rin«Ed«>rdOo.JiihaU.Kh», '•*'• ^"[■'•"■.•™«" *»^ 

D. D. Un. Tim. Bern. 1» Ladln ^- Umnticl, John Darland, Dr. 

ofCBiiibwl»KtO«i>g«g«lii>n, .WOO J«. liocienifl, Olit« ed™d», 

JfonA«r» /or ti/t. FnndiOnwi.O.b, yiicilm>,B'. 

VER— MiddlfbBiT H*T. Tho. A. w™*"pB"L'L£dkr'4ii«ii« 



fcuab, Hw. B«™ Aoiiin, D7 • ^ ^^ [,. yi)uiL_K,n Chetter, John 

OI»Dl^»nSu*li Ana Andrews, « "iti*"^*'"''' u '„'*'* 

dfewi, MM P""'"* a » 

OolchHWr.WUllunT Torner.flo Other Dmatiau. 

a'^«SI'airS-hn™«'r.„'"'" CONM.-3trfi*d,M«.A6.8mltb, ■ W 

■•"'TS^^^^nnB A.4»~l .- VHI SlndtKB, ^. . . 10 00 

bL«Sl« r . MM Bo(rilo,« Friend MM 

s»sa- """■"■.:..» '^nsssis-JiS"; .» 

Ke«(llliB,Rr>.WiUl«mO.KoiEn. N. Vor* Clly, laiHim, . . IB 

b. BIT. Helion aod Din E.Jen- ^o. ■ Frt™?, . . A 00 

nlnji,. . ■ ■ ■ -SOOO Poiia:bkeepjle,Dr.Pel,O.T»BpeB,1000 

Rf."'Mr '"™ii«T«"U?^wJ Homelier: from Tntt-boitiSpi 

^'^^^S'.I'S'.lL-.. ^:,^- S S _'"<l^i""'?rl«™l'ofT"r«15; _: i Ott 



Icotl.brLnd. SO 00 TF, 
«._YOaK.-:Dhu'»««, Eer.Joha beyond A lleVhw] 



ill, RCT. Jired Ilcwine, br Pri.nH - >.. ji - 
. 80 00 I 



" 00 AccompmiyliiE Tncl for 



Bojd, by Lidlei, . . .MOO irpnmiuiiirfiii.'l 

H. jen—'obeslrr, ne'.Ahrohom ^ii^dl " . . 

I)*bwn;,Rt>.' Alfred Chen 



iTDcbborg, Her. Bobeii It; lund, 



?,»'■"" 



THE AMERICAN 



THIRD ANKUAI. MEETING OF THE AMERICAN 
TRACT SOCIETX- 

The Third Auaunl Meeting of the American Tract Sacielj was held 
«l the City Holel,»ew-Vork, oaWedDesday.Ma)' 7, 1828, at 10 o'clock ' 
A. M. The President of the SocFetj-, S. V. S. Wilder, Esq, tooic the 
chair, supported bj Col, Richard Variclc and Uev, James MilDor, D. D. 
of New- York. 

The MeeliDg was opened with prnyerbjthe Rev. Alvan Hyde, D.D. 
of tlic Evangelical Congregatioaal Church, Lee, Massac huietta. 

In the abnTice of the Recording Secretory, the Rer. Charles G. 
Sommert was chosen Secretary of the Meeting. 

The Preiiilent delivered a short introductory address. 

The Treasurer. Mr. Mosis Ai.len, then read the Report of the 
Commiltee who audited hii accoimls; and the Annual Report was 
read by Mr. Willuh A. Hallock, the Corresponding Secretary. 

The following resolutions were then preaenled, and unanimously 
adopted, vii. 

On molioo of Rer, Mark Tacker, of the Preibyterian Church, Trc^, 
New-York, seconded by Ret. J, D. Knowlei, of Ihe Baptist Chnrcb, 

Vot/lll. 6 [Wbole Ho. 30. 



6^ THIRD ANNUAL MtETIXG. [JuU^j 

Resolved, That the Reports now read be accepted, adopted, and 
publUhed under the direction of the Executive Committee. 

On motion of Rev. Stephen Tyng^ of the Epigcppal Church, Prince 
George's county, Maryland, seconded by Rev. Benjamin Tappan, of 
the Evangelical Congregational Church, Augusta, Maine, 

Rtsol^edj That this IVfeeting express tiieir gratitude to God for his 
special blessing upon this Society the past year : the great increase 
of its operations, the active co-operation of its Branches, Auxiliaries^ 
and friends ; and particularly for the influences ot the Holy Spirit, 
which have evidently acQompanied its publications to the salvation of 
many souls. 

On motion of Rev. Noah Davis, of the Baptist Church, Philadelphia, 
seconded by Rev. Jacob Van Vechten, of the Reformed Dutch Church, 
Schenectady, New- York, 

Resolved^ That the moral wants of large portiions of the inhabitants 
of oar country, especially in the Valley of the Mississippi ; the useful* 
ness of Tracts, and the facility with which they may be published and 
widely diffused, call for prompt and spirited efforts to extend their 
circulation throughout all our inhabited territories. . 

On motion of Rev. Dr. Milnor, of the Episcopal Church, New-Tork, 
seconded by Mr. Frederick Erringer, of the Reformed Dutch Church, 
Philadelphia, 

Resolved^ That the limited .pecuniary means of this Society, and the 
urgent claims upon it for the extension of its operations, call for libe- 
ral contribution in aid of its funds. ^ 

On motion of Hon. Theodore Frelinghuysen, of Newaric, New- 
Jersey, seconded by Rev. Heman Humphrey, D. D. President of Am- 
herst College, Massachusetts, 

Resolvedy That, while this Meeting rejoice in the amouht of gratui- 
tous distributions to the destitute the past year, they recognise addi- 
tional claims, not only^ from large portions of our own country, but 
from Spatiish America, from Greece and other countries on the Me-' 
difeerranean, and from benighted millions in heathen lands. 

On motion of Rev. William StUwell, of the Methodist Church, se- 
conded by Rev. Sutherland Douglas, of the Episcopal Church, the 
Officers for the ensuing year were elected. 

The Meeting was addressed, with much effect, by Rev. Messrs. 
Tucker, Knowles, Tyng, Tappan, and Davis, the Rev. Drs. Milnor 
and Humphrey, and Hon. Mr. Frelinghuysen. The room was com- 
pletely filled ; a delightful spirit of Christian love and harmony pre- 
vailed, and a deep sense of the usefulness of the Society, and of itft 
clainis on the enlarged and liberal support of the Christian community. 



EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE— JRc-c/«c*cd Mcof 7, 1828. 

PUBLISHING OOMlHTTS£. 

Rev. James Milnor, D* D. of the Rer. Justin Edwards, D. D. Bos-^ 

£{HSCopal Church. ton, Mass. of the Congrega- 

Rev. Thomas McAuley, D. D. tionai Church. 

LL. D. of the Presbyterian Ch. Rev. Charies G. Sommers, of the 

Rev. John Knox, D. D. of the Re- Baptist Ckttrch. 
formed Dutch Church. 



18£S.] THiAD anhual repokt. 65 

DiSTRIBUTIffG COUttltTEC, FIHAITCE CeKMlTTEE. 

TlKMinis Stokes, - Arthur TeppaQ, 

John H. Hill, Df. John Stedrns, 

Dr. James C. Bliss, Meses Allen, 

Timothy Dwigiit Willi«ms, EHjah Pierson, 

Marcus Wilbar, Richard T. Haines. 



ABSTRACT OF THE THIRD ANNUAL REPORT. 

The Executive Committee of the American Tract Society (^1 that 
they present their Third Annual Report under circumstances peculi- 
arly aaspicious to the cause of Christian benevolence. The success of 
efforts made in our own country, the past year, to extend the circula* 
tion of the Holy Scriptures; to send the living preachers of the Gos- 
pel to the destitute in this and foreign lands ; to convey the instruc- 
tions of the Sabbath School to the young and rising generation ; and 
to glorify God by promoting the sanctification of his day, and in va- 
rious ways advancing the cause of our Redeemer, has had no parallel 
in preceding years, and gives animating indications that God is about 
to accomplish a g^at work on the earth. The period is one of mo- 
mentous interest, and the station we occupy rull of responsibility. 
Placed in this free, enlightened, and happy eountry, witn the most 
inviting field of effort, perhaps, on which the sun ever shone, spread 
before us ; with abundant resources, and evidence that God is ready 
to bless our endeavours by the accompanying influences of his Holy 
Spirit; there is no room for hesitation or delay ; we must gird our- 
selves with renewed strength, and, relying on Divine direction, press 
forward in the high and holy enterprise. The period is one which 
calls for the exercise of strong faith in G^, end the entire consecra- 
tion of all our powers to his service. 

Among the institutions which have enjoyed the special smiles 6f 
Divine l^vidence the past year, the American Tract S<K:iety fs not 
least in obligations of gratitude. When it was found that the results 
of the second year of its operatioiis were Ihtte^foJd what they were 
the first year, and still more, compared with the aggregate amount of 
the whole Tract operations of the country in any preceding year, it 
was felt by some, that the magnitude of the result was occasioned, in 
no small degree, by the novelty of the Society, or some temporary ex- 
citement, and that veiy little, Jf any extension, could be expected for 
many years to come. Bat the issues of the third yedir, now closed, 
bear the relation to those of the second year of five to three, and show 
an increase, compared with the preceding year, which is very rare in 
the history of benevolent institutions, and which furnishes a new and 
instructive lesson, that God is ready to bestow large blessings upon 
Zion, and that his children shall never be straitened in Him. 

Great harmony has prevailed in the Committee during the year. 
They have never met without unitedly seeking the Divine blessing : 
and have endeavoured to feel, at all times, that the w6'rk in which 
they are engaged is the Lord's, and to trust in Him for wisdom, and 
direction, and pecuniary aid. 

During the year, one of the Vice-Presidents of the Society, Hon. 
William Phillips, and two of the Directors, Rev. T. CttAKLTotr 
HcNHT, D. D., and Rev. Edwabd Patsov, D. D., have finished their 
labours, and gone to their reward, leaving few behind them who have 
been equally useful to th^ cause of Zion. " The celestial city," said 



64 THIRD ANNUAX EEPaRT. [Juiie, 

Fayson, just on the eve of his departure, ** is full in my view. Its 
g^lories beam upon me ; its breezes fan me ; its odours are wafted to 
me ; its sound strikes upon my ears, and its spirit is breathed into my 
heart. Nothing separates me frodi it but the river of death, which 
now appears but as an insignificant rill, that may be crossed at a 
single step whenever Grod shall give permission." He was the author 
of two of the Society's Tracts, the " Bible above all Price," and the 
" Address to Seamen." During the year, also, the Rev. Legh Rich- 
mond, author of those most useful Tracts, the " Dairyman's Daugh* 
ter," the " Young Cottager," and the '* African Servant ;" and like- 
wise the Rev William Rust, author of the " Swearer's Prayer," 
have gone to meet, before the Redeemer's throne, hundreds and thou- 
sands to whom, there is reason to believe, God has made, and will 
make, those Tracts the instruments of salvation and eternal life. 

Proceedings oj the Publishing Committee, 

The Publishing Committee of the Society, though one of their num- 
ber has been compelled, by want of health, to spend the past winter 
in a milder climate, have, amidst many arduous labours as Ministers 
of the Gospel, faithfully prosecuted their highly responsible work. A 
large number of treatises, original and selected, have been examined, 
from which considerable additions have been made to the list of the 
Society's publications. To the series of duodecimo Tracts in English, 
12 have been added, which extends that series to No. 21 2, and to page 
204 of vol. VI!. 

Besides continuing to issue this series in six bound volumes of 400 
pages, as heretofore, the Committee have recently had the same done 
up in 18 volumes of a smaller size, especially for the use of libraries 
for the young, and for distribution on ships and steamboats, and in 
other circumstances in which volumes of that size may be considered 
especially adapted to be usefnl. 

To the series in Spanish^ seven have been added, which extends 
that series to No. 20. 

For the circulation of Tracts in the German language, very spirited 
efforts have been made during the year, especially by the Branch So- 
ciety at Philadelphia. The German population in Pennsylvania and 
other parts of the United States is numerous ; a new interest has been 
awakened among them for the reading of Tracts, and twenty-four^ 
in the German language, have been stereotyped and published ; in 
preparing which, the Committee have gratefully to acknowledge the 
very active and friendly co-operation of several of the clergy embraced 
in the Committee and direction of the Philadelphia Branch, and of 
several other clergymen in Pennsylvania and New-York, who speak 
and write the German language. 

Besides the above Tracts in the duodecimo form, sixty-five Chil- 
dren's Tracts have been stereotyped, and most of them printed. 

The Committee are gratified also to add, that the sum of 800 dollars 
having been contributed by the liberality of four distinguished and 
much respected friends of the cause, of different Evangelical denomi- 
nations, for the stereotyping and perpetuating of Dr. Dcddridge's 
Rise and Progress of Religion in the Sou/, that excellent work was 
unanimously approved by the Committee, and has been stereotyped 
and printed. It will be sold at the low rate of thirty-seven and a half 
cents per volume, and, the Committee cannot but believe, wiU prove 
a valuable accession to the Society's publication^. 



tlld.] 



^ttBlICATlON^. 65 



Of the Ameriean TVuet JXtagaeirie, 6000 etiphs are now published » 
in the form of a half sheet, monthlj. The Chrittian Almanac for 
1828) was published in twenl^ distinct edUiont. 

The Publishing Committee hare endeavoured to beitr constantly in 
mind, that their first and highest aim, lookiiig to God for dii^ctioft, 
must be to select and issue those great Evangelical doctrines of the 
Cross, which God is accustomed to magnify the riches of his grace in 
blessing to the conversion of sinners to himself, and the building up 
of Christians in the most holy faith. They have believed, at the same 
thne, that no pains should be spared to issue these truths in a form of 
narrative style, and external appearance, calculated to interest the 
community, and secure, if possible, general attention and respect. 
And they nave reason for especial gratitude to God for the general in- 
terest he has awakened in the Society's publications, and, above alf, 
for that seal of his approbation which he has so signally given in rcA- 
dering them, very extensively, the means of spiritual good. 

Amount of Publications printed, 

Bttiiiyg tb« year endiog May 1, there have been prinled, Tradt* 

In the English language, ^906,000 

III Prencb, 50,000 

In Spanish, 35,000 

In German, }44,000 

In Hawaiian, 65,00d 

Inltafian, . . . . 6,000 

Children's Tracts 339,000 

Boatswain's Mate, 2fi00 copies, embracing 14,000 

Bound voltoies of Tracts ; of vols. L and VI. each 4,000 copies ; of vol. V. 
3,000 ; of vols. II. III. and IV. each 2,000 i making, in all, 17,000 vo- 

hnaes, comprising Tracts, 560,000 

Whole number of Tracts printed during the year, 5^19,O0Q 

Wliole number printed since the formation of the Society, . . . 8,834,000 
Whole number o£ pages of duodecimo Tracts printed during the year, . 53,667,000 
Whole number ofpagesof do. printed sincethe formation of the Society, 87,835,000 
Whole number of i«ges of Children's Tracts printed during the year, . 5,208,000 

Of the Tracts issued during the year, 3,190,000 have been covered, lAaktng 
1 2,760,000 j9ag-u ofeovert issued during the year, exclusive of the Tracts mentioned 
above. 

Of forty 
of twenty. 

"Quench not ^-.^ .., — , ... „^^., „^,,^, ..^.^^ 

the whole number of the last-mentioned Tract, published by the Society in three 
years, 109,000. 

The whole number of copies of the American Tract Biagazine, published dnrlne 
the year, is 40,500. 

Whole number of copies of the Christian Almanac for 1828, printed at the Socie* 
ty's House. 123,900. 

O'f the Rise and Pn^^ss, embracing 280 pages, 2,000 copies have been printed; 
whole number of pages, 560,000. 

Amount of Puhlieations circulated. 

On Hay, 1, 1827, the General Depository contained duodecimo Tracts^ Paget, 

rincluding'theTractii In 7,545 bound volumes,) 15|788,268 

Printed the last year in separate Tracts and bound volumes, dttodedmo» 53,667,000 




Remaining in the General Depository, IMay 1, l828,(IneliidiDg the Tracts 
in 1(^,357 bound volumes,} 



68,455,263 

23,183,484 

duodecimo Tracts circaiated during the jrear, (ioclodiDf the Tracts in 

14,188 bound volumes,) . , . . 46,S8L7S4 

Total circulated shice the formation of the Society} .... 74,701,516 

6* 



66 THIBD ANNUAL KEPOBT. [JUDe^ 

Chrahiiious DiMtributions. 

Of the Tracts gnUaitously distribaUid, there have been wnt, Paget. 

To the Sandwich Islands, • • 645,000 

To the Mediterranean, 269,000 

To other forelg^n lands, 91,238 

Total to foreign eountries, . > . >,0lfi,29S 

Westand Soathofthe Alleffhany MountaiDS, . . . • • • 97^^139 
To other parts of the United States, . ....... 611,602 

Whole amount of grants as aborei, ....... 2,603,978 

The Committee have also i4>prDpriated 300 doUan to the Rev. Jona& 
King^, to be employed in procuring^ Translations of this Society's Tracts 
into the language of modem Greece, to be distributed under his direc- 
tion, in his contemplated mission to that suiTering country : a number 
of such translations having already been printed at the American 
n^ission press at Malta. 

The Committee cannot dismiss the subject of gratuitous distribu* 
tions to the destitute, without expressing the sense they have of the 
duty devolving on this Society, greatly to extend thi* branch of its 
operations. They see no bounds to the field of usefulness which may 
thus be occupied, and feel the obligation most solemnly binding, to 
enter upon this work with a spirit of more enlarged and expansive 
benevolence. Nothing but means is wanting to enable this Society tOt 
disperse millions of pages of Divine truth, every year, among those 
who have very few, if any, of the privBeges of the Gospel, and thu& 
use the means which God has appointed, and is accustomed to blesff, 
for the conversion of sinners to himself. The need of further pecu- 
niary aid for gratuitous distributions will be still more apparent, on 
presendng a view of the 

State- of the Funds. 

' REGBIVED, daring: the year ending May 1st, 

For Tracts sold, nearly at cost, $32,670 20 

Donations — from Brancties and Anxlliaries, 4,685 03 

Do. from 117 Life Directors, s|l06 Od 

Do. from 168 Life Members, 3,408 01 

Annual sabscriptions, and other donations, l,S6a 34 

Wliole amount o£ donations 12,464 38 

ToUl Receipts during the year, .... . $15,134 5Z 

. PAID, daring the year. 

For paper, $18,229 01 

For priDtinr, stereotyping, engraving, folding, stitching, landing, 

Tracts and Ghristian Almanac, 21,310 91 

Services of the Corresponding Secretary and General Agent, the. De- 
positary and three assistants, whose time and efforts are wholly de- 
voted to the Society, ........ . . 1,856 08 

Services and eipenses of travelling .Agents, chiefly in more destitute 

parts of the country 1,982 S2 

Expenses of General Depository, postage, taxes, fuel, and all other ex- 
penses, 1,806 06 

Total paid daring the year, as above, $45,134 68 

It appears from this statement, that all the funds received have been 
expended, leaving the Treasury empty, and the Society, which has n* 
permanent funds, entirely dependent on the charities of the Christian 
community for the means of carrying forward and extendnig its ope* 



\ 



182^.] STATE OF THE FtJKDST. 67 

rations. On closing the accounts of the yejir, there wete also bills then 
due, to the limount of $711 64; and the Society was under additional 
obligations, chiefly for paper, and due previous to October first, to the 
amount of $10,2^ 92, exclusive of all the current expenses for print- 
ing, folding, binding, &c. The Societ^^'s funds have, at all times since 
its formation, been very limited, compared with the extent of its ope- 
rations, there having rarely been funds enough in the Treasury to 
meet the current expenses of two weeks ; and it often having been re- 
quisite for individual members of the Committee to assume personal 
pecuniary responsibility, in order to meet the Society's dues. 

The causes of this state of the Society's funds are very apparent. 
It is not that pecuniary contributions have not been liberally made ; 
but that the extent of the Society's operations has exceeded them. 
The Committee, in view of the responsibility in so great a degree de- 
volving upon them, of carrying forward this department of benevo- 
lent exertion in our country, have never dared to look first into the 
Treasury, and graduate their efforts accordingly ; they have felt, that 
they mtut press forward in the work, and trust in God, through the li- 
berality of the friends of the cause, to sustain them. This course they 
' feel that they must still adopt. The General Depository has not yet 
been supplied as it should be with Tracts; the wants of the destitute are 
every month more and more apparent ; the field of usefulness is daily 
extending ; evidences of the Divine blessing on these publications are 
accumulating ; the Committee feel, that the providence of God calls 
them to go forward, and that they cannot go back, nor diminish their 
exertidns. 

The pecuniary wants of the Society were never so great as at the 
present time. Some thousands of dollars in donations are needed for 
Immediate use. The Committee thus spread their cause before the 
Christian community— the rich and the poor, clergymen and laymen, 
ladies as well as gentlemen — ^and pray for such aid from all, as the 
dealings of Divine Providence with them permit them to afford. 

The Committee would mention, in this connexion, that no pains is 
spared to eonduet the concerns of the Society in the most economical 
tMnner. The services of all the members of the Committee are gra« 
tuitous ; and also those of the Treasurer, whp, in addition to dis- 
charging the duties of his office, has converted all the uncurrent bills 
received, except on banks broken, into bills current at the banks, and 
made a donation to the Society to the full amount of the discount. 

And, notwithstanding the large amount of service necessarily re- 
quired in receiving into the General Depository 5,000,000 of Tracts 
annually ; delivering them in large and small quantities, and for- 
warding them to every part of the country ; conducting the corre«- 
spondence ; keeping the accounts ; and superintending the printing, 
stereotyping, engraving, agencies, and the whole operations of the 
Society ; yet the Committee have, the past year, issued thirteen pages 
of Tracts for every cent received; and that, throwing out of the ac- 
count the expense of stereotype plates and engravings, the printing 
of the Annual Report/ the Tract Magazine and Christian Almanac, 
2,000 occasional volumes, and 12,760,000 pages of covers : an amount 
of printing, whkh, compared with the receipts, it is believed, will give 
the most entire satisfaction to every friend of the cause, and create in 
every mind the assurance, that the sacred funds committed to thi$ Iii» 
fititntion are faithfully and discreetly appropriated. 



68 THIED ASnVAL REPORT. [Jutt^,, 

WctJc of Qmu in the Soektfs Home. 

In connexion with this view of the internal or domestic arrange- 
ments of the Society, the Committee would mention, with devout gra- 
titude to God, that an interesting work of Divine grace has, for several 
months, been apparent among the females employed in printing, fold- 
ing, and stitching Tracts in the Society's house. An unusual serious- 
ness was observed among them in February of the last year, and at 
no time have the influences of the Spirit seemed to be entirely with- 
drawn. Songs of praise have often ascended from their lips, while 
their hands have been active in folding those messages of truth ; and 
many a Tract has been wet with tears of sorrow for sin, and, it is 
hoped, of real penitence, before it has gone forth on its errand of 
mercy. Since the commencement of the work, 41 different individuals 
have been employed in these departments of the Society's operations, 
15 of whom were previc^usly members of the church. Of the remaio- 
iog 26, 18 have, since the period above mentioned, professed faith in 
Christ, and most of them have connected themselves with churches of 
different Evangelical denominations in the city. 

A work of similar character, and simultaneous in its progress, has 
also been witnessed among the females engaged in the house of th^ 
American Bible Society. 

Branches and Auxiliaries. 

The Branch Society, cU Bostofi, still retaining the name of the Am^ 
rJcan Tract Society which it received by charter from the civil autbo^- 
rities, whose receipts, the last year, were $10,30& 40, and which has 
between 500 and 600 Auxiliaries, has moBt cordially united its ener- 
gies with this, in our common labour of love. It has procured from 
this Society, during the year now past, more than 7,000,000 pages of 
Tracts, and has remitted to your Treasury $7,636 03. Of this sunK, 
the Committee gratefully acknowledge $2,006 25 as donations. 

The Philadelphia Branch has prbbably b(^ been less active, daring 
the year, than any other institution in the land. .It has already recog- 
nised 170 Auxiliaries ; the Grerman clergy on its committee have vi- 
gorously co-operated with the Committee of this Society in the prepa- 
ration and stereotyping of German Tracts ; and it has retnitted to your 
Treasury $3,^84 38. It is operating extensively through the states 
of Pennsylvania and Delaware ; and its Committee have recently 
passed the unanimous resolution, 

** Thai, with reliance on Divine aid, they toUlform, in every iriha*- 
bited township, a/nd in every congregation thai mil grant permitsion, 
in the states of Pennsylvania and Delaware, an Auxiliary Trad Society, 
jfrevious to the Jird day of January, 1830." 

This enterprrae accomplished, will form a new era in the history of 
Tract operations. The Committee feel that it ought to be accom- 
plished ; and that the same should be done^ and that without delay, in 
every inhabited township, and in every religious xsongregation, as far 
as our population extends. 

Several Auxiliaries, in states west of the AUe^iany mouniains, have 
been active in the cause. At the last Annivei*sary, the Committee re*, 
ported the sad fact, that ofdy Tracts to the value of ^70& had reached 
those states from this Society's Depository. During the year now closed, 
tbe value of Tracts gratuitously distrilyiUed there exceeds that sum ; 



1828.] MOTIVES FOE INCREASED EXERTION. 69 

and the whole amount of remittances, daring the year, from Auxilia- 
ries in that portion Of the country, is $3,008 64. This shows, that the 
work of supplying the 4,000,000 of these states is indeed begun. God 
grant it may be carried on, till this spiritual seed shall be sown 
throughout the whole vast Valley of the Mississippi. 

Other notices of Auxiliaries are necessarily omitted in this abstract. 

The number of new Auxilicaies, formed during the year, is 268 ; 
making the whole number of Branches and Auxiliaries 640, exclusive 
of the Societies connected with this Society's Branches or Auxiliaries. 
Of these 640, 76 are in Connecticut, 216 in New-York, 61 in New- 
Jersey, 77 in Virginia, 65 in States and Territories west of the Alleg- 
hany, and the remaining 146 in other States of the Union. 

MOTIVES ^OR INCREASED EXERTION. 

Mudi Land remains to be possessed. 

The work of supplying our country with Tracts, is scarcely yet be- 
gun. Where is the city, or town, or neighbourhood, in which the Tract 
operations might not be increased ten fold with the utmost advantage? 
Where is the Christian, who might not have done far more for the 
cause of his Redeemer, through their distribution, than he has done ? 
The Committee look upon the most favoured parts of the country as 
places where these short and interesting portions of truth, adapted to 
men of all conditions and circumstances in life, shoi^d be constantly . 
circulated, as long as there are souls to be saved and the truths of the 
Gospel are blessed as the -grand instrument. Every established Chris- 
tian needs, and usually delights in these publications, as means of his 
growth in grace. Every impenitent man should be met by them, as 
spiritual seed, to be sown in the morning, and not withheld in the 
evening, knowing not which portion God will bless to arrest his atten- 
tion. Every inquiring sinner should receive the one best adapted to 
the state of hb mind — ^best fitted to direct him to the word of Grod, 
and to Christ, " the only Refuge from wrath to come." Every intem- 
perate man, every profane swearer, every Sabbath-breaker, and every 
rejecter and despiser of the Gospel, should be met by them. And, 
above all, the whole mass of the rising generation should be made 
familiar with them from earliest childhood. No individual, who early 
read Mrs. Hannah Morels Cheap Repository Tracts, or works of kin- 
dred character, arid has observed how durable are the impressions 
made on his opening mind,* while his heart was melted, and his eyes 
were filled with tears, can be unmoved at this last suggestion, or fail 
of recognising the importance, that these publications should be made 
the daily companions, as it were, and most familiar friends of all the 
young. 

The Committee feel, that the obligation devolves on the Christians 
of our country to send Religious Tracts to our whole populaiien; till, 
what the brethren in Philadelphia are attempting to do for Pennsyl- 
vania and Delaware, shall be done throughout all our inhabited terri- 
tories ; till an Auxiliary be formed in every townsnip and neighbour- 
hood, and Tracts be conveyed to every family and soul. Who will 
believe that Divine Providence requires less at our hands ? 

God has given us every facility for accomplishing this work, and 
that without any protracted delay. The Parent Institution hopes al- 



70 THiaD ANNUAI. aEPORT* [JUDC, 

ways to have the means of prioting' and laraishittg^ the Tracts at the 
lowest rates. They can easily be transported to e?ery part 9f the 
country. Branches and Auxiliaries hare already established Deposi- 
tories in almost all our principal towns, where Tracts can be procured 
for the adjacent country. Every Christian ciui have access to them, 
and engage in their distrit^ution. A man may carry a hundred, or even 
a thousand of them in his arms ; they can be dispersed through Sab- 
bath and Common Schools ; at places of social and public worship ; 
by ministers and private Christians ; by gentlemen and ladies ; by the 
most humble and obscure in life ; by the aged, and middle-aged, and 
even the little child. 

Perhaps in no way can the message of the Gospel be conveyed fo 
more iruHvyiuah iU a leu expente. And, perhaps, no means, compared 
with the expense of effort and of funds, promises greater usefulness. 
The Tracts are short, and will be read by those who are too indolent, 
or too much occupied, to read a larger work ; they are interesting, and 
will often be read by the listless and careless; they are pungent, and 
oflen reach the mind unaffected by other means ; they are tcmunim- 
ingt and gain admission where other means are excluded ; they are 
adapted to all charaders and conditions^ and, if properly selected, are 
admirably fitted to convey a word in season ; they are silent, and ac- 
company the reader to the stillness of his retirement ; there is a sa- 
crtdness in the very name and character of Trodis, by which the very 
sight of them often strikes the profane man dumb, stops the Sabbath- 
breaker in his course, and disperses those who have oompanied for 
purposes of sinful amusement and vice. 

Nor is there a land on the globe which presents such inducements 
to circulate these puUicatiuns. Ours is a nation of /reemen, accus- 
tomed to think and act for themselves ; an enlightened, investigating, 
reading people, the great portion of whom are taught the rucUments 
of education in their earliest childhood ; almost the whole country use 
also one language, and a bond of union encircles the nation from one 
extremity to the other; there are few provincial or local prejudices to 
be overcome, and no political restraint whatever: the Tract goes 
forth, and is welcomed by the active, intelligent friends of Evangelical 
truth throughout the land. 

And we have almndant pecuniary resovaxes. To speak of want of 
means for circulating Tracts^ in a country so happy and prosperous, 
would be to violate the common sense of the community, and fross 
ingratitude to Him who has so bounteously showered his gifts upon us. 

And no nation depends so entirely, for the preservation of its pros- 
perity,, on the exertion of moral it^uenu. Without it, our freedom, 
and all our civil privileges, will soon be known only in the remem- 
brance of better days. And this moral influence must be everted by 
the voluntary efforts of Christians. Our government, while it prohi- 
bits no efforts to sustain the Gospel, can make no provision for it. It 
ifi for Christians voluntarily to decide, whether the influence of this 
blessed Gospel shall, under God, save our country ; or whether it shall 
be left to destroy itself under the intoxication of luxury, and dissipa- 
tion, and crime. 

And let it not be forgotten, that all our feUwhmen who believe not 
in our Lord Jesus Christ, are pressing their way down to the regions i(f 
everla^ng wo. To save their souls from death, and bring them back 
from their wanderings, as trophies of Redeeming mercy ; to fill heaven 



18ft8.] CLAIMS OF THE DESTITUTE. 7l 

with joy at their repentance, and add them, through boundless grace, 
as new stars in our Saviour's crown of glory— these are motives which 
drown all human calculation, and overwhelm us with their amazing 
itoport. 
But to ail these plain indications of duty, we have also added 

Tht Call from our destitute Brethren. 

Under this head, the Report contains numerous extracts of letters 
from Christians in different parts of the country, especially in the 
Valley of the Mississippi, and the New Settlements generally ; show- 
ing the great want of Tracts, and the almost boundless field of useful- 
ness opened by Divine Providence before the Society. The Beport 
thus proceeds : 

Such are the calls fi'om some of the destitute in our own country, 
especially from the 4,000,000 west of the Alleghany Mountains. The 
work of supplying them, as the Committee have said, is begun ; but 
it should be immediately increased ten fold. And shall the Christians 
»f our country wait for years and ages to roll away, before the desti- 
tnte of our own population shall be supplied with Tracts ? For what, 
the Committee would ask, shall we wait? Providence has opened 
wide the door of access to them. Nothing but means, with the blessing 
tf God, is wanting. Let those to whom God has given little, and to 
whom he has given much, of this world's goods, and who have access 
to his throne by prayer, say how long before, under his conttnaed 
smiles, this work shall be performed. 

Clainu of Foreign Countries. 

There is also a wide field spread before us on the north, and on the 
south, and in distant heathen lands. AU Spanish America, with the 
more than 20,000,000 of her population, may lay a most just claim 
on this Society for supplies of Tracts ; and the Committee feel, that 
they should be the ofcyects of our special prayers and efibrts, during* 
the coming year. 

Tracts are also requested from the Society for countries bordering 
on the Mediterranean, especially Malta, where the Committee hava. 
just sent 169,000 pages ; and Greece, to which the charities and sym- 
uithies of so many in our country are flowing at the present hour. 
At the anciept Thyatira, a Greek has communicated the interesting 
intelligence, that some of the Tracts there distributed by American 
Missionaries, had been lent from one to another till they had beea 
rtad by nearly two hundred persons. 

The interesting population at the Sandwich Mands, just now ac- 
cpiiring the ability to read, " in their own tongue, the wonderful works 
of God," and who have shared liberally in the benefactions of the 
Society the past year, will require continued aid, not only for the 
benefit of the natives, but for the crews of ships touching at the 
Islands. 

And budM, with her hundreds of millions buried in all the darkness 
of pagan idolatry, is open to the operations of this Society, if it bad 
means to aid in sending them the Gospel. Even in the darkness of 
India, Tracts have been signally blessed. We are informed by Dr. 



7£ THIRD ANNUAL &EPOBT. [JUOC, 

Carey, that a distingunhed Brahmin, who had, for four yean, ob- 
served a vow of perpetual silence in the temple of Kalee, and was 
worshipped as a god, and whose case was apparently the most hope- 
less of all the human family, was converted to Christianity by the 
reading of a Tract. 

There are no bounds to the wants of our felldw-beings, or to the 
iield of usefulness spread before the Society, and inviting from it the 
most enlarged and vigorous exertion. 

DIVINE BLESSING ON THE SOCIETY'S PUBLICATIONS. 

Bat the most delightful source of encouragement to increased exer- 
tion yet remains to be presented : — €rod has sanctioned the work in 
which we are engnged, by accompanying the Tracts distributed tcith the 
special influencts of the Holy Spiritf and making them the evident 
means of salvation to multitudes. Some of the facts illustrating this 
truth, which have been communicated during the year, the Committee 
feel bound here to record, as a memorial te the praise and glory of 
Divine grace, and a ground of encouragement for nobler efforts. If 
the proud ur^eliever despises Tracts as unworthy of his regard, we 
hold op these proofs of the honour which God himself has conferred 
upon them. If any professed Christian^ 'through inattention, or the 
apparent inadequacy of the instrument, has never yet been persuaded 
of their importance, yve hold up these facts to remove his doubts, and 
strengthen his faith, and excite him to activity. If any minister or 
private Christian, of any one religious denomination^ has felt, that 
Evangelical Christians of so many names could not unite in circidat- 
ing truth which God will bless, we hold' up these facts as a voice from 
Heaven, which seems to say, the religioji of the Gospel is one, and 
the faithful endeavours of those who truly believe in Christ, by what- 
ever name they are called, if made in his strength, and in reliance 
on his aid, shall be rendered successful. 

The following facts hone all been communiealedf either to this Society, 
or to its Branches, or Auxiliaries, during the past year; many of which 
have already been published, under the sanction of the Committee, in 
the American Tract Magazine, and copied extensively into the re- 
ligious journals of the day. They come from every part of the land, 
and most of them from sober, intelligent Christians. For the cor- 
rectness with which all of them have been originally written, the 
Committee cannot vouch ; nor do they suppose it certain, that all, 
who have been apparently converted by means of Tracts, will be 
found, at the day which shall try men's souls, to be the real disciples 
of Christ ; yet the evidences of conversion are, perhaps, as strong, 
when effected through this silent medium, as by any other means of 
grace ; and the amount of good reported, compared with the whole 
actually accomplished, must manifestly be small. The original do- 
cuments are, in most instances, preserved, and their substance is 
given with the most scrupulous accuracy. * 

The Report proceeds to recount a great number of striking ex- 
amples, which have been communicated during the year, in which^ 
these publications have been blessed to persons of rarious characters 
and conditions in life: in the reformation and hopeful conversion 
to God of abandoned stamen^ of intemperate men, profane swearers, 



i82S.] THIRD ANHUAL REFOET. 75 

and Sabbath-breakers; in bringing UfdvertdHstSt and even avowed 
JnJidelSf to renounce their errors and accept of mercy at the Ibot of 
the Cross; in carrying consolation to mourners, and arousing the 
lukewarm from their spiritaal slumbers; in the conversion of many 
irreligious and thoughtless youth, and, in several instances, of tL father 
and mother in the same family, and of persons who are now preadiers 
of the Gospel, A number of examples are also mentioned, in which 
revivals of religion have been manifestly occasioned by Tracts, and 
in which those inquiring for the way of salvation, or indulging a 
trembling hope, have been blessed by particular Tracts, specially 
adapted to the existing state of their minds. 

Conclusion. 

Such are some of the evidences, that the hand of the Lord is in 
this work. He has caused the spirit of love to continue in the Com- 
mittee, sustained and cheered them in their exertions, and taught 
them new lessons of trust and confidence in Him. He has given, 
the first year, $10,000; the second year, $30,000; the third year, 
$45,000; to be used in this service, for his glory. He has opened 
before the Society a boundless field of usefulness, and excited his 
children, among the waste places* in eveiy direction, to lift up their 
cry for aid. He has richly imparted the influences of his Holy Spirit, 
to show that he will bless the endeavours of his children, in the salva- 
tion of multitudes of souls, and the hastening of the triumphs of 
the Redeemer on the earth. 

All motives conspire to urge the Society onward with redoubled 
seal. Its aim should be nothing less than to send these heart-search- 
ing messages of love and salvation to every town, and neighbour- 
hood, and family, and soul, to whom we can have access ; and that 
withoitt any delay. The whole Evangelical community should be 
enlisted in the work-— every individual become personally a Tract 
distributor— a procurer of spiritual blessings by prayer — and the 
means of exciting to action all others within the reach of his influence. 

This work must and will go on. If we are mactive, God will raise 
up others. The day of millennial glory in our world will be hastened 
in its time. And, though the previous contest with the powers of 
darkness may be long and severe, there will be found a multitude of 
fiftithful followers of the Lamb, who will choose to bear the self-denial, 
and toil, and suffering; and, if need be, reproach and persecution; 
that they may be found in his service, and may ultimately reign with 
him on his throne Then, tiiese dreams of earthly enjoyment will have 
all vanished away, and eternity have opened upon us its living realities. 

Then, the multitudes whose salvation is involved in these appointed 
means. of grace, will be seen to be innumerable : and all who have 
been won from the error of their way through the agency of this 
Society-*«nd all who, from love to Christ and the souls of men, 
shidi, by aiding in its conquests, have " turned many to righteous-^ 
ness'^— shall unite, with *^ ten thousand times ten thousand and thou- 
sands of thousands," in songs of salvation " mito him that loved us, 
and washed us from our ains in his own blood, and hath made us 
kings and priests unto God and his Father: ta him be glory and 
dominion for ever and ever," 
Vol.111. - 7 



74 REV. m. TTire's adpbe8S. [June, 



\ 



At the Society** Annivenary, May 7, 1S28. 



ADDRE9II .OF RET. STEP HEN H. TYNG, OF THE 
EFISCOPAI* CHURCH, HARTIiAND. 

Mr. President — Before I submit to you, Sir, the resolution which 
I hold in my hand, I must ask permission to make a few remarks upon 
the interesting object which has called us together this day. In the 
vast Taiiety of plans for the moral improvement of the world, which 
have been originated in this age of Christian benevolence, the object 
of the Society over which you have the honour to preside, appears to 
me to possess claims of peculiar interest and importance. 

Proper and efficient instruments for the religious instruction of the 
dependent classes of society, have long been a desideratum with those 
who have felt for the ignorance and wretchedness of man. In the ex- 
tended prog^ress of moral illumination to the different members of the 
human family, the total deficiency of meanfllof instruction in the great 
truths of salvation adapted to the mfancy of man, whether referring 
to the period of hU natural immaturity, or to his infancy of mind, has 
been a matter of the most painful experience. The paramount value 
and importance of your benevolent design, permit me to say, is be« 
held in the adequate supply of this fatal deficiency, and the facility 
with which, by means of your interesting Tracts, the most inestimidrie 
instructions are conveyed, in an intelligible and profitable form,' to the 
young, and the poorer and more ignorant classes of adults. 

Sir, the infancy of man, like the infancy of nations, seeks that kind 
aM degree of instruction which is by sensible images to be conveyed. 
The eye or the ear may be attracted, and by their instrumentality 
the understanding may be enlightened and the heart engaged, if, in 
the interesting form of a picture or a parable, the truths to be com- 
municated are contained ; though, without this vehicle of information, 
those same truths would be unable to make impression. It is known, 
Sir, that the first alphabet of nations has ever been an alphabet of 
pictures. In the incipient progress of human society to knowledge' 
and refinement, this is found to be the form which all naturally adopt 
for silent communications — the form in which the earliest records of 
nations have been transmitted to posterity ; and from parity of rea- 
son, with individuals in the infancy of knowledge the same means of 
instruction are always found to be the most intelligiUe and efficacious. 

Sir, these are the powerful instruments which have riveted the fet- 
ters of Romish superstition upon ten thousand times ten thousand of 
the children of men, which have extended its idolatrous dominion over 
the igporant and thoughtless of many preceding generations, and have 
arrogated to the figments of mortal hands, the original design of which 
was perhaps purely good, the worship which is the sole prerogative of 
the eternal God. These instances of their operation show their exten- 
sive influence among men, and may teach us how to wrest the mighty 
weapon from the grasp of the adversary, and to use it for the glory 
of God. For it will be found, that in the same method of commnni- 
cation by which erroneous principles of faith and conduct have been 
inculcated iipon such multitudes, the first principles of knowledge of 
the most valuable character*— of that wisdom which is unto salvatwn 



1828.] wtv. JIR. ttkg's address. . X^"^ 

— maj be impressed upon the attention of the yonng and onin- 
formed. 

Novir, Sir, the system of instruction adopted in the Narratiye Tracts 
which you give us to distribute, and which, in my ezperknce, have 
been far the most useful, partakes of this character, ^ough per- 
haps with reference to a state of society one step fartl^ removed 
from total ignorance and darkness. And any degree of observation 
or experience in the instruction of men, it appears to me, must aflbrd 
abundant conviction, that these veliicles of religious information are 
adapted to the wants of men, and do and will produce extensive and 
lasting benefits. 

Sir, the abstract principles of truth, however plainly declared, wiU 
not engage the attention' of the young and ignorant ; they are far 
above Ste level of their customary range of thought. There is in them, 
of necessity, a sublimity of elevation far too exalted for their minds to 
attain ; a delicacy of connexion far too nice for their powers of re> 
flection to discriminate ; and. an universality of application £ur too 
extended for their capacity to survey, illustrations of the accuracy 
of this assertion may be ^lyived from a multitude of the important 
doctrines of religious truth. 

Go, Sir, lecture to the young or the ignorant, in the plainest and 
most intelligible language of .which the subject will admit, upon the 
universaUy controlling providence of the Deity ; and you will find 
them unable even to affix any definite meaning to the terms which 
you are constrained to employ. But show them the three children 
walking with the Bon of Grod unhurt in the midst of the furnace of 
fire — ^present to them the patriarch fioating safely in his ark over the 
snrfiice of a deluged world — give them a view of Daniel peaceful and 
undisturbed in the den of lions — ^bring before them the thousand in- 
stances, which have been given in every age of the church, of this 
watchful care, and your object is accomplished ; you are enabled to 
enchain their attention, to engage the most ardent affections of their 
hearts, and to fasten an impression upon their minds, which no mere 
reasoning upon abstract principles would be found competent to 
produce. 

Go, reason with the unthinking and uninformed, upon the necessity 
and value of a sacrificed Mediator and a vicarious atcmement for a 
world ruined by sin-^upon the indubitable certainty, that without the 
shedding of blood there is no remission— and, ailer all your labour, 
you leave them iarthe dark. Bring then before them, a fair picture 
of the selfdenying labours of man's Redeemer— show them the ago- 
nies and the patience of the cross— -relate to them the touching history 
of the humiliation, the sufferings^ the sacrifice of the Lord of glory — 
and the interest of the most heedless will be excitW — and eyes will 
weep, that, fdr other than personal sorrows, never wept before. 

£very one, I think, Sir, who has had experience in the work of in- 
struction, will respond to the correctness of these remarks. It is the 
prevalence of this method of communicating knowledge which forms 
to the less enlightened among men, the chief cireumstance of attrac- 
tion in the Holy Scriptures. There are many, who read their Bibles 
with great interest and evident improvement, whose attention is par- 
ticularly excited by the interesting variety of parables and histories 
which they contain. They comprehend not tiie accurate and con- 
nected reasoning of the Epistles ; the truly suUlme elevations of the 



KEY. MR. TTNG'S ADl>R£Sd. 



[June, 



Cl 



as 



trains are beyond their reach ; but/ as the venerated Cecil 
uUy expressed it, in reference to his own selection of pro- 
be comfort of his afflicted state, they g^o from history to 
a bird from spray to spray," seeking every where some* 
MiM^ «^^JtV awaken, excite and interest their thoughts. 

tt is this^rindple. Sir, which constitutes the leading importance of 
your Tracts — those peculiarly which are of a narrative character. 
They are suited to the actual state of man : their touching stories en«. 
gage the sympathies of i&e most thoughtless ; and, even though th^ 
may be carelessly thrown aside aiter^the perusal, it will generally be 
found that some valuable impression, at a future period to manifest 
its advantageous operation, has been fastened upon the mind. 

But what other means can accomplish the same result of good ? 
What can supply the deficiency of these precious instruments of in- 
struction ? Any^ Sir, it is true, in the hands of that sovereign grace 
which worketh all things after tlie counsel of its own will; but, in 
human calculations, none. The Ministers of .(esus may &ithfully 
perfona. their important work, " in season, out of season ;" may pro- 
claim with all fidelity the truth as it is inJj^li ; and yet there will be 
multitudes of men beyond the reach of tlielr instructions. There are 
numbers in every community, who will be found totally ignorant of 
those first principles of religious truth which the preacher is obliged^ 
to assume as postulates in his public labours — ^who are altogether 
unacquainted with the foundation which he must necessarily consider 
as already laid, and can therefore have no adequate conception of the 
instructions which he communicates. There are numbers,' too, of the 
souls '^ rightfully committed to his charge, who habitually withdraw 
themselves from the reach of his public exhortations, and pass their 
lives without ever mingling with the multitude of those who keep the 
holy day. How valuable are your Tracts, for the awakening and in- 
struction of such as these ! Tf^y preach with power, where the voice 
of the living witness is never heard ; and excite a concern for the 
things which belong to their eternal peace, and produce anxious in- 
quiries for salvatipn among those by whom his messages, however 
faithfully communicated, have never been understood. They are 
Swift-winged messengers, who follow the sinner to the seclusion of 
his firest&— arrest his attention when thinking of nothing less than 
the matters which they communicate-— collect around their instruc- 
tions a iSeimily whose only union has been common ignorance and 
common transgression— *and convert the abode of nice and irreligion 
into a temple for the Redeemer, a habitation of holiness for the Lord 
of Hosts. 

The observatiws. Sir, which I have been permitted to make, of the 
beneficial operation af Religious Tracts, in my estimation, magnifies 
to a very high degree their importance as instruments of spiritual 
good ; and I would gladly engage the hearts of all Christians in the 
promotion of this great and pious object, till there should not be found 
a soul in this land called Christisua, though yet filled with spiritual 
' ignorance, without one of these messengers of grace. Far more must 
be done ; and in the Tracts which you have already dissemiinated, you 
have given us the best warrant that our means cannot be more surely 
invested than in your hands. I must say. Sir, I have been delighted 
with the character of those Tracts which have been issued from your 
Depository ; with the candour and evident Christian disintcrestedne^sa 



IZt^*] JftON. THEODORE FaELINOni7TSElV*8 ADDESSS. 77 

with which they have been selected from the writings of the worthy 
of all denominations of the Christian Church ; with the truly Christian 
dig-nity — for I can call it by no other name — with which, what all must 
consider, in comparison, minor differences of opinion have been over- 
looked, in a common concern for the faithful publication of the ines 
timable truths of a common salvation ; and still more, jpprmit me to 
say, with the strongly marked delineations of Gospel provisions, Gos- 
pel promises, and Gospel requirements, which have' characterized the 
valuable selections of your Committee. 

* I read, Sir, with thankfulness, a sentiment contained in the first ad- 
dress of the President of this Society, which was, to me, a fair and 
cheering presage of the character of its operations. " No Tract should 
ever be issued,'^ I think it was, ** which does not contain, should it 
find its way where a Bible was never seen nor the Gospel ever heard, 
enough of divine truth to guide the ignorant and inquiring sinfier into 
the path of eternal life." I fully believe, the. very respectable Com- 
mittee to whose hands this important task has been confided, have 
complied with this wise and pious recommendation. They deserve, 
Sir, the highest confiden^and encouragement ; and I trust the time 
is not distant, when the ^Rlbsive spirit, which has hindered a Portion 
of this confidence, wherever it be found, shall give way in shame ; and 
universal tiiankfulness, esteem and co-operation, shall be the present 
remuneration of their labours. Your Tracts preach the Gospel faith- 
fully ; they point plainly to the way of salvation, and hold forth, in all 
its vital and saving doctrines, the rich word of life ; and we demand, we 
have the right to demand nothing more. Coincidence in these cardi- 
nal truths, which from the Scriptures they proclaim, is, in matters of 
belief, agreement enough among the followers of Jesus. While we 
are thus united in ** the r^ot of the matter," and quiet and charitable 
in our smaller disagreeings, we can ask, we can expect no further 
unity on earth. In heaven we shall be one, as God and Christ are 
one. Here, ** though the Spirit of God may rest upon us in divided 
tongues," as the eloquent Bishop Taylor has somewhere said, " yet, 
so long as these tongues are of fire, not to kindle strife, but to warm 
our affections and inflame our charities, we should' look upon this va- 
riety of opinions but as a diversity of operations, while the Spirit is 
the same." 



ADDRESS OF HON. THEODORA FRELINGHUYSEN, 
OF NEWARK, NEW-JERSEY. 

The circulation of Religious Tracts is calculated to be as extensively 
useful as perhaps any other written mode of imparting instruction. 
The great majority of mankind want the leisure to sit down delibe- 
rately to a system of truth. Even the Bible, plain and simple as are 
its practical lessons, requires patient attention and study { and when, 
with this, is considered the native repugnance of the heart to its pre- 
cepts and disrelish of its promises, it is not wonderful that this blessed 
volume often lies unheeded on the shelf to gather the dust of years. 

But an unpretending Tract arrests us because of its unobtrusive ap« 
pearance. It seems to require so small a tribute of time or thought, 
that we yield, because we are hardly invited to do so. It meets us on a 
jonrney, and by the way side ; and often, when the traveller is hurried 
on by the cares of this world, this fai^ful tittle messenger of truth 

7» 



78 BON. tbeodoius frelinghutsen^s adoressu [June, 

fixes a thought upon his heart, that neither business nor time can dis- 
sipate. The gracious Spirit has, by it, roused the sleeping conscience 
from its torpor, awakened the forebodings of a judgment to come, 
presented the claims of a despised and resisted Saviour, and compelled 
the heedless sinner to repent. 

This is no vision, Sir. Many instances might be adduced to evince 
its sober reality. 

And besides, who can estimate the immense influence exerted by 
these means on the moral feelings and habits of the great mass of so- 
ciety ? A Religious Tract is an efficient auxiliary to the Bible ; it is a 
faithful pio;neer, that can often reach a nook or corner, where the vo- 
lume never finds its way. And it often strikes a eonvietion to the heart 
too; when the Bible would plead in vain for the perusal of its pages. 
There are many, very many, Sir, who are afraid of the Bible : not 
iuhamed merely — ^although that might almost make angels weep^-but 
they are afraid of it; yes. Sir, they dread it as they would the ghost 
of all their unrepented sins. They will ridicule it — they will madly 
and wickedly torture its denunciations of eternal judgment to 'mean 
a little temporal calamity, but they dare not calmly approach its sa- 
cred pages ; while a Newton, and Locke, 4(id Edwards, with the sim- 
plicity X>f little children, could sit at the feet of Immanuel, and learn 
wisdom from his word. These modern de&ers of God will despatch 
his whole counsels at a blow, rejudge his justice, and dare attempt to 
dethrone his power; and yet, Sir, scarcely one of them has ever dared 
to read the Bible carefully and connectedly. 

To the deluded votaries of cheerless infidelity these Tracts have 
been signally blessed, and I pray they may more abundantly succeed. 

The endless diversity of form in which Tracts are ingeniously made 
to embody truth, gives them a wonderful facility and power. They 
enlist that thirst for variety so natural to us all— the attention of the 
thoughtless is taken by surprise— <the sword of the Spirit makes its in- 
fliction, while the man may be seeking duly for the amusements of air 
idle hour. 

We have the faithfulness. of the Great Fountain of Truth to encou- 
rage us ia4ts dissemination. He has said, ''My word shall not re- 
turn unto me void.'' It will accomplish his purposes of grace and of 
judgment too. The feeblest- efforts of his children will not be forgot- 
ten. The seed sown of your charities may long lie buried ; but a day 
is coming, when it will spruag up and bear fryit an hundred fold.— An 
interesting anecdote, well authenticated, happily illustrates this prin- 
ciple in God's providence. A young man had heard in England, from 
a pious and eminent preacher, a sermon of solemn interest. It made 
no lasting impression, still it was remembered. He emigrated to 
Ameiica — bis heart was devoted to the world— years rolled away in 
carelessness and sin. At the. end of half a century, when sitting one 
day in his fields, the prominent sentiment in that sermon came home • 
with power to his soul: the dissipations of fifty years could not de- 
stroy this seed ; the momentous subject of the preacher arose in vivid 
recolljEction ; and at threescore and ten, he rejoiced in the- forbearance 
of God, who had spared him in mercy, and at last led his soul to the 
hope of the Gospel. 

Let it not; be said, that mUnrellous cases make uncertain rules. 
They are all marvellous cases ; every redeemed siimer will be a won- 
der to himself through eternity. 



1828.] BET. BR. mTMPHEET's APX^EEES* 79 

Let OS then, when our labours seem to fail<— when disappointments 
t»efal us — when the enemj mnltipiies the iaure9 faster than the good 
sefed is sown — ^let us seek oar consolation and our refu^ in God. He 
will have a people for his praise : the stone cut out of the mountain 
without hands shall fill the whole earth : Zioa shall arise and shine, 
her light being cOme ; her sons shall come from far, and her dangh- 
ters from the ends of the earth : and I have no doubt that the efforts 
of your Society have an intimate connexion with the fidfilment of 
these promises. 

When the Lord intends to bless anj portion of his vineyard, he 
usually precedes it by a spirit of prayer and laborious exertion among 
his chddren. And what may we not wait for in the displays of his grace, 
when every nation throughout Christendom is coming up to his help ? ~ 
Nerer has there been such a day for benevolent enterprise. Christians 
begin to feel, in some degree, that the silver and the gold are the 
Lord's. And) what may be considered a still more auspicious token, . 
there has gone abroad a deeper sense of dependence upon the Divine 
blessing ; there is mor«r work done for God, and less for vain glory ; 
the distinction is more felt, between that liberality which may give all 
its goods to feed the poorf and yet be accounted nothing-— worthless 
as the tinkling cymbal^and that pure, sanctified principle, which is 
ai really in exercise, and will meet with as gracious a seward; in the 
bestowment of a cup of cold water, as in the more splendid ofierings 
of wealth and plenty. And when a humble page is sent forth from 
your Depository, if the heart that gives it a destination <^an in faith 
look to Him who hath said, ** Not by might nor by power, but by my. 
Spirit," we may confidently expect, in due season, to witness the fruits 
of your- labour of love. And t*he objects of your Society assume an 
interesting and affecting importance in their relations to our national 
welfare — an importance, that I hope will address itself with power to 
every American who loves his country. There is cunongst us a thirst 
after knowledge, prompted by the nature of our political institutions. 
The mind of a freeman cannot be inactive ; there exists a restless 
spirit of inquiry in every soul that breathes the pure atmosphere of 
rational liberty ; and it becomes a momentous inquiry, how we shall 
nourish and fill this desire — how we shall best meet the rising ardour 
of four millions of our youth, who will very soon give the standard to 
principle and the tone to morals. Let the patriot look abroad, and, 
while he surveys the rising generation, and reflects with intense anxiety 
on the impulse of character which these active spirits will throw into 
the next fifty years of our national existence, let him say, under what 
auspices his hopes first begin to kindle and bis fears to subside. Could 
he select the agents, and they would come at his bidding, what other 
than religious and moral influences would he send forth, to pervade, 
elevate and refine this mass of mind ?— None other can avail us, Sir. 
Here rests the hope of our country. It involves a nation's destiny-— 
and I trust that it will repeive a nation's patronage. 



ADDRESS OF RET. DR. HVJUPHREY, 

President of Amherst CollegCf Mass, on being feqwsied to geeond the 

last Rtsoluiion. 

I find, Me* President, on revisiting this growing metropolis, after 
an interval of ten yfars, that a new flujiily, of 91 most extraorflioary 



80 ABSTRACT OF BEY. MB. T¥CKCB*3 AODBC8S. [Juoe, 

and interetting character, has here risen up, to bless not only the 
city^ but the nation and the wor^. With the eldest of these sisters 
I had some slight acquaintance in the loveliness of her infancy ; but 
the rest have all grown up within the period specified, and I rejoice 
to find them " adorned with modest apparel, with shame-facedness 
and sobriety ; not with broidered hair, or gold, of pearls, or costly 
array — ^but, which becomethV those " professing godliness, with good 
works." 

I hare read, Sir, in fable and in song, of the heathen graces : how 
many of them there were, I cannot now remember, for I hare come 
to seek acquaintance with these Christian graeeSf whose singular 
virtues and beneficence lare spoken of with admiration throughout 
the land ; and, without pledging myself that I will not modify my 
opinion to-morrow, I feel now strongly inclined to say, in view of what 
is presented this morning, ** Many daughters have done vtrtuously, 
but thou excellest them all.** 

The resolution which I have been so unexpectedly invited to se- 
cond, recognises the duty of preparing and sending out Tracts to be 
distributed among the Greeks^ whose sufferings and struggles have 
excited such general sympathy. This reminds me of a circumstance 
which will excite in your bosom, Mr. President, no common emotions : 
—Within less than a week past, a promising Greek youth, once a 
member of your family, and now in a course of liberal education, has, 
BS we humbly trust, been brought as a penitent to the foot of the 
Cross. Some of the Tracts of your Society have, in this case, been 
eagerly sought for, and, I doubt not, have been employed by t|^e 
Spirit to " convince him of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment." 
May we not hope and believe that the same means, sent now to bis 
brothers and countryipcn, will, by the blessing of God, bring them 
also to the knowledge and obedience of Christ? 

But, Sir, I will not enlarge. I came here, not to speak, but to see, 
to hear, to feel, and to lift up my heart in silent praise to God. And 
indeed, had the case been different, I should despair of saying any 
thing to advance this glorious cause. There is a mighty energy, a 
living principle, in the machinery of this Tract Society, which urges 
it onward so rapidly, that I shall esteem myself happy, if, instead of 
attempting to give.it any additional impulse, I may save myself from 
being left far behind, by laying hold of it as it rolls majestically by. 



ABSTRACT OF TM£ ADDRESS OF REV. MARK 

TUCKER, 

Of the Presbyterian Church, THy, N. Y. 

I almost tremble to accompany this, resolution [for accepting and 
prhiting the Report] with a single remark, lest the delightful impres- 
sion made by the reading of the Report should be effaced, the spirit- 
stirring effect should be weakened. 

This expedient of the Tract Society is peculiarly adapted to tjie 
wants of our countiy. It affords the greatest facility of directing the 
istreams of knowledge through every portion of this widely extended 
republic. A Tract is a leaf from the tree of life, which every wind 
may waft to the most distant quarter for the healing of the nations ; 
or it is a ray of light from the Sun of Righteousness, which may be 



1828.] ABSTRACT OF REV. MR. TBCKER^S ADDRESS. 81 

made to shine upon the most sequesteted ralley, the most obscure 
habitation. If intelligence and religious influence do not keep pace 
with our population, our civil institutions cannot resist the tide of evil 
that will assail them. The mass of the people must be enlightened 
and virtuous, or they cannot be free. The ordinliry means of grace 
are not adequate to the wants of the community. In the large cities, 
not one third of the population are brought under the sound of the 
Gospel. There will often be found, under the shadow of the temples 
otOod, and in the vicinage of wealth and intelligence, the most at^ect 
poverty, the most deplorable ignoranee. In the New Settlements, 
there are large districts unsup{died with the institutions of religion. 
Ministers cannot be furnished in suflicient numbers to make up the 
deficiency. Bible Societies cannot overtake the fearful demand. And 
must these thousands and tens of thousands remain in ignorance, stu- 
pidity and moral death 7 Evils of the most active character, of 'the 
most threatening influence, are at work to prostrate the pillars on 
which rest the glory and existence of our republic. Our prosperity, 
by augmenting our resources, and thus leading to luxury and vice, 
will accelerate our ruin. If some method be not devised to stem the 
torrent — ^to induce reflection— to check the progres»of flagrant crime 
— ^to difliise general intelligence — ^to set up a high standard of mora- 
lity, and excite a deep-toned feeling of piety — ^nothing can save us 
from utter ruin. 

Next to the ministry of reconciliation, and as a most powerful aux- 
iliary, the distribution of Religious Tracts will aid in lifting up a stand- 
ard against the flood that is rising to overwhelm us. 

How is intemperance, that wide-lvasting evil, over which the legis- 
lator sleeps, over which the magistrate and even the minister of Christ 
has slept too long, to be resisted ? Will you seek to rescue the poor 
victim himself? While with one hand he is seizing the poisonous cup, 
will you put into the other a Bible or a Tract, that, in anrhour when 
he is himself, his conscience' may be awakened to a sense of guilt, 
that he may look into the gulf that will swallow hi|n up 1 Vain will 
be these efforts : the poor man is struck with death, and no mortal 
energy can save him. Sir, the only hope of salvation to our country 
from this devouring evil, is the influence that can be exerted upon 
publit opinion; and the circulation of able Tracts will do much to 
excite salutary alarm. This Society is capable of reaching the public 
mind by a thousand points of 4x>ntact— of influencing public senti- 
ment 1;^ speaking in a thousand voices to the public ear. . 

They are particularly useful in promoting revivals of religion. Con- 
taining clear and striking exhibitions of evangelical truth, -forcible 
appeals to the conscience, they are well calculated to become the 
after-preacher of God's word, and not unfrequently secure the nail 
fastened by the Great Master of assemblies. ' In whatever light this 
Institution is regarded, whether in relation to morals or religion, to 
temporal or spiritual interests, it has a strong claim upon every mem- 
ber of the community. 

Sir, an institution of such vslue and influence ought to have an efii- 
cient Branch, an active Auxiliary, in every inhabited township of our 
CQuntry. And, I doubt not, it will be done. The work is commenced. 
A splendid example has beep set by the Philadelphia Branch. May 
the noble spirit of their resolution be communicated to every Society 
in our widely-extended communhy. If Cliis resolution is to be cscrried 



St FBEHH7U TRACT ON ETitS OT LOTTERIES* [June, 

into operation^ you must doable the number of your priiitii>g*preS9es 
—you must multiply the sources of your revenue — ^for you must 8up» 
ply the Tracts. The Parent Society must replenbh the Depositories 
on which such large demands will be made.' 

Little do the ina<;^ive, mefficient members of the church know the 
solicitude and care, the vigilance and untiring perseverance of those 
who are at tive head of these operations of charity. With an empty 
Treasury and unanswered demands, they must go forward, measuring 
their exertions by the 6eld to be occupied, and not by the limited 
means in their power. The paradox of the Apostle is appHcabie to 
them, "As deceivers, and yet true; as sorrowful, yet always re- 
joicing ; as poor, yet making many rich ; as having nothing, yet pos- 
sessing all things." 

The Society has commenced its exertions in a day of wonders. It 
occtipies a commanding station in the midst of the ^reat operations of 
the age. It has engaged in an arduous and difficult undertaking. You 
cannot recede: to so forward, is to assume, at every step, additional 
responsibilities. You must supply twelve millions of souls with Reli- 
gious Tracts. The work can be done, and it must be done speedily. 
Death is daily placing multitudes beyond their reach. Error and vice 
are rapidly dosing up the channels of communication to many more. 

The indications of Providence, like the pillar of cloud, invite you 
to go forward ; and, like that cloudy pillar, they will be light to you, 
and darkness to your enemies. The success already witnessed, is 
most encouragipg. Your statistics are almost like the fictions of ro- 
mance. Though but just commenciug your operations, there is a ma- 
turity in your plans, a harmony in your agencies, and a power in 
your movements, that are seldom obtained in a lapse of years. Their 
character should inspire unlimited confidence. They possess a cor- 
rectness of sentiment, a power of language, a fullness of Evangelical 
doctrine, aicompression of matter, a closeness of appeal, and an indivi- 
duality of application, that must commend them at once to the taste of 
the scholar, the good sense of the citizen, and the piety of the Christian. 
God has placed upon them the seal of his approbation : the judgment- 
day alone will fully reveal the amount of good they have effected. 

We regret that our limits have compelled us so much to abridge 
this last address. That of Rev. Dr. Milnor may be expected in our 
next Number. 



TJBCBSaxmtt, TRACT OXT EVZXiS OF Z.OTTB&XBS. 

We are requested by the Publishing Committee of the American 
Tract Society to announce, that, having examined the several Tracts 
submitted to them on the Evils of Lotteries, though many of them 
possess considerable merit, they have not deemed any qpe of them 
so far to combine all the requisites of a first-rate Tjact on th^ subject, 
as to warrant their awarding to it the premium, or publishing it under 
the sanction 'of the Society. The Committee, however, in view of the 
importance of the subject, have resolvbd still further to extend the 
time for the reception of Tracts. 



L 



1B28.1 



1kECElFT9« 



83 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OF THE AHERICAK TRACT SOCIETY, 
From Mcof % to May U, 1828. 

Xf9t€-^The Receipts from April 16 to Miiy I, and the Receipts from Life Directory 
and Life Members, from May 2 to Slay 15, are omitted in tliis list, being ac- 
knowledy^ed in the Third Annual Report. 



Sec 



FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 

VER.— Clarendon, Fere. Mrs. Eveline Uodges, Sec. 
West Rupert, David Wilson, Ag. .... 
MASS.— Uoston American Tract Society, John Tappan, Tr. 

Lee, (L Bartlett, Tr 

Riciiniond, . • . • . . . / 
Stockbrid^e, North, Rev. Nathan Shaw, Pres. 

Tyrinebam, 

CONN.— -Black Rock, Capt. 6. Sturges, Pres. 

MiJford, Mr. Georgpe Mann, Tr 

New Haven, Yale College, Walter Carpenter, 
Nonhfield. Litchfield Go. Lyman Warner, Jun. Sec 
Koxbury, Rev. Fosdic Harrison, Sec. . 

Routhbury, 

Stratford, A. Curtis, Tr. ... 

Woodbury, Fern. Mrs. Elisa Preston, Ag. 

N. YORK.— Allen, Alleghany Co. Noadiah Alvord, Tr. 

Bfdford, Fern. Mrs. Susan Nichols, Tr. 

Buffalo, Orlando Allen, Tr. . . . • 

Ganandaigua, Fern. Mrs. Eliza M. Hubbell, Tr. 

Chatham, Fem. Columbia Co. Alice Johnson, Tr. 

Kasi Granville, Fem. Lucy Savage, Sec. 

Fayette, Seneca Co. Fem. Mrs. Susan Day, Tr. 

Forf Ann, (South Bay,) Joseph Hibbard, rres. 

Ualen, Few. Mrs, Pratt, Tr. . 

Geneva, James Bogert, Tr. .... 

Harlaem, Fem. Mrs. Ann Ball, Tr. 

Harmony, Ghautaone Co. Titus Kellogg, Tr. 

f luntington, L. I., rem. Mrs. Henrietta Brown, Sec 

Lenox, WiiUam Cobb, Tr. . . . • . 

Marlborough, Mil. Julia Ann Tuthill, Sec. . 

Majville, Chautauqoe Co. Mr. Loomis, Tr. . 

Montgomery, Ornnge Co. John F.Soot, Sec 

Moriah, Fem. Mrs. Alary B. Whitf:, Sec. 

Morrisvilk, Fem. Mrs. Sarah Lord, Sec 

New Hartford, for Trarts beyond the Alleghany, 

New-York, Fem. Mrs. J. U. llurd, Tr. . 

do. Rutgers-strept Ghurcli, Fem. Mrs. A B. Wheeler, 

•do. Fern. Aus. North western DisL Miss O. Johnson, Tr 

OwegOjCriogaCo. East Jury DUt. Auz.)Col.Chas.B. Pixley, Tr, 

do. do. by their Au!t. Big Flat, . 

Perry Centre, Talcott Howard, Tr 

Portland, Chautauque Co. Elijah Fay, Tr. . 
Ripley, do. Selden M. Ely, Tr. . 

Sheridan, do. Elias Uaven, Tr. 

South East, Putnam Co. Fem. Rosauna Jackson, Sec 

Troy, A. Loveland, Tr 

Uilca, Edward Vernon, Sec 

Watertowi^ Jefferson Co. Eli Farwcll, Tr. . 

York, Rev. Johnson Baldwin, Sec 

Yorktown, Miss Sally Lee, Tr 

N. J ER.— Lebanon, John J. Lowe, Sec 

Lyon*s Farms, Fem. Mrs. R. W. Lambdin, Bee . 

Mendhaal,rem 

Princeton, Fem. F. W. Morford, Tr 

Princeton, Nassau Hall, 

MAR.— Baltimore Br. 

VIR.^^harlotteTille, Albemarle Go. Rev. Francis Bowman, Tr. 
Fincastle, Edgar Robertson, Sec 
Norfolk, Robert Robertson, Tr. . 



ForTr. 



Don, 



aoo 


1 00 


S 81 


S 31 


1600 00 




00 


8 20 


7 fiO 


260 


18 92 




69 


1 10 


6 £0 


6 60 


16 50 


6 60 


7 SO 


2 60 


14 26 


4 75 


6 00 




8 00 




10 76 




12 IS 


4 04 


80 


26 


19 84 


6 61 


60 00 




2F 26 




2 14 




16 00 


500 


400 


300 


10 00 




4 00 




6^00 




5 00 




7 28 


2'42 


S 76 


1 25 


10 17 


3 39 


6 88 


1 96 


6 81 


1 94 


14 06 


4 69 


15 67 


6 18 


9 00 


SCO 




13 00 


90 64 




60 00 






2 50 


48 60 




1 13 


37 




2 00 


3 19 


1 06 


6 32 


2 11 


6 26 


1 75 


4 69 


3 06 


60 00 




86 00 




32 00 




7 00 




6 26 


1 75 


4 69 


1 66 


7 60 


260 


460 


2 25 


20 00 




17 00 




62 11 




10 00 




9 19 


306 


il 18 





84 



IIECEJFTS. 



Trlnce Edward Oo., Un. Tliei)!. 8cm. John HcEwen, Tr. . 
M. CAR.-»eiiOy Orange Cow Joieph D. Uiighes, Sec. . 
Greet** Cburch, Gaswetl Co. David MHcbell, Pres. 

Little River, Samuel Turentioe, See- 

Balero, 6toiie« Go. H. O. Clauder, Sec. . . • . 
GEO.— Aoguita, Timothy Edward, Tr. .... 

ALAB.— Mesopotamia Oh. Green Co. Hrt.Martlia Oreswell, Sec 
Mobile, D. Mclloy, Jun. Sec ...... 

KEIf .p^Lezing^ou, Win Margaret A. BIjrthe, Sec. 
omOv— Avon, Lorain Co. Daniel D. Caldwell, See. . 
Blaek River, Lorain Co. Daniel G. Whiton, Tr. . 
Uloominffburar, Favetle Co. Joe S. Oillesi^ie, Sec. , 
Brownheiin, (Lorain Co. Aux.) Rev. A. U* fietts, Ag. . 
Olaridon, Geauga Co. SteplieD Pitkin, Jun. Tr . .. 
Oleaveland, (Cnjraboga Co. Au.) Thomas Davis, Tr. 
Dover, Cuyanoga Co. Ashur Uoolev, Tr. • « . . 
Elyria, (Lorain Co. Aux.) Francis West, Tr. ... 

Farmincrton, Tmmball Co. Rev. Enodi Bouton, Ag. . 

QranviUe, Rev. Jacob Little, Pres. 

Jefferson, (Ashtabula Co. Aux.) Rev. P.Fratt,Harpersiield, Sec 

Johnstown, L.N. Cook. Ag. 

Kingsville, Ashtabula Co. Rev. Urbane Palmer} Ag. . 

Newark, Rev. S. S. Miles, Ag 

Norwalk, (Huron Go. Aux.) Leaver^lt Bradley, Tr. . 
Paittsville, (Geauga Co. Aux.) L. Morley, Tr. . . . 

Faiatviiie', James Galbratb, Pres. 

Salem, Ashtabula Co. Dr/ John Vener, .... 
Sheffield, Lorain Co. Henry Root, Tr. . 



Societies not AuxUvxt^,f<n' Tracts. 

N. YORIL — Oanajoharie, Mrs. 

Wheeler, Sec. for Tracts, . 6 00 
New Utrecht, L. I^ Fern. Bib. 

Misftiunsiy and Tr. Soc. Mrs. 

Bcrier, Tr. . . . . 7 1& 
Oyster Bay X.L, Silas Laltere,Tr. 6 88 
Wiad&or, Broome Co. Marcus 

Saar*, Tr. 20 00 

TENN.— North East, Erie Co. . 4 00 
V I R. — Fredericksburg, Prayer 

Book and Tract Society, R. T. 

Thom, Ag. .... 8 82 
N. CAR. — Book Company, Rev. 

James W. Douglass, Ag. . SO 00 
Tracts sold at the Gen. Deposi- 

toi7 to individuals, . . . 839 87 

Annual Dirfctor. 
PEX.— Phihidelphia,IsaAcLoyd, 6 00 

Annual Members. 

R. ISL.— Providence, Col. Alex- 
an<'er Jones, . . . 2 00 

CONN— Middietown, Miss Julia 
Ann Riley, . . . 1 00 

West llaven, Mrs. Hannah Paint- 
er, 2 00 

N. YORK. — Soi^th Kortright, 
Rev. Robert Forrest, . . S 00 

PEN N.— Philadelphia, A. Olax- 
ton, d 00 

Other Donations, 

V£R.^Fidrrax,JonathanSottth- 
ward, ..... 50 

HASS<— Lancaster, Hon. Wm. 
Sicdraan, 5 M 

Salem, J. B. Lawrence, . . 2 fiO Totatf 



ForTr, 


29 00 


12 94 


S 76 


4 01 


16 00 


89 76 


38 00 


18 00 


10 38 


8 60 


6 31 


8 87 


3 75 


63 62 


9 61 


14 60 


7 36 


6 76 


46 00 


7 60 


11 00 


11 81 


7 76 


31 60 


800 


3 94 



Don. 

4 SI 
1 26 
1 84 
600 

11 00 



600 



2 25 

16 00 

2 60 

8 93 



1 00 



S 00 
2 00 
800 
200 
1 00 
12 00 
40 



CON N.— Coventry, G . Page, . 

Middletowu, Friend to dissemio 
nation of knowledge, • 

N. YORK. — Blooming Grove, 
Orange Co. Miss A. O. . , . 

Hopewell, Ontario Co. Pres. Cb. 
Monthly Concert, . • 

MCnhdm, Herkimer Co. Luther 
Pardee, 

Moriah, Rev. Isaac R^d, sale of 
TracU granted, * 

New- York Citv, B. F. 2 dollars, 
A Friend, 10 dollars, 

Windsor, Broome Co. Rev. Jo- 
seph Wood, .... 

N. JER.— Pemberton, individu- 
als, hy Rev. John Rogers, 60 

N. CAR.— Rev. Benj. Richel, . 6 00 

Houston P. O. Rowan Co/ Mar- 
tha A. and Margaret A. An- 
drews, 60 cts. ead, . . . I 00 

Tabor, Iredell Ci>. Col. A. F. 
Caldwell, l 00 

S. CAR.— Charleston, Rev. John 
Dixon, 5 00 

OHlO^EIyria, Lorain Co. Mrs. 
Mary Belden, . . . . 6 00 

Newark, Rev. B. S. Miles, sale 
oCiTracU granted, . . 4 82 

Toungstowtt.Trumbull Co. John 
£. Woodbridge, . . . 8 00 

Friend of Tracts, ... 50 

Receipts from May 2 to May 15, 
including 2 Life Directors and 
16 Life Members s 

Donations, . $726 96 

Eec. for TracU sold, 8,280 70 



93^967 60 



I THE AMERICAN 



niiX, isas. 



teintoalllbewwlil.Hid prencliUieOmpdloeverT cniiliiTe." Hark,ii 
ADDRESS OF THE RET. DR. MII.NOR, 



BtfoTt Hit American Tratt Sectety, May 6, 1628. 

Dr. Milnor addreBsed Ihe Meedng in (uhstance >a fbllowt : 

It faaTiog been deemed expedient that, besides the addreiMt fi- 
pecled to be delitered on thix occmIod, there should be some remarka 
of a practical bearing, from a member of the Executive Committee, I 
have reluctantly consented to obtrude myself on youratteotioa. I am 
happy, however, that il is not necessary to address you in the language 
of repining oc complaint. Never was there a benevolent design, dat- 
ing its commencement from so recent a period, that has been more 
giogularlj blessed by the smiles of Divine Providence than Ibis. Let 
the glory be to Him who-e Spirit and Providence have alike aided our 
efforts ; and with unspeBkable gratitude for what he has enabled us (o 
accomplish, let it attach oar hearts more firmly to a cause to favonred 
of Ood, and stimulate us to new eiertions in its conduct. 

That, at the close of one year, $10,000 should have been contributf d 
to this design, and that, at the end ofthe second, our income had risen 
10 (80,000, were, «■ taej oconmd, cireuBUtaDces of a oature calcu- 

ToL. Ur. 3 [Wh«jWo.31. 



86 REV. DR. MTLIIOR'S ADDRESS. [^ulj, 

lated to rejoice our hearts ; and now that, at the termination of a third 
year, our receipts are $45,000, we should be most ungrateful if we 
did not raise the song of thanksgiving to the God and Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, that he has so blessed our humble endeavours to 
advance his glory and the kingdom of his Son. 

But there is a singular felicity accompanying the religious opera- 
tions of the present day. Where the object is worthy of the patronage 
of Heaven, it would seem that Christians have only to believe that it 
is possible, and immediately the result proves that all things- are pos- 
sible to him that belie veth. 

The first question that arose in the minds of many, when this Insti- 
tution was first proposed, was. Is it practicable to unite Evangelical 
Christians of different names in its establishment and conduct ? I was 
one that doubted; and when my hesitation was overcome, I considered 
still, that it was an experiment, not without hazard of failure. I was 
willing, however, for one, to try ; for while I am ever ready to avow 
a decided preference to that Church of Christ to which I am attach- 
ed, my heart is full of kindness to those of every name who love our 
Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity ; and I did and do believe, that, as the 
period of the latter-day glory of the Church approaches, although 
there may not be an amalgamation of the different religious commu- 
nities, yet there will be a nearer approximation to each other, more 
forbearance in non-essentials, and a firmer bond of union in resisting 
infidelity, and the lamentable errors which, under a Christian exte- 
rior, are not far removed from an utter rejection of the Grospel. Sir, 
let our hearts exult, that to such an encouraging extent union prevails 
in the promotion of this most powerful instrument of conflict with 
Satan and his emissaries. And if prejudice and misconception pre- 
vent its including all Evangelical Protestants, let us calmly wait the 
disposals of that Divine Being who can turn the hearts of men, even 
as the rivers of water are turned ; and let us hope, that, as our ad- 
herance to the fundamental principles so candidly avowed at the com- 
mencement of the Institution, is further attested by our publications, 
we shall find less reluctance in those who have hitherto forborne to 
join us in our great work, to come under the banner of a Society de- 
termined to " know nothing" in its operations but '^ Jesus Christ and 
him crucified." But I did not intend to say thus much in a general 
way of observation. My desire rather is to call the attention of our 
friends to a few particulars on which some practical remarks may be 
useful. They will relate to the number and character of our publica- 
tions, the necessity of increased funds, and the means by which, un- 
der God's blessing, they may be procured, and the best mode of ren- 
dering our Tracts more extensively useful. In regard to the number 
of our publications, I wish the views of the Committee to be under- 
stood. They now amount to 212, of the principal series in duodecimo, 
forming six neat volumes, and a portion of the seventh. Besides 12 
Tracts of this series, there have been added to the Society's publica- 
tions and stereotyped, during the past year, 65 Tracts for children ; 
24 Tracts in German ; 7 in Spanish ; and- that most excellent work, 
** Doddridge's Rise and Progress of Religion in the Soul." 

Sir, it is with great consideration the Committee have pursued, at 
different periods of their progress, the two opposite courses— in the 
first place, of accelerating the increase of the number of Tracts, and 
when they had reached such a number as the means of the Society 



1828.] &BV. DR. UILN0&*8 ADDRESS. 87 

would enable them to keep in printi to lessen the rapidity of accumu- 
lation. The number stereotyped and printed has at all times been so 
far in advance of the funds of the Society, that it has been impracti- 
cable to keep up in the Depository a full supply of every Tract. Be- 
sides, when a selection had been made from Tracts already extant, 
and a few excellent original Tracts had been brought into the series, 
more caution became necessary ; the merit of our publications became 
more an object of anxiety than the enlargement of their number. 

May I venture to say for myself and my respected associates, that, 
in the character of our selections, we do hope for the approbation of 
this assembly, and of the religious community in genersJ. It has been 
an ardent desire, and a subject of continual supplication, that we 
might be found faithful to those great principles, the developement 
and enforcement of which were announced, in the first address of the 
Society to the public, to be the object of its establishment. We hope 
we have succeeded in giving the Lord Jesus Christ, as the second per- 
son in the glorious Trinity, a place of distinguished prominence in our 
Tracts; that man's native and actual sinAilness has been, without 
equivocation, scripturally portrayed; that redemption through the 
blood of atonement, applied in the exercise of a living faith, has been 
exhibited as the sinner's only hope ; and the regeneration and sancti- 
fication of his nature shown to be essential to bis acceptance with God 
and his enjoyment of the felicity of heaven. The law as a school- 
master to bring the convicted sinner to Christ, and as the sacred and 
obligatory rule of human conduct, we have not failed to present in all 
its terrors to the wicked, and in all its holiness and beauty to the peo- 
ple of God; and morality, not the world's baseless and incongruous 
system, but that of the Gospel of Christ, has received at our hands its 
full measure of regard. Nor have we been timid or reserved in thu 
attack of fundamental error. Socinianism with all its withering influ- 
ence, Universalism with its soul-destroying tendency, and kindred 
errors contravening the faith once delivered to the saints, we have not 
hesitated to expose, not in the language of unrequired vituperation, 
but with overpowering argument, and the pre-eminent authority of 
God's holy Word. 

Sir, we do fondly hope that 46 millions of pages issued during the 
past year, and spread over our immense territory, will, in the great 
day of decision, be found to have wrought spiritual effects, similar in 
kind to those cheering instances recounted in our Report, but to an 
extent vasdy beyond what is there related, or of which we shall ever 
hear on this side of eternity. The Lord God multiply their fruits an 
hundred fold ! 

Another topic to which I would invite your attention, is the indis- 
pensableness of a great enlargement of our fitnds. With all our ac- 
knowledged causes of gratulation, it will be recollected that we have 
only two sources of revenue — our receipts for Tracts sold, and volun- 
tary donations and bequests. We have no permanent fomdy and toe 
desire none. Beyond the house given us by the benevolence of a few 
citizens, and the indispensable furniture and materials for carrying 
on our operations, we have not a dollar's worth of property. Every 
cent received is immediately disbursed in the purchase of paper, in 
the provision of plates for new Tracts, in the payment of the persons 
employed in printing and patting them up, and the incidental ex- 
penses of the establishment. Necessitated as we are, to ^ve credit in 



88 BEV. DB. MIIiNOK'S ADDBE8S. Rutj^t 

many instances to Auxiliaries, especially in the more destitute parts 
of the country, the returns arising from sales will not meet the exigen> 
cies of the Institution, even if no gratuitous distributions were made. 
But gratuitous distribution is often, and to a considerable extent, re>- 
quired ; and it is on free pecuniary donations from Auxiliaries of com- 
petent means, and from generous individuals, that we depend for the 
means of meeting, in this respect, the expectations of the public. It 
is greatly desirable that additions should be constantly making to the 
nnmber of our Tracta, and that our Depository should Ite continually 
supplied with an adequate quantity of impressions of every Tract in 
the series ; so that those who appi v for Tracts shall, in no instance,, be 
disappointed in obtaining actual and complete sets. 

But how can the Society. accumulate a suffident stock of Tracts to 
be ready to meet everv demand, unless public liberality iVnmish an 
amount of contribution equal to its acquisition ? With no income de- 
rived from existing capital, it is impossil^e, unless, besides a punctual 
payment for Tracts purchased, there be added a sufficient amount of 
free contributions. But the necessity of a great enlargement of our 
'funds arises out of a still more important consideration. There is a 
vast amount of religious and moral destitution to be supplied, where 
only partial, and, in many instances, no returns can be expected. To 
meet these numerous calls is utterly impracticable on the ptfrt of the 
Parent Institution, unless the pecuniary means are furnished. 

Sir, it is needless to trouble this intelligent audience with protracted 
details on this subject. Your Report tells you; the religious periodi- 
cals, weekly and monthly, tell you ; ^ou have heard from the respect- 
able gentlemen who have addressed you to-day, how large is the mea- 
sure of necessity in the Valley of the Mississippi, and the whole West- 
em Region of our countr bevond the Alleghany. Mexico and Soudi 
America, and the Isles of the Pacific, and oppressed Greece—- yes, and 
countries still more distant, are destined, we trust, to be the gratefid 
beneficiaries of American charity, in the communication of the bread 
of life through the medium of Tracts. 

But I need not dweU on the undeniable fact, that an almost bound- 
less field of Christian benevolence is before us : nor enforce upon such 
a class of hearers as surround me, the necessity of coinciding with the 
orderings of Divine Providence, which seem to have devolved on us 
the necessity of becoming its laborious cultivators ; and therefore I 
hasten on to the further particular I designed to notice, which was, the 
means whereby an adequate accession to our pecuniary resources may 
be obtained. 

These are the formation of Auxiliaries in counties, and townships, 
and congregations ; the constituting of Ministers Directors and Mem- 
bers for Life ; the multiplying the number of efficient Agents; and an 
expansion of generous feeling in the wealthier classes, in giving libe- 
rally of their abundance to this object. 

On these topics Dr. Milnor considerably enlarged, and then stated 
that there was a final topic deserving of a remark or two— the means 
of rendering oia Tracts more extensively useful. 

Let it be impressed on all our minds, that tl)ese silent preachers, in 
order to do good, are to be distributed- Let them not lie on the shelves 
of our Depository, or on those of. our Branches, or be locked up aa 



l€S8.] BRANCHES AND AUXI1IAB1E9. 89 

euriMities in the cabinets of individuals. They should be sent upon 
their errands of mercy without delay. But as the judicious ambassa- 
' dor of Christ endearours to ascertain the spiritual wants of those to 
whom he ministers, so let the distributor of Tracts consult the neces- 
sities of those around him, and let his gifts be seasonably and profit- 
ably applied. 

Though, if he err in this respect, no essential prejudice may follow, 
yet he will do most good by assiduously acquainting himself with the 
characters of those to' whom his charity is extended. 

In order to this, how important that distributors should be well ac- 
quainted with the nature and design of every Tract, and, from their 
knowledge of its appropriateness, direct it to just such a destination 
as Is calculated to produce the best spiritual effect. Thrown by the 
way-side, or left on the table of an inn, or on the seat of a steam-beat. 
or handed promiscuously to every passing traveller, the Spirit of Groa 
may make them the instraments of salvation to many a soul. But, 
given with a direct view to individual profit, and with a knowledge of 
the character of the receiver, and the adaptation of the appeal to the 
circumstances in which he stands, the probability of salutary results 
is greatly increased. In one way or another, who is there that may 
not accomplish much g^d ? When was ever before heard of so easy, 
and cheap, and efficient an instrument of religious benevolence ? The 
Lord incline all our hearts to use it to bis glory and the salvation of 
our fellow-men ! 



CINCINNATI (OHIO) BRANCH TRACT SOCIETY. 

The First Anniversary of this Society was held April 21, 1828, in 
presence of a large audience. After the reading and acceptance 
•f the Annual Report, the following resolutions were unanimously 
adopted : 

On motion of Rev. 8. Johnston, Corresponding Secretary of the Society, of the 
Episcopal Church, seconded by Rev. David Root, of the Presbyterian Ohinrcb, 
Kuolvtdt That we view the American Tract Sodetyas one of the most useful and 
important among those great national Institutions which the Christian Philan- 
thropy of the present are has originated. 

On motion of Rev. Eayah Slack, President of the Society, (the Corresponding 
fiecretaiy in the chair,) seconded by I. Burnet, Esq. Ruolved, That the experience 
of the last year has presented many new and animating facts calculated to invi- 
gorate our seal, and inspire renewed exertions to extend more widely tite drea- 
Ution of the Society's Tracts. 

On motion of Mr. Ephralm Robbins, of the Baptist Chorcb, seconded by Dr. 
Waldo, of the Presbyterian Church, the following preamhio and resolution passed : 
. Whereas, in the opinion of this Society, the verv wide field presented thronghont 
the Ohio and M tssissippi Vallles for the distribution of the Society's Tracts, is such 
as to call, without delay, for some more enlarged, systematic, and efficient plan of 
operation on the part of the present Society, than has heretofore been propose^, 
therefore Retolved, That a Special Committee of the members of the Society be 
appointed to collect and arrange the sentiments of this Society on this importan| 
Sutject, and, with the advice of the Executive Committee, to report such plans to 
the Parent Board at New- York, for tlieir consideration, with the least potsibia 
delay. 

On motion, Raehtd, That the Rev. Elijah Slack and Mr. Ephimim Robbins bo 
that Committee. 

Several addresses were made on this interesting occasion ; and the 
genersd expressions of approbation, together with the addition of 

8* 



90 aUUNGHES jmb atixiliabxes. U^iff 

many new members, encourai^ the Society to prosecute with more 
ardomr the objects of this praise-worthy Instkution. 

This Society purdiased, daring the year, from the American Tract 
Society, 600,000 pages of Tracts and 3,000 Christian Almanacs; 
300,000 pages of the former and the principal part of the latter haye 
been put into circulation. Receipts, during the year, $487 73 ; of 
which $165 30 were received from 12 Auxiliaries, ^90 from Life 
Members, and $232 43 from Annual Subscribers. 

Of Capt. Moses Guest, an active member of the Board of Managers, 
tiie Report sajs : ** When in solemn view of the eternal world, so 
fully impressed was he of th^ utility of circulating Tracts, as eamesUy 
to recommend the Society to prosecute its benevolent objects with 
renewed exertions ; and that both those who send and those who re* 
ceive these little heralds of mer<7, might more seriously consider the 
solemn and instructive messages which they bear. His example dif- 
fused a sacred influence, and bids us * be not weary in well doing\*^ 

We cannot but feel a deep interest in the enlarged spirit of Chris- 
tian enterprise exhibited in the two last of the above resolutions. The 
subject of sending a general Agent to labour for the promotion of the 
Tract cause throughout the whole Valley between the Alleghany and 
Rocky Mountains, has already engaged the attention of Ute Execu- 
tive Committee of the Parent Society, and efficient measures will be 
immediately adopted to secure so important an object. 



liOUISYILIiE (KENTUCKY) AUXU.IARY TRACT 

SOCIETY. 

First Annual Meeting, held April, 1828. Amount of Tracts pur- 
chased, 401,760 pages. Receipts, $408 41. Number of Auxiliaries, 
12. Members, 83. Much harmony has prevailed among the different 
Evangelical denominations engaged in the Society ; and one striking 
instance is recorded in the Report, of conversion by the instrument 
tality ofaTract. 

SOUTH CAROLINA BRANCH. 

The second Annual Meeting was held in Charleston, April, 1828.. 
After prayer, and the reading of the annual Report, the following re> 
solutions were presented and unanimously adopted : 

On motion of Rev Professor Dickson, seeonded by the Rev. Mr. Pressly, of New* 
bury, Ruoivedf That the Report Just read be aeeepCed^ and published under the 
direction of the Board. 

On motion of the Rev. Dr. Palmer, seconded by the Rev. Mr. Olldersleeve, 
Restivtd^ That this meetiner regard the signal advancement of the Tract cause, 
during the past year, and eniecially the success which has attended the efforts 
toform Tract Associations hi the several Churches in our city apd state, as calling 
for fervent gratitude and unwearied perseverance. 

On m'>tion of the Rev. Dr. Leland, seconded by Mr. Charles Mdntire, Ruohed, 
That this meeting very cordially approve of the efforts which have been com. 
menced te (Virnlsh a building for Depository Rooms, and other accommodation^ 
designed to facilitate the operations of benevolence; and that they recommend 
this undertaliing to the patronage of the Christian community, as an ol^ect, in 
their estimation, of pre-eminent importance. 

On motion of Mr. Cominflr, seconded by the Rev. Joseph Brown, ((be Oorre* 
spomling Secretaiy.) ibioZvect, That the thanks of this meeting be presented tn 
Ae Parent Society, ror their liberality in sending an Afrent to labour in tids state 
at their expense, but for the specUd benefit of our Branch. 



ttt%.] 8EAZICHES 4NP AVX1X.IAB1E9. Ql 

^ Eacb of the above Gremlemeti addrvseoH the meeting, and though 
the weather was mdement, and of course the ciudienoe small, it is 
believed that most of the individuals who were present^ felt that it 
was the cause of God, and that they must either go with it, or at 
length t>e left of it and him together. 

To the South. Carolina Branch of the American Tract Society, says 
the iReport, the last has been a year of special increase, and the Board 
feel assured that it will long be remembered with interest, as a bright 
epoch in its history. There have been re<;eived into its Depository, 
990,683 pages of Tracts, 9,800 Christian Almanacs, and 141 volumes 
of bound Tracts, for which the full amount has been punctuaUy re- 
mitted to the Parent Society; ^^7 have also been forwarded, for 
which Tracts have not vet been received. 

The Treasurer has received from Annual Subscriber, $72, and 
from Life Members, $120. The whole amount of expenditures have 
been $1,683 34, and of the ordinary receipts $1,619 64, leaving a 
balance due the Treasurer of $63 80. Besides this amount, $902 
have been subscribed, and most of it collected, for the purpose of en- 
larging the Depository ; and by the arrangement of the Erection 
Committee, this sum has been increased from the current funds of 
the Societi^ to $1000, which is to be employed exclusively in keeping 
an ample supply of Tracts. 

At the last anniversary, the Society had five Auxiliaries.' Thirty- 
five have been formed, and have become regularly connected with it 
since that period. 

About 60,000 pages of Tracts have been distributed gratuitously 
during the year ; and a number of instances of conversion by mean^ 
of Tracts have been communicated. 

The object referred to in the third resolution above, if accomplish- 
ed, will prove, we doubt not, a most important enterprise for the cause 
of benevolence in Charleston and the adjacent portion of the South- 
ern country. The1>uilding referred to is designed to contain roomd 
for Depositories of Bibles, Tracts, and Sabbath School Books ; a room 
for the meetings of Committees of the various Benevolent Institutions ; 
and perhaps a still larger room, in which anniversary meetings may 
be conveniently held. At a meeting of Gentlemen, held in December 
last, with particular reference to the interests of the Branch Tract 
Society, after nearly $1000 had been subscribed to be invested in 
Tracts for a permanent Depository, $2,700 were subscribed for this 
building, which last sum has since been increased to $3,500. The 
Board express the most ardent hopes, and strong confidence, that, by 
the benevolence of the friends of Christ, the subscription for this im- 
portant object will be speedily filled, and the building prove a perma- 
nent blessing to the cause. 

PETERSBURG (VIRGINIA) AUXILIARY TRACT 

SOCIETY. 

Second Annual Meeting held April, 1828. Tracts procured during 
the year, 168,100 pages. Receipts, $147 54. The Society has a 
Young Ladies' and a Young Men's Auxiliary in Petersburg, and has 
commenced efforts for establishing a permanent Depository of Tracts, 
(torn which the whoJe adjacent coimtjy may be supplied. 



BRANCHES AVD AniLIJUtlES' [^aQT, 

BALtlMOtCE BHANCH. 

First Annual Meeting held May 12, 1828. The exercises were 
Opened hy the Rev. Mr. I^evins' reading a portion of Scripture and 
addressing the Throne of Grace. The Rev. Mr. Henshaw, President 
of the Society, then made an appropriate address ; after which the 
Managers' annual Report was read by the Secretary. 

Very eloquent and impressive addresses were delivered by N. B* 
Smith, M. D. Professor in the Medical College, and the Rev. Mr. 
Toung. 

A new Constitution was submitted, and approved of; from the pro- 
visions of which, we are induced to hope a new impetus will be given 
this Association^ and that it will become still more efficient in the di& 
fUsion of Evangelical truth. 

This Society has ordered from the Parent Society, during the past 
year, 6,000 Christian Almanacs, and 919,130 pages of Tracts, of 
which 835,597 pages have been circulated. During the year, there 
have been gratuitoutly distributed to Sabbath Schools, 51,859 pages ; 
to the Custom House and Steam-boats, 41,452; to Seamen, 18,415; 
to the Prison, Penitentiary, Hospital, Infirmary, and Alms House, 
8,000. ^The Societv has 33 Auxiliaries, of which six are Juvenile 
Associations in the city of Baltimore. Receipts, during the year» 
91f396 73. The Report urges increased action, accompanied by fer* 
vent prayer, in behalf of a population of no less than 70,000 in the 
dty of Baltimore, and in behalf of the inhabitants of a large portiott 
of the country which naturally depends on the Branch in that city for 
supplies of Tracts. Rev. J. P. K. Henshaw, President; Mr. Samuel 
Young, Cor, See, and Oen. jSgent, 



PENNSYLVANIA BRANCH. 

The first Annual Meeting of this (late the Philadelphia) Brane!!^ 
was held on Friday evening, May 23, 1828. The assembly was very 
large and respectable, and was addressed, in a very animating manner ^^ 
by Rev. Dr. Beecher, Rev. Dr. Ely, Rev. Mr. Danforth, and Rev. 
Mr. Brantly. Receipts, during the year, ^,531 24, of which sum 
$2,200 were from Auxiliaries, and $1,350 from Life Subscribers and 
Directors. Whole number of Auxiliaries 160, many of which have 
been very active. Received into the Depository, during the year, 
7,238,000 pages of Tracts, including bound volumes, of which up- 
wards of 5,000,000 have been put into circulation, .^ount of gra- 
tuitous distributions, 46,500 pages. Of the Christian Almanac for 
1828, 8,000 copies were circulated ; and it is intended to print 15,000 
for 1829, besides an edition of 10,000 copies in German. The Tract 
Magazine, which was commenced in January last, has nearly 1009 
subscribers. 

The Report presents an interesting view of the general co-operation 
given by difierent Evangelical denominations, extensively, through- 
out the state ; especially bv German Clergymen, under whose super- 
vision, In co-operation with the Committee of the Parent Society* 
thirty German Tracts have been stereotyped and printed. Ten Board« 
of Agency have been established in ten difierent counties, composed of 
a few active ministers and laymen ; and Depositories have been formed 
9i Harrisburg, WillLesbarre, and Gettysburg. The Philadelphia City 



18S8.] 



^BANCHES AN0 AUXILIARIES* 93 



Tract Society, which said, the last year, ioto the Treasury of the 
Branch, $356, resolved, at its last aoniversarv, to raise, for the pro- 
motion of its objects, before the next anniversary, the sum of $2,500. 
Of a measure adopted by the C^mittee of the Branch, which no 
friend of the cause of Tracts will 'oon foreret, the Report thus speaks: 
The resolution of the Executive Cciumittee (adopted in April last) 
to " form in every inhabited township, and in ever\ church that will 
^;^nt permission, in the states of Pennsylvania and Delaware, a Tract 
Society, previous to the first of January, 1830," remains still to be 
accomplished ; and the Committee appeal to the Christian community 
to come up to their help in this great work, by the successes which 
have, thus far, followed their labours; bv the wants of the dark, de- 
solate and destitute region spread before them ; and the wide-spread- 
mg power of infidel and heretical errors. In many parts of this field, 
Tracts, it is presumed, have never been seen, and the ministry of the 
Word is rarelv, if ever known. Multitudes are yearly passing away 
to the judgment, while the declaration of the Almighty, who proclaims 
** wo to the wicked," reihains', and shall not pass away. Whatsoever, 
therefore, the Churches design to do for the living, should be done 
quickly. 

BRANCH SOCIETY AT BOSTON. 

The Fourteenth Anniversary of this Society, which still retains the 
name of the American Tract Society, which it received, by charter, 
from the civil authorities, was held Ma 28, 1828. After prayer and 
the reading of the Report by Rev. O. Eastman, the Corresponding 
Secretary, the fi^Uowing resolutions were ofiered, and unanimously 
adopted : 

On motion of Rev. Calvin Hitchcocit, of Randolph, iseconded by Rev. Louis 
Dwight, of Boston, Ruoivcd^ That the Report now read be accepted, and printed 
under the direction of the Executive Comnuttec' 

On motion of Rev. William A. Hallocli. Gorrespondinff Secretary of the Ameri* 
ean Tract Society, ll^ew- York, seconded by Alexander Jones, Esq. of Providence, 
Rhode Island, Resoited, As the sense of this Meeting;, that this Societv has been, 
through the Divine blessing, an imp(»rtant instrument of advancing the Redeemer's 
cause, and that urgent «laiina now devolve upon it for more enlaigad and ex* 
tended efforts. 

On motion of Rev. Henry Hunter, of Vermont, Agent of the American Home 
Missionary Society, seconded hy Rev. John H Rice, D. D. of Virginia, Reiolvidf 
That this Society approve of the efforts now making by the American Tract So* 
cle^ at New- York, to extend the circulation of Tracts among the miilions in the 
VaJiey of the Mississippi, and that we will aid them as far as practicable in that 
anportant work. 

On motion of Rev. George Cowles, of Danvers, seconded by & V. S. Wilder; 
Esq. of Botton, Retolved, That in view of this meeting, it is desirable that the 
operations of this Society in foreign countries be more vigorous and extended 

The meetuig was addressed with much affection and sincerity by 
Rev. Dr. Ricfe, and Rev. Messrs. Hitchcock, Halloek, Himter and 
Cowles. The house was full, and A deep interest manifested in the 
cause. 

It is now, says the Report, two years since the union Between this 
Society and the American: Tract Society at Pfew-York was consum- 
mated, dilring which time they have been uniting their energies, and 
moving forwuxi with the most perfect harmony, to accomplish the 
great work which is before them. At that time it was supposed that 
the resources of this Society would be greatly dimuiishedi and its use* 
fulness limited. But experience teaches that this Society has yet a 



94 BRANCHES AND AUXILIARIES^ [J^uly, 

g^at work to do — a large field to cnltiTate. The receipts of the past 
year have risen nearly $2,000 above the receipts of any preceding year. 
Nothing is now wanting but the vigorons co-operation of the Christian 
community and the favour of God, to render this Society a still greater 
blessing to our country and the world, than it has ever yet been. 

State of the Funds. 

Receipts, during the year, $12,460 23 ; of which $9,643 67 were 
for Tracts sold, and the balance in Donations. Remaining in the 
Treasury, $218 38. 

Amount of Th'octs Circulated. 

Sold to Agents, Auxiliaries, and Individuals, . Pages 9,012,742 
Delivered to Life Members and Donors, .... 724,078 
Donations for gratuitous distribution, and to establish 
permanent Depositories, 1,354,436 

Whole amount circulated, .... 11,091,256 

Ch'atuitotuf Distributions. 

The extent of this Society^s gratuitous distributions, during the 
year, forms a most interesting item of its proceedings. There have 
been appropriated, for distribution In Maine, 73,406 pages—in New- 
Hampshire, 30,500— in Vermont, 14,700 — in Massachusetts, in part 
to seamen, 101,580 — in Rhode-Island, 20,000— in New-Tork for dis- 
tribution, and to aid in establishing two permanent Depositories^ 
205,000^'in Ohio, to ud in establishing a Depository, 67,270 — in 
North Carolina, 30,000. 

To Benevolent Societies. — Maine Baptist State Convention, 35,000 
—Vermont Domestic Missionary Society, for their Missionaries, 38,800 
—Providence Religious Tract Society and Female Domestic Mission* 
ary Society, in j>art for seamen, 30,800 — to Massachusetts Mbsionary 
Society, for their Missionaries in this state and Maine, only a part of 
which have been delivered, 100,000 — to American Home Missionary 
Society, the amount of from 2 to 5,000 pages for each Missionaiy 
sent out by that Societv, to be delivered by the order, and sent at the 
discretion of the Corresponding Secretarv. He has already delivered 
189,000 pages. These Tracts have been delivered to 38 Missionaries 
labouring in 11 different states. These Missionaries report, that thirty 
Tract Societies have been formed at their stations. 

To the American Board for Foreign Missions, to be distributed 
mostly at their stations among the Indians, 39,000 pages — for the 
Mission Librarv at Bombay, one set of the Society's publications 
bound, 4000 — Tracts in English, from the Mission at the Sandwich 
Islands, 50,000^in Hawaiian, for the Sandwich Islands, 80,000— 
American Education Society, to each beneficiary 1000 pages annu- 
ally: during the past year, 97 have been supplied, 97,000 — ^to 60 
members of the Theological Seminary, Andover, for distribution in 
vacation, 55,860— 'to Rev. Thaddeus Osgood, who applied in behalf of 
the Societv for Promoting Education and Industry in Canada, 20,000 
-—to the Executive* Committee, for personal distribution, 74,986. 

Besides the above grants of Tracts, this Society has, during the 
year, made donations to the American Tract Society at New-York, 
for its general objects, for printing Tracts in foreign languages, and 
to aid in sending an Agent to New Orleans and the West, to the amoaat 
of $2,006 25.— Whole number of AuxUiaries 647. 



18£8.] 



RECEIPTS. 



95 



ABCBBZOAir TRACT 80CZXST7. 

This Society's want of fund» was never so urgent as at the present 
time : the Treasury being entirely emptv ; the Committee having been 
compelled to advance considerable sums from their own private per- 
sonal resources; and there being large obligations resting on the 
Society for paper, which, to the amount of upwards of $3,000, must 
be met in the month of July. 

All Auxiliaries and friends are earnestly requested to afford what- 
ever aid is in their power. No funds should be any where unneces- 
sarily detained ; and all should be active in this work, that the amount 
of good accomplished by the Society may not be diminished, but fully 
sustained and increased. 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 
Jhtring the month ending June ld« 1828. 



FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 

VER.— Swanton Falls, Rev. E. H. Dorman, Ihnea. 

MASS.— Boston, American Tract Society, John Tappan, Tr. 

Lowell, by their Fem Aux- in Ist Cong. Soc. Eunice Brown, Tr. 

R. IS Jj.— Newport, BenJ. S. Caboone, Sec. 

CONN.— Bethel, Fem. Miss Hannah Starr, Sec. 

Brookfield, A. Brundage, Tr. 

Canteii>ui7, Fem. Betsey L. Coit, Ag. 

Danbury, Horace BuU, Tr. . 

Daiien, Rev. £ben<>ier Platf, Sec . 

Hartford, Connecticut Branch. Charles Hosmer, Sec. 

Harwinton, Litchfield Co. Joel (i. Candee, Sec. 

Vevr Haven, A. Towmend, Jun. Tr. 

New MUford, £. Noble, Tr. . 

Plymouth, Andrew Stoughton, Sec 

Salisbury, Timothy Chittenden, Tr. 

Sharon, Charles F. Sedgwick, Sec. 

Waterbury, N Haven Ca Horace Hotchkiss, Tr. 

Weston, James Seelcy, Sec. 

Wiosted, in Winchester, Litch. Oo. Josiah Smith, Tr. . 

N. YORK.— Albany, N. York State Branch, G. Gates, See. 

Andes, Delaware Co. William C. Benedict, Tr. . 

Berkshire and Newark, Tioga Go. William B. Bement, Sec. 

Canandaigua, Jared Willson, Sec 

Columbia, in Walton, Darius Seely, Sec . 

Gien»8 Falls, Elias HawW, Tr. .... 

Hampsted, Rockland Co. Fem. Mrs. Elizabeth Ooe, Tr. 

Hebron, West, Samuel Livingston, Sec. . 

Hudson, Alexander Snuyder, Tr. .... 

Hurley, Ulster Co. Derick Dnbeois, Tr. . 

Middirtown, in Brookhaven, L. L, Lewis Rich, Tr. 

N. York City Aux. R. V. Beekman, Tr. 

do. Fem Mrs. J. R. Hurd, Tr. . 

do. Juv. in S. School, No. 8, Scotch Pres. Ch. Cedar-st 

J. P. Redfield, Sec. 

do. Rttlgers-street Church, Mrs. Martha Wheeler, Tr. 

Old Man% L. I., William M. Brown, Tr. . 
Portaee, 0. F. BurUngame, Tr. . . , . . 

Poundridge, Westchester Co. Fem. Mrs. Hannah L. Keeler, Sec 
Roxbunr, Delaware Co. Fem. Mrs. Jane Smith, Tr. 
Salem, Washington Co. James H. Seymour, Tr. . 
Skaneateles, Rev. Alexander M. Cowan, Tr. 
Warwick, Orange Co. Henry Pelton, Tr. . 
Wbitehali, George H. Fish, Tr. . 
N. JER.— Lebanon, Joseph Crate, Tr. 
Mansfield, Warren Co. Fem. Mrs. Sarah M. Shcrrerd, Tr. 
Mount Holly, Buriiogton Co. Fem. Mrs. J. J. M vUn, Sec 





For Tr. 




3 75 




2(K)0 00 




ao 00 




2 44 




2 25 




933 




14 83 




235 




200 00 




48 38 




12 00 




30 00 




69 00 




1 50 




7 50 




£26 




6 00 




£4 00 




100 00 




2 11 




15 00 




40 00 




403 




938 




225 




500 




9 84 




402 




80 00 




87 00 




758 




450 




1181 




5 35 


• 


£25 




159 




625 




10 OO 




197 




900 




13 13 



Don, 

1 25 

16 00 

81 

75 

4 67 

4 94 

75 

16 12 

10 00 

23 00 

£0 

2 50 
1 75 
200 

18 00 

70 
£00 

1 34 
43 50 

3 12 
75 

3 41 



10 00 


100 00 


2 52 


150 


3 94 


175 


175 


175 


10 00 


65 


300 


437 



96 



BECENT PUBLICATIONS. 



Readiufrtowii, Martin Wycknff, Tr. . . . . 

White House P. O. in Readipf,town, Dr. William Johnson, Sec 

Woodbridge, Fem. Mrs. Eiirabeth Ricord, Sec. . 

VENN.— Oibson, Sufquehaunah Co. Philander K. WiUiams, Tr. 

Harford, Susqaehaanah Co Lee Bicbantson» Tr, . 

Wysox, Laceme Co. Harriet Myer, Sec .... 

DIS r. COL WashinL'ion Cit* , lohn Coyle, Jun. Sec. . 

VIR.— Bethel, \uga^ia Co. John B. Cbristian, Tr. 

Boydton, Mecklenbtti^ Co John G. Baptist, Sec. 

Sturgeonville, Fem. Mrs. H. E Clary, Sec. 

S. Car.— Charleston, South-Carolina Branch, Horace Utley, Ag. 

ALA.— HuntsviUe, Samuel Coltart, \g. . 

LOU,— N. Orleans Bean! os Ape«cy, J A. Maybin, Sec. . 

KEN.- Lexin/ton, Fem. Mi^s Margaret A.Biythe, Sec. . 

Louisville, Rev. Daniel C. Banks, Tr. ... 

OHIO.— Jefferson, (Ashtabula Co. Aax.) Rer. Perry Pratt, Sec. . 



ForTr. 


1 93 


75 


333 


4 00 


11 35 


7 50 


46 30 


3 75 


17 06 


750 


900 00 


110 00 


100 00 


65 00 


80 00' 


4300 



Don. 



S5 
11 
00 
75 



250 



25 
69 



350 

17 00 



Societies not AuxUiary^fer Tracts. 

N. YORK.— Haverstraw, Rockland 
Ca Fem. Mrs. Ann Hackie, Tr . 4 38 

Bath, (Steuben Co. Aux) James 
G. liigrtrins, Tr. . . . 50 00 

Tracts sold at the Dpposit<iry tu 
individuals, (including $2 50 for 
use of Com. RoomO 179 84 

Director for Life. 

VIR.— Millwood, Frederick Co. 
Rev. William Meade, by Ladies, 
(in part uf $50,) . . .. 30 00 

Memhers for Life. 

MASS.' Springfield, Chicopee 

Par. R(>v. Alexander Phoenir, 

by Ladies, . . . 20 00 

CONN.— Tewett City, Rev. Seth 
Bliss, W Fem. Aax. Tr. Soc. ; 30 00 

Norfolk, Rev. R:^lpfa Emerson, by 
a Lady of his Soc. . . 20 00 

Korth Killingworth, Rev. Asa 
King, by Lndies, . . 20 00 

Sharon, Rev. David L. Perry, by 
Aux. Tract Society, . . 20 00 

N. YORK.— Albany, BliHS Cornelia 
Paterson Van Rensselaer, . 20 00 

Blooming Grove, Orange Co. Da- 
vid H. Moffat, (in part of $20,) . 8 00 

JJurham, Dra. Benjamin Chap- 
man. (In part of $30,) . .5 00 

Jamaica, L. I., Dr. Nathan Shelton, 20 00 

Smyrna, Chenango Oo. Isaac 
Foote, Jan. . . 20 00 

N. JER.— Saccasunna, Rev. Peter 
Kano'ise, by Ladies, . . 80 00 

MD.— Cave Town; Rev. Henry 
Krob, by a few friends^ (in full 
of $20,) . .10 00 

VIR.— Culpepper Go. Rev. James 
Garnett, by Ladies, . . 20 00 

Lon^ Branch Meeting-houaejFau- 

Suier Co. Rev. William F. Brau- 
as, by his Cong. . 30 00 



GEO— Sparta,MrsJ[uKaP.WarDe, ' 
by Youog Ladies of Fern. Sem. 30 00 

OHIO — Vernon, Mrs. Deborah 
Coe, by Ladies of Kinsman, . 20 00 



2 00 



10 00 

200 
200 



- Amual Me»bers-^SZ each. 

CONN — Norwich, Miss Nancy 
Pannimr, .... 

N.YORK.— New. York City, Mrs. 
Henry Barclay, James David- 
son, Anthony Lamb, L. S. Lock- 
wood, Mrs. Sarah P. Walton, . 

N. JER.— Hanover, Mr. N. P.Tho- 
mas, . • . > 

Middletowii, Miss Ann Ustick, . 

Other Donations, 

VER.—Brookfield, Young Ladies, 10 00 
CONN.— Norwich, Dea. WiUiani 

Cleaveland, . . . 1 (X> 

N. YORK City, A Friend, by Rer. 
A. Dickinson, for the circulation 
of Tract, " Search the Scrip- 
tures," . . , 5 00 
A Friend, SOc. ; do. 25c. . . 75 
Friends of Tracts, . . .12 00 
S. W. G. fur Tracts for Sandwich 

Isl. Mission, . 1 00 

Rochester, Everard Feck, premi- 
um on Christian Almanac, . 17 50 
Sherburne, Samuel Stebbins, . 1 00 
Skaneafeles, Miss Minerva Sher- 
wood, . . . 3 00 

The above list contains Donations^ 

For Tract » Search the Scrip- 
tures,'^ . . $5 1)0 
For Sand. Isl. Mission, 1 00 



Whole Am. of Donat. $717 39 
Rec. for Tracts sold, 3,858 02 



Total, 



. $4|OT5 41 



BBOBXTT IPUSZsXOATXOXrS. 

Doddridge's Rise and Brooress of Rsligiov in the Scut, conr 
iadning 280 passes 12mo, price 37 1-2 cents bound. 

Also Sixty Children's Tracts, all of which are printed, and a large 
numl9er of them ready for delivery ; a list of which will be found in 
the Annual Report, and in the Tract MagaEine for Au^st. 



THE AMERICAN 



AVauST, 1828. 



ABSTRACT 

ADDRES3 OF MR. WILLIAM A. HALLOCK, 
CDrnipondinf Stcrttary of the Amtriam Tract Soatty, bcfari titt 
Branch Trad Sociels in Boilon^Mini ^, 1826. 
Mr. Hallocs remarkHl, thai he had watched the progreii of 
(hit Society with especial inlrrest. having beeo Tor lome time enga- 
ged ■■ ill A^^nt in ca.operaOon with iu eicelleni and derotad 
Committee ; and thiil hii mind wai deeply imprrited vith a lenie 
of the interpoiilionii uf Divine Providence in ilireclin|f ili cDDCeina 
IVom finl to liBl, and making it a powerful instrumeat of advaocing 
the Redeemn'i cauie. He rplaled lome itrikiog incideola in the 
earljr biitory of the Society, and alluded to iia rapid progrei*, and 
the malliplied evidence! of canvenion by itt publintioiu, which 
every Annual Report bad exhibited. 



mwm* 



98 w. A. hallock's addbess. LAug. 

He believed, however, that the Society had accomplished a stUl 
greater good indirectly^ by co-operating in the formation of the Na- 
tional Institution formed three years since, in New-York. A new 
impulse had, at that time, been awakened in the Tract cause through- 
out the country ; the friends of Tracts at New-York, in view of the 
commercial advantages of that city, felt that there was the proper 
location for a General Depository from which the country siiould be 
supplied ; and, as their first measure, proposed to this Society to 
concentrate its energies with other Tract Institutions of the country 
in a new Institution in that city. 

I well remember, said Mr. H.,the concern which the Committee of 
this Society felt, on receiving that proposition, lest, by a compliance 
with it, the cause should suffer ; .and the hesitation felt by the Soci- 
t^iety at their meetinjs; in this city three years ago. The superior 
local and commercial advantages of the sister city were acknowledg- 
ed ; but thus to change the systpm of the Society's operations ap- 
peared to be giving up a certain good, at the hazard of loss and in- 
jury. 

Three vear*. Sir, did. I say ? Yes, it was but three years since — and 
now " what hath God wrought?" The excellent series of this Socie- 
ty's Tracts has been revised, adopted with the unanimous approba- 
tion of the Committees of bo:h Sdci^ ties, and stereotyped ; additions 
have been made to it from other series of Tracts, and from original 
manuscripts ; and now, it is in general circulation throughout the 
Bvangelical community in these United States. 

And the series was not wjured by the revision. Were I visiting. Sir, 
from house to house, in a revival of religion, distributing Tracts 
adapted particularly to the case of individuals, (and it is in this way 
that the distribution of Tracts is most effectual) — were I wishing to 
diafribute Tracts best calculated to alarm the impenitent, to guide 
the inquiring sinner to Christ, and arouse the lukewarm professor of 
religion, I v^ould prefer the series as revised, ^if there is any choice 
between them in this respectj to that before the revision ; and I say 
this, familiar with every page of both series, and with every word 
that has been changed. 

To effect the circulation of such Tracts throughout the 12,000,000 
of our country, instead of those almost uniformly inferior Tracts 
published by small local Societies, is an object of surpassing inte- 
rest — the grand object for forming a National Institution — an object 
which, of itself, would richly repay all the sacrifices and efforts this 
Society has made since its formation. 

But not only are far better Tracts in circulation throughout the 
United States, than would have been, had the principal Societies con- 
tinued independent ; but the nttmber circulated is, doubtlessyfnr great- 
er. This Society has circulated more Jracts (^nearly 1,000,000) the 
past year, than in its most prosperous year before the union ; and 
the Society at New- York, during the three years of its existence, 
has published — the first year, nearly 1,000,000 Tracts; the second 
year, 3,000,000 ; the third year 5,000,000 ; and its receipts have 
been— the first year ^10,000 ; the second year 530,000 ; the third 
year ^45,000. The rapidity of its growth, and the success of its ope- 
rations during these three years, has scarcely had a parallel in the 
history of any benevolent institution. Its operations exceed one 



1828.] W. A. HALLOCK*S ADDRESS. 99 

half the amount of those of the Religious Tract Society of 
Londoo, which has been in successful progress these twenty-nine 
years, and has had the concentrated energies of the British Nation. 
Nor have the Tracts circulated from. New York been less signally 
blessed^ than those published and circulated by this Society.. 

[Mr^ Hallock then briefly presented a view of the great variety of in- 
stances, communicated during the pastyear, chiefly in the corresf>ondence 
of the Society, in which Tracts have been blessed to the conversion of ir- 
religious and thoughtless youth ; of intemperate men, profane swearers, 
and Satibath breakers ; of Universalists and Infidels; of both parents, in 
some instances, in one family ; and their particular usefulness both in oc- 
casioning and promoting, under the blessing of the Holy Spirits revivals 
of religion. Two or three affecting instances were more particularly spe- 
cified. In the same connexion, Mr. H. mentioned the revival of religion 
among the females engaged in folding Tracts in the Society's House f which 
commenced in February, 18^, and has continued, with different degrees 
of interest, till the present time. No less than 18 individuals, out of about 
40 thus employed, nave, since the period above mentioned, professed faith 
in Christ.] « 

Two days before I left New-York, said Mr. H. I learned, that one 
youhg woman, who had been engaged in folding Tracts since the 
first of May, as she was turning over the leaves in her hand, saw the 
title ** Day of Judgment*' coming frequently before her eyes, and 
sometimes the words '' Depart ye cursed,*' *^ O what shall then be the 
condition of those who know not God'' — and was so affected with a 
sense of her contlition, and of the sacredness of her employment, 
that she couM no longer rest in irapenitency, as an enemy of God ; 
and, afrer distressing convictions of «in, she had hopefully submit- 
ted herself in heart to him who will jud^e the world at the last day. 
And the very day 1 lefe New-York, I was informed that another was 
indulging the hope of pardoned sin. Those females, when about to 
have accessions to their number, have often made their expected as- 
sociates the subject of special prayer— the work of the Holy Spirit 
among them has been unusually solemn and striking ; and it has 
seemed to be a seal of the approbation ef Heaven on the labours of 
the Society. 

But the resolution contemplates more extended efforts on the part 
of this Society. Sir, let me ask you, and the Committee, and the ac- 
tive friends of this Society, have you done all your duty in promot- 
ing the circulation of Tracts in this Citif ? Seamen, and all other 
classes of your citizens, need Tracts. Never was there a population 
to which they are better adapted to be useful. This is a reading peo- 
ple ; and many who have imbibed fatal error, may be converted by 
the simple story of the cross in the pages of a Tract, when the most 
powerful controversial arguments would never affect them. 

Sir, this Society ought tliorougfUy to occupy every portion of Xfeto 
Ent^landf naturally associated with Boston rather than New- York. 
The Philadelphia Branch has resolved, that, with the blessing of 
God, every town and parish where permission will be granted, with- 
in the boundaries of Pennsylvania and Delaware, shall have an Aux- 
iliary formed in it previous to January 1, 1890. (Vill not this So- 
ciety do at least as much for New England ? Ought it not to do it ? 
The work will be far less difficult ; and the example would be felt, 



100 LONDON RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETT. £Aug. 

and we hope imitated, throughout the United States. I do hope, 
Sir, this Committee will at once proceed to the actual accompMmtrU 
of this at once practicable and most important object. 

And New England must do more than w/pply herself. She must 
impart her moral power and influence to carry the Gospel to the 
vast portions of the country which are destitute ; especially the 
millions in the valley of the Mississippi. The Committee at New- 
York hare actually entered on the work of supplying that vall^. 
A general Agent, we hope, is soon to go out to take up his abode 
there and labour permanently. Christians in the West are aroused 
to the importance and magnitude of the object. Before one student 
can go through ihe usual course of preparation for the Ministry, 
Tracts can be printed for the supply of that whole country, and dis- 
tributed into erery family. A thousand motives, addressed as well 
to the patriot as the Christian, urge us now to occupy that almost 
boundless portion of our territory, w here are so many children who 
need instruction, and where the rapidity of increase is fast throwing 
the population beyond the reach of all moral means which can b€ 
• used. 



LONDON RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY. 

The Twenty-ninth Anniversary of this Institution was celebrated 
on Friday morning, May 16th, 1828, at the City of London Tavern. 

LoBD Viscount Mandeville, m the Chair. 

After prayer by Rev. W. B. Sibthurpe, who was elected Secreta- 
ry, in place of the lamented Lkgh Richhond, 

William Jovks, Esq proceeded to read the Report, which, after 
stating the operations of the Society in China and Judea, went on 
to observe, that the Committee had forwarded to the different sta- 
tions in the East, 480 reams of printing paper, and 90,400 Tracts 
«uid Books. In the grants to these plares, more than j[8,d00 have 
been expended. The Report also referred to the circulation of 
Scriptural works in Spanish America, the British Colonies of North 
America, in th« West Indies, anri various parts of the North of Eu- 
rope ; in France, Switzerland, and Malta. During the year, 90,000 
works were sent to Ireland for f'ratuitous circulation ; 557,000 pub- 
lications were circulated in London and its vicinity, to soldiers and 
sailors, and also to prisoners of various descriptions. Tlie benevo- 
lent income of the Society amounted ro $14,820, being an increase 
of j[2,l93. The money grants and gratuitous issues, amounted to 
$14,418. The sales alw increased $9224. The total circulation of 
publications during the year, amounted to 9,649,507 *, which, added 
to the Tracts published in foreign languages, shewed an increased 
circulation of about two millions of works beyond the preceding 

year. 

Addresses, all which are published, were delivered by eleven Cler- 
gymen ; among whom were Rev. Mr. Patton, of the Presbyterian 
Church, New- York, and Rev. Mr. Allen, of the Episcopal Church, 
Philadelphia. By these two gentlemen, a full and animHting view 
of the prosperity of the American Tract Society and of the Branch 
at Philadelphia was presented, accompanied by many evidences 



ia28.] I.ONDON RKLiaiOUS TRACT 80CIETT. 101 

neotfoned, of the special blessing of God on their operations. Their 
ad/resses were received, by the meeting-, with expressions of joy 
9iid gratitude to God. 

From the Addresses delivered, our limits permits us to make only 
the following brief extracts. 

REV. MR. PATTON. 

He found, upon consulting a document in his possession, that in the 
year 1272, the pay of labouring men was just three half>pence per 
day. At the same period of time, the price of a Bible fairly written 
out, was 30/ sterling; now, by an easy system of arithmetic, we should 
find it would have required the entire enruings uf more than 13 
years to have procured one copy of the Bible. Oh, what must our 
fathers then have thought of givins^ the Bible to the world, and fil- 
ling the world with Religious Tracts ! The most they could have 
thought of was to place a Bible in every pulpit, that the people, on 
the holy day, might come up, and reverently listen to the reading 
of Divine truth. But subsequently, by the discovery of the art of 
printing, we had been enabled to circulate the Scriptures and Reli- 
gious Tracts much more extensively, and at a great reduction in the 
expenses. The invention of stereotype plates has still farther reduc- 
ed the expenses, and facilitated the operation. He had sometimes 
been affected even to weeping, when thinking of the kindness of Gody 
in holding the intellectual vigour of mau hound until the reign of 
infidelity had passed away. What if Voltaire, the author of Iracts, 
had known of stereotype plates, and the other facilities ? he wauld 
have polluted Europe with the dark and poisonous waters of infidel- 
ity. But no ; the God who rules in heaven, who has the hearts of 
all men in his hands, and can turn them as the rivers of waters, 
whithersoever he will, never broke off the shackles, and allowed the 
mind to go free, until he had prepared the way for the march and 
triumphs of his truth. Thus, then, when we looked back, and saw 
what had been, might we not confidently expect that all which God 
has promised shall surely be accomplished. That the knowledge 
of the Lord shall cover the earth, as the waters cover the sea. 
As our fathers, fifty years ago, could not possibly have expected^ oc 
even hoped for, what our eyes have beheld, and our ears have heard^ 
80 no man in this age, in which the Providence of God is hastening 
with rapidity like the flight of the angel, bavin ^^ the everlajiting 
Gospel to preach, could tell what half a century would produce. 
It became us to take our stand upon the highest mountain in the 
world, and as we looked upon the myriads of men who were below, 
to breathe over them, a spirit that was hallowed, and. to unite oui* 
every effort that they might be prepared for glory. 

Rev. Mr. Patton, in concluding his address^ stated, that, at ft 
meeting of the Branch Tract Society in Boston, at which he was 
present one year since, a gentleman authorised the announcement, 
that every Clergyman present, who would )>urchase at the Deposito- 
ry one doUar^s worth of Tracts for distribution on bit return home, 
should be supplied with another dollar's worth gratis; and that 
nearly one hundred Clergymen availed themselves of the ofi^r. 

The Rev. Edward Bickersteth, in closing his address, lubsequent- 

9* 



10& LONDON RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETT. [AUg^ 

\y delivered, said tliat, in coDsequence of the suggestion of his fii«nd 
from America, lie was authorised to state, that a gentleman w«8 
present who would allow five shillings worth additional Tracts for 
every five shillings they migbt go and spend at the Tract Society. 

REV. DR. PINKERTON. 

He referred to the encouraging fact, that, while in Greece, South 
America, and other Foreign countries, men are throwing off the 
yoke of superstition, Bible and Tract Institutions are raised up for 
the purpose of sending them the light and knowledge of eternal 
truth. 

He had often been struck, in foreign nations, to see the avidity 
with which a single Tract had been received ; the joy with which it 
had been perused ; because we, who lived, as it were, in the midst of 
liooks. who were surrounded with periodical publications every day, 
many of us not having time to peruse one half of them, could have no 
idea of the value of a single Tractor copy of the Holy ScriptureSy 
in the midst of a flock of perhaps 500 or l()0O individuals, among 
whom were perhaps not ten persons who could read them. When 
a Tract reached a place like this, it was listened to with attentiem 
by hundreds, and continually treasured up in the mind ; and where 
the truth entered the mind, there the Spirit could operate upon It 
savingly. 

REV. EDWARD BICKERSTETH. 

We have great pleasure in receiving, from the mouth of (his excel- 
lent man* whose praise is in all the Churches, the following delight- 
ful sentiments respecting Christian union in ike cause of Tracts, 

What was the ground of all our efforts, of our union together, of 
our labour to spread Divine truth ? The true, and solid, and only 
ground of motive, was the deep sense of the pardoning love, the free 
forgiveness^ the foil justification, which we ourselves had received 
from our blessed Redeemer ; and feeling our obligations to him, we 
longed to communicate the same blessings to our fellow-creatures 
throughout the world. He remembered conversing with a pious 
friend some years ago, about the Religious Tract Society, and his 
friend said, << I think it is one of those things on which it is impossible 
for Christians to agree ; for here we enter into doctrines, here we 
enter, not as we do in the Bible Society, into the mere inspiration of 
Scripture, and the necessity of distributing a volume which we all 
consent to ; but we enter into those things which divide the Chris- 
tian Church ; therefore, it is impossible for the Religious Tract So- 
ciety to go on without division." 

Now, he was truly thankful to see in that very objection, one of 
the highest glories of the Religious Tract Society. It appeared to 
him one of the highest points of union which the Church of God in 
its various denominations had hitherto attained, that we could agree 
in diffusing Religious Tracts, containing those common principles 
Jn which we all agreed. He saw a union of the Church of God in 
the Bible Society ; but here we saw Christians combined togetherj 
to circulate a commentary upon that Bible. 

But what were the proofs of this onidn ? He had seen many dc;- 



l&Kd.] lONSOlf RSLIGIOUS T&ACT SOCIETY. lOS 

li^htful proofS) to one or two of which he would advert. He had 
been at a meeting of the Committee of ihe Religious Tract Societjr, 
when they were discussing subjects that formerly would have set 
kingdoms and nations at war with each other, yet he found in those 
discussions a spirit of onion, love, and kindness, that truly rejoiced 
and gladdened his heart. And then again he had another proof 
when he looked at he publications of the Society. If there was one 
subject upon which the Society was more likely to differ than upon 
another, it would be in a history of the Church of Christ ; yet how 
delightful it was t8 see, that they could bring forth a history in 
which all Protestants could unite. Another publication to which he 
would call their attention, was, the lives of the reformers. He ne- 
ver could have expected that the Religious Tract Society wouhl 
have issued such a publication from its depository; but they had done 
so, and he only wished it might be generally read, then it would be 
iieen of what spirit was our common Christianity. 

He thought all these things shewed, that, in the Religious Tract 
Society, we had attained a higher point of union among Christians 
of all denominations, than was ever before accomplished. He re- 
membered being much delighted with a case which one of his 
friends supposed. It was that of the immortal spirit of different de- 
nominations, arriving at the heavenlj mansions, and as might na- 
turally be supposed, each individual inquiring after members of its 
own communion. The glorified spirit of the Churchmen said, where 
are all the Churchmen ? There ar^ no Churchmen here ! The glori- 
fied spirit of the Baptist said, where are all the Baptists ? There are no 
Baptists here! The glorified spirit of the Wesleyan said, where are 
the Wesleyans? There are nn Wesleyans here! The glorified spirit 
of the Independents said, where are the Independents ? There are 
no Independents here ! At last they all of them exclaimed, Where 
are the Christians? They are all he>e! When we come to the Reli. 
gious Tract Society, we say, Wh^re axe the Churchmen, he, Lc. ? 
and we find there are none of them here ; but when we come up and 
ask, where are all the Christians f We find them alt here ! 

REV. DR. HENDERSON.— £jfec< of a singU Tract. . 

It was now about twenty-three years since hefirst addressed a let- 
ter from a foreign shore to the Committee of this Society. About 
that time had elapsed since he gave away a Tract, called « The Great 
Question answered,'* in Copenhagen, which was made the instru- 
ment of carrying the intentions of the Bible Society into effect in 
Denmark, Switeerland, Iceland, and lastly in the great contit^eut of 
Russia. In the course of these years it gave him satisfaction to per- 
ceive that a change had taken place in the Danish dominions, 
where, at that time, infidelity reigned almost uncontrolled, and the 
Bible bad entirely disappeared. But what were the circumstances of 
that country now ? He heard It stated with great pleasure, in the 
Report of another Instution, the other day, that in Denmark, there 
were no fewer than 100,000 children receiving the benefit of a Scrips 
tural education. 

A Pariak in Sweden Converted by Tracts. 
In no country in the north of Europe could he direct their atten- 



104 LONDON RELIGIOUS TRACT BOCIETr. [Aug. 

tioa to the sa.y'mg effects of the Gospel more visibly than in the kiog- 
dom of Sweden. He would confiae himself to one instance. When 
Dr. Paterson and himself went to Lapland, in 1808, they took a stock 
of Tracts from Stockholm. There was one place where they distri- 
buted several hundreds of Tracts, consisting chiefly of copies of 
'' The Great Question Answered." Some years afterwards they 
learned tliat a great sensation had been produced in the parish by 
giving away these Tracts. Inquiry was excited, and almost imme- 
diately, the saving influences of the Holy Spirit were poured out oa 
those who were engaged in reading them. Aeconcein about the 
immortal interests of their souls became very general among the in- 
habitants of ttiat parish The flame which was thus kindled was 
communicated from cottage to cottage, till all became thirsty for the 
waters of everlasting life. But where were they to find them.' In 
the parish Church ? Alas ! the name of Jesus Christ was never men- 
tioned except in the Liturgy, or those pans of the service previ- 
ously composed. Those whose minds were brought under a serious 
eoncern about their everlasting interests, found nothing but coldnefs 
analogous to the icy and adjacent regions of Lapland i they, there- 
fore, met together in a large barn, which was opened for the pur- 
pose. In the course of a short time there was not an individual ia 
the parish that did not join the assembly. A persecution' was raised 
against them, and a commission was appointed by government to 
go down and examine into the affairs. It was found that nothing 
took place in this assembly but the reading of the Scriptures and 
the sermons of Luther. What was the result ? The Clergyman with 
the band of soldiers were blamed for the conduct they had pursued. 
At last the Clergyman thought he would go and hear one of 
the sermons read ; and although he only went out of curiosity, yet 
the presence of that Supreme Being was there, who said to Zaccheus^ 
** Make haste and come down ;" the Word reached his heart, he 
made confession of his form^^r ignorance ; he began to preach the 
unsearchable riches of Christ . betook his flock back to the Church, 
and from that period the doors of the barn were never more opened 
fur such a purpose. 

Surprising exertions of a Pious Female. 

He would conclude with an anecdote which he beard only two 
^ays ago, ami which, he trusted, would tell upon this audience. It 
referred to a female in one of our large trading towns. She was 
formerly a most abandoned character, one of the most wicked wo- 
men tiiat perhaps ever trod on the face of the globe. However, by 
the grace of God, she was brought to a knowledge of the truth} a»d 
WAS sent to a Penitentiary, where she gave the most decided evi- 
dence of a saving change of heart ; but, shortly after being put in- 
to that situation, she was deprived of the use both of her hands and 
her feet. Her heart, however, was full of love to the Saviour, and 
she was at a loss to show forth the praises of that God who had cal- 
led her out of darkness into hi& marvellous light. She could not 
walk about to tell what God had done for her soul ; she could not 
employ her hands, but she learned to write with her mouth, and the 
letters thus written, being sold at small sums, piroduced something 
considerable to the fnnds of the Penitentiary. She began to learn 



IT T^ 



1828*] AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 105 

the art of paintin|^, and the produce of those paintings, which the 
accomplished with her mouth, produced last year ^75, to the funds 
of the Institution. Now he would not saj to this assembly, go and 
do likewise ; but he would say, You have hands and yoii have feet, 
and you have a tongue to tell the wonders of Redeeming Love : go 
and do what you can. 



AXCSBIOAvr TRACT 800ZBT7. 

LIIHITED PECUNIARY MEANS. 

This Society has arrived at a point, when a number of Us pretses 
mvxl he slopped, and its field o/ usefulness be proportionably diminisli' 
ed, or U must receive very prompt and liberal pecuniary aid. 

On May 1, every cent in the Treasury was expended; ^711,64 
were then due, which the Society had no means of paying ; and ad- 
ditional obligations, chiefly for paper, to be met by the Committee 
previous to October 1, amounted to $10^120 92. 

On the 17th day of June, when the stated monthly meeting of the 
Executive Committee was held, the Treasury was entirely exhaust- 
ed, j(d83,80 had been advanced by individual members of the Com- 
mittee, during the preceediog week, to meet bills for paper ; a bill 
of $973 83, for printing, due on. the day of the meeting, remained 
dsv toHbeprovlded for^ and there was t h e n du e . fo rpttper,^ffttfain tiw 
period of four months, 1 10,391 37. 

From the 17th of June to the time of putting this sheet to press, 
the expenditures had fully equalled the receipts. And the Society 
has no permanent fund whatever ; nothing but the materials em- 
ployed in issuing its Tracts, and the house in which its operations 
are conducted, which was erected solely by contributions for thai 
specific object. ' 

These facts speak a language more powerful than any force of 
words ; and we wish them to be distinctly known by every Evange* 
lical Christian in the country. 

The Society must receive some thousands of dollars in donationSf 
before it can ever proceed, without embarrassment, in the work of 
supplying the country with Tracts. It must have stereotype plates, 
and paper, and other materials to work with ; its General Deposi- 
tory must be supplied with Tracts, from which the country may 
draw ; it must g^ve short credits to feble Auxiliaries in the New Set* 
tlements ; and must distribute, to aorae extent at least, gratuitootly 
to the destitute. 

To curtail its operations, white nearly one half our whole country 
is unsupplied with the stated means of grace ; while almost every 
letter we receive and every Christian friend we meet from the vast 
regions of the South and West urges to increased effort ; while the 
voice of Providence is so clear in rendering the Society's Tracts the 
evident means of the conversion of sinners ; while our population is 
increasing with untold rapidity, and vice and soul>destroying error 
making alarming inroads, and multitudes pressing daily to the grare ; 
and while there is nothing to prevent immediately supplying the whole 
country with Tracts but want of means ; and all this in a day of 



106 



RECEIPTS. 



[Aug 



roost signal blessings to the Church^iin these circumstances, we saj, 
to curtail the Society's operations and wait for another generation 
to perform the work which Proyidence now devolves on us, would 
be shame fuUneglect of duty, if not daring impiety towards God. 

The want of means, we repeat it, is now the chief, we might almost 
say the only embarrassment. And they are to be supplied, not by- 
miracle ; not by empty wishes, or words of encouragement, or ap- 
plause ; but, as every thing else in this cause is done, by cutual per- 
severing labours and scurifices and self-denial. It is for every one to 
come forward promptly and give and do what he can; and the work, 
by the blessing of God, will move gloriously forward. 

The only question now is, Shall the pecuniary means of the Socie- 
ty be increased, or shall its operations be curtailed ? May a faith- 
ful Providence grant the former, and prevent the latter. 

RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

During the month ending Jufy 15. 1828. 

FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 

VER«— -Burlington, Auxiliary Depository, Jolin Wickware, Sec . 

Underbill, Elliot Frink, Tr 

Waitsfield, Itbaniar Smith, Ag * « . 

MASS.— Boston, Ain. Tr. Soc, ara*t of appr. for Trs. in Mod* Greek, 

Great Barrington, Cbarlc^s Taylor, Sec 

Washington, Berkshire Co. Rev. Caleb Knigfai, Pres. 

R. ISL.— Pawcatuck, in Westeriey, Qeorge P. Maxson, Sec. 

CONN.— Betblem, Nathan Burton, Jan. Tr. 

Chester, i^em. Rev. Wm. Case, Ag, 

Greenes Farms, Edward Hyde, Ag*. . 

Huntington. Fairfidd Co. Christopher W. Shelton, Tr. . 

Litchfield, Joshua Qarritt, Tr. 

New-Haven, A. Townsend, Jun. Tr. 

do. From onp of their Auxiliaries, 

do. Yale Collegne, Horace Binney, Jun. Sec. 

Kew-Pretton. Homer Camp, Sec. 

V. YORK — Andover, Allegrhanj Co Fem. Lydla Alien, Tr. . 
Canaan Four Comers, Fem. Mrs. E. 0. Warner. Tr. 

Canandalgua. Uiel Warner, Tr. 

Casenovia, Fem. Mrs. B. Bnmeli, Tr. 

Harpersvtlle, Broome Co. Eli Dort, Tr 

Huot^s Hollow, AUeghany Co. Samuel Swain, Tr. . 

Aimaica, L. I., James Rider, Tr 

Livonia, Fem. Mrs. Anstres E. Stow, At^ 

Marbletown, Ulster Co. Isaac B. Bloom, Tr 

New-York City, Fem. Mrs. J. R. Hurd, Tr. 

do. Cbristie-St. Methodist Ch. Fem Mrs. Sarah B. StllweU,Tr 

do. Jnv. S. S. No. 8, S. Ores. Cb. Cedar->st. Sarah McElroy, Tr. 

do. Rut^rs-st. Ch. Fem. Mrs. A B. Wheeler, Tr. 

do. St. George's Cb. Fem. Mrs. F. M. Hill, Tr. . . . 
Owe?o, Tioea Co. (E. Jury District,) Col. Charles B. Pixley, Tr. . 

Patchogue, L. I., Rev. Noah Hallock Gillet, Sec 

Phillipstown, Fem. Miss Ann E. Horton, Sec .... 

Rhineheck, Dutchess Go. Fem. Mrs. C. DavidtCM), Sec. . « 

Ridgebury, Orange On. Jonathan Uailey, Tr. 

Somers, John Owen, Prest. . . * 

Troy, A. Loveland, Tr 

N. JER.— Elizabethtown, in First Pres. Ch. J. J. Bryant, Tr. 

Newark, Ellison Conger, Sec. • 

Oxford, Fem. John M. Sherrerd, Esq. Ag. 

Perth AmlH>y, Fem. Mrs. Bbrgaret Morris, Tr. .... 

Six MUe Run, J. G. Voorhees, Sec . 

F£NN.^Holmesburg, William Bartolett,Ag 



■N 



Fr.Tr. 


Don. 




3 20 


?23 

200 

300 00 




12 75 


4 2-5 




15 OU 


5 OU 




9 00 


30O 




11 40 


3 80 




788 


2 62 




75 


25 




15 00 


500 




7 60 


2 50 




15 00 


300 




IS 75 


425 




6 65 


2 35 




300 


1 00 


s 


11 64 


5 82 




14 00 


18 00 




1 00 


6 00 




6 00 


200 




7 88 


2 62 




3 50 


600 




600 


200 




74 27 






30 00 






7 00 






8 50 


12 50 




15 00 




4 


12 75 


425 


i 


3 75 


125 




30 00 






722 


3 40 




4 61 


1 63 




45 00 






24 00 


18 00 




52 16 






4 69 


1 56 




I 44 






938 


3 12 




450 


1 50 


1 



1 828.] 



RECEIPTS* 



107 



Phila4JI<>lphia Branch, N. Murray, Gen. Ag. 

MD.^ — Baltimore Branch, Samuel Toung-, Sec .... 

Worcester Co. Fera. James Pale, Sec 

VIR.— Liberty, Bedford Co. Edward Phillips, Sec 

Lynchburg, George Bagby, Tr. 

Richmond, William F.Micou.Tr 

N. CAR— ftalHgh, N. C Branch, Rev. P. W. Dowd, Sec 
Snlisbury, Rowan Co. Phlln While, Sec ... 

GEo_Augu8ta, Timothy Edwards, Tr. 

MISS. — Natchez. Fem. J<»an Henderson, Sec 

OHI0.~Cbillicothe, Rev.JolinP. Bausman,Tr 

Cincinnati, Henry B. Punk, Tr. 

Norwalk, (Humn Co. Aux.) David (Jibbs, Esq. Sec. 
Worthington, Ur. C. H. Wt- tmore. Sec ...... 

MO.— Si. Louis, Rev. James RpTte, Tr 

L. CANADA.->Hull, York Co. Fem. Mrs. Nabby Estabrook, Tr. . 



Fr,Tu 


700 00 


SOOOO 


7 fiO 


S6 90 


105 00 


230 00 


fiOOO 


80 00 


37 60 


70 00 


50 00 


700 


9 09 


100 00 


15 76 



Socklies not Jiiueiliary,for Tracts. 

N. YORK.— Little Falls, WUlUm 
Hammiil, Tr. ... i 28 

N. JER.— Washington, Morris 
Co. ..... 6 00 

N. CAR.— North Carolina Book 
Co. Rev. J. W. DouglBss, Ag. 21 00 

Tracts sold at the Depository to 
individuals, (including |63 50 
for use or Com. Room,) . 329 52 

Directors for Life, 

N. JER. — ^Bridgetown, West, 
Cumberland Co. Ebenezer El- 
mer, Esq 5ft 00 

ENGLAND. — North Ferriby, \ 
Hull, Ralph Turner, Esq. . 200 00 

Members for Life. 

MASS Lenox, Rev. Samuel 

Shepard, D. D. by young La- 
dies, 20 00 

CONN.— Chester, Miss Sarah Sil- 
liman, (in full of $20,) . .10 00 

N. YORK Caienovia, Rev. 

Lewis Leonard, by Ladies, . 20 00 

Fishkill Village, Rev. Cornelius 
Westbrook, by his Ch. and 
Cong, (in part n( $20.) . 4 87 

Jamaica, L. I.^ Miss Eliza M. 
Wlckes; Mis6 Harriet Wickes; 
by their father, E. Wickes, Esq. 40 00 

Monroe, Orange C*. George W. 
Goff, (in part of |20,) . . 6 00 

N. York City, Horatio G. Onder- 
donk. (in full of $20,) . . lO 00 

North Junius, Seneca Co. Rev. 
Joseph Merrill, by Ladies, (in 
fullof$200 . . .'\ 14 00 

Owego, Tioga Co. Mast. John 
HoUenbach Pumpelly, by his 
mother, Mrs. M. H. W. Pum- 

^,P*»y» , •„ • • . . 20 OO 

Pleasant Vallev, Dutchess Co. 
Rev. John Cflark, by his Ch. 
and Cong, (in part of $ao,) . 4 25 

Foughkeepsie, Rev. Alonzo Wei- 
ton, by a member of his Ch. SO 00 

Schenectady, Rev. Jacob Van 
Vechlen, by Ladies, . 90 00 Total, 



VIR. — Cumberland Co. Rev. 
John Kirkpatrick, by members 
ofCunib. Gong 

Leesburg, Loudon Go. Rev. Tho- 
mas Jackson, by Ladies, . 

L. CAN.— Quebec, Rev. George 
Bourne, by female friends, . 

.Annual Members. 

ll. IS L.— Providence, G. A. De 
WIti, fi)r 1 827 and 1828, 

N. YORK— New-York City, Jas. 
Kelso, . . . . ; 

Do. Leander Mead, . , 

Other Donatimis. 

VER.— Waitsfield,Rev. A. Chan- 
dler 50e. Miss Charlotte Smith 
$1, Mrs. H. Silsby 60c. Indivi- 

MASS.— Oils, Berkshire Go. Da- 
vid Spear, .... 

CONN.— Betblem, Myron Gay- 
lord, 

New- Haven, A. Townsend, Jun. 

New-London, Miss Lucy M. 
Woodbridge, 

N. YORK. — Lanshjgburgh, A 
Friend, . . f . 

Monroe, Orange Co. Rev. John 
Boyd, 

New- Windsor, Orange Cc Da- 
niel Clemence, 

New-York City, F. B. W. $2, A 
Friend, by Editors of N. Y. 
Obs. $2, A Friend, by do. $1, 
left at Dep. I2c. Mrs. H. Jer- 
rett$2, 

Wynant's kill, Capt. Andrew 
Finch, ..... 

N. JER.— Hanover, N. P. Tho- 
mas, ..... 

Princeton, A Friend, 

PEN N— Bethany, A Friend, . 

Harrisburg, A. Graydon, 

S. CAR.-A Lady, . . . 

Whole am»t of Donat. 1,033 66 
Rec. for Tracts sold, 2,649 71 



Don. 



2 50 
2 50 
5 60 



12 50 

3 03 
525 

20 00 
20 00 
20 00 

400 

200 
200 



250 

1 00 

80 
5 95 

10 00 
1 00 
500 

1000 




$3,683 37 



108 



RECENT PUBLICATIOIVS* 



BfiOHMT FUBUtOiLTXOirS. 
CHII«DR£BrS' TRACTS. 

The rullowingr are stereotyped and printed, and a lai^e number of them re«d]r 
r»r delivery : vi*. 



SER. II.--16 |>p. 32m». Price Ic 
VOL. I. 
1. Address to h Child. 
3. Goodness of Prttvidence. 

3. The Vine. 

4. The Orphan. 

5. A Gbild^s Catechism in Verse. 
iu The Christian Drummer. 

7. WooderfttlGureofNaaman. 
B. The African Widow. 
9. Mary Jones, or 6oldier*s Dangta- 
ter. 

10. Ann Walsh, the Irish Girl. 

11. Bible Happiness. 

12. StAa of tb<> Score, or the Penitent 

Robber. 

13. Mischief its own Punishment. 

14. Louisa and the Litil<> Dirds. 

15. Advice to Sabbath School CbU- 
dreo. 

16. Bread the Staff of Life. 

VOL. II. 

17. Affectionate Daughter. 
Id. The Happy African 

19. Sally Butler, and Passionate Boy. 

20. Select Verses for Children. 

21. The Happy Man: or Life of Wil- 
liam Kelly. 

22. Ttie Imaffe Boys. 

23. The Lord's Prayer. 

24. The May Bee. 

25. The Wishing Cap. 
S6. Eyes and No Eyes. 
27. The Shipwreck. 

2P. Memoir of Miriam Warner. 

29. The Wreath. 

30. Little Sally, ofthe Sabbath School 

31. To Children. By Cecil. 

32. Christ nur Example : or Hlstoiy of 

Dorothea. 

SER. IU.~^ pp. S2nie. Price 2e. 
VOL. I. 
1. Honesty the Best Policy. 



2. History of Jenny HicUtng. 
8. Histoid of Thos. FraniUand. 

4. Active Benevolence, or Ln^Oare- 
fuL 

5. Falsehood Chasti^ied, and Bcr« 
trand and his Family. 

6. John Schureman Sutpbcn. 

7. The Lost Opportunity. 

8. Life and Death of Lady Jane Grey 

VOL. II. 

9. Bowyer Smith. 

10. Good Boys, or Examine Yout: 

seWes. 
SER. IV.— 36|ij>. 18mo. Price Sc. 

VOL. I. 

1. Memoir of Thomas HanAtahPar- 
too. 

2. History of Lucy Jackson. 

3. History of Honest Roger. 

4. History of the English Bible, 

5. Life of Alary Mordant. 

6. History of Jacob Newman. 

7. The Cottage Girl 

VOL. II. 

8. Little Ana : an Authentic Narfa- 
live. 

9. History of Peter Thompson. 

10. Village SchooL 

11. Scripture Parables in Verse. 

12. Fourth of July. 

13. Memoir of David Acheson^rr. 

SER. v.— 48^. i8mo. Price 4& 
VOL. I. 

1. History of John Wise. 

2. Catharine Warden, or the Pious 

Scholar. 
8. Tommy Well wood. 

4. History of Theophiins and Sophia. 

5. Elspeth Sutherland. 

6. Memoir of Howard F. Randolph, 
Andrew Underbill, and Thoma$ 
Walton Hughes. 



07 The price of each of these Tracts is inserted on the last page of the cover 
fti mills. 



TO ifiYERY CHRISTIAN. 

There is no roan, woman, or child, who has any access to bis fellow-beiogs, that 
may not very advantageously distribute Tracts j and when the heart is warm with 
love to God and the souls of men, it is always a grateful service. But »' " »^o^** 
pertaining t<»the eternal welfare of men ; and if sphritual affections h^e become 
languid, it will, among other means of usefulness, he almost certainly n^ected. 
The inquiry may well be made by every individual, as a test of bis Christian cha- 
racter, wbetiier hefaitfnily employs this means of grace. Almost the whole amoant 
of good accomplished by Tract distrilration, istkrowk theprivaU efforts of indand-^ 
ual* ; and if it is the duty of other Christians to be active and faithful in this work, 
ench individual may veiy properly ask himself, Is it not also my duty f 



THE AMERICAN 

>L. ni, SBFTBWBSS, 1828. 1^0. : 



Bet pige 120— lllsli; 



THE QV£BTION 

NOW BEFORE THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 
fAall Iku Saeitig euenliall;/ vfirlail Um optrelioai/Br tcanl ofptcumaru 

»id, or itill prtu/arteard in tlu work of atlualli/ lupplDtng tht mil- 
lioni o/oiir cmtntrg leilh Tradi T 

At ilie meeting nt the Executive Committee, July 21tt, the ltBt« 
of fbe Treasury wai as fallows : 

Dur.uadiDDcnl biamemtierDf DieCooimKIcton unoleRiriaper g380 00 



Whole smonnl due Uilidaj 1.607 63 

Anuiunt oral^^aiiDDi iluepmkinila D<«ii)ier B2, cfaMlj tor 

These facts inffldeDtly ihait, as ihe Sociely hu no permaneat 
fllnd vhatoTer, ibat iti rrkources muit b« increwed, or lu ofiera- 
tfooi dimiuliliei]. ThVre il ii« other atternalive. 

VbB. ta. It) [Wbdle No. 33; 



110 THE qtJE^TiON* [Sept. 

Must then a considerable number of its presses be stopped, and 
its usefulness be proportionably abridged ? 

The voice of Christian responsibility to God and the souls of men 
, replies, No. 

The expansive spirit of the age says. No. 

The voice of Providence, in the accumulating evidences of con- 
versions to Christ through the instrumentality of TractSp says, No. 

The spiritual wants of multitudes of our countrymen, wfab are 
living without God and without hope, and destitute of the means of 
Gospel grace, say, No. 

The alarming progress of infidelity and vice, especially among 
the rapidly increasing millions o( the West, which threatens to 
destroy ys, unless God shall speedily bless our efforts to save Ihemf 
says, No. 

The fact that men in sufficient numbers to preach the Gospel to our 
destitute cannot be obtained, and that by Tracts the messages of sal- 
vation can soon be sent to all, says, No. 

The Word of God, ** Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it 
with thy might,'* says. No. 

The cries of Christians scattered abroad through our moral 
wastes, repeat. No, No. 

We beg that a few of the latter may be heard, just as they come 

to the ears of the committee. 

From J^tW'Orleans a gentleman of the law writes thus: ** The 
field for the operations of our Board of Agency of the American 
Tract Society is a most extended one ; jione perhaps so wide and 
80 rlsjionsible in thetFuited States.- New-Orleans is destined to be, 
like your own city, great in numbers, wealth, resources and influ- 
ence ; and, according to its moral &nd religious character, the mil- 
lions who arc to rise in the valley of the Mississippi will be elevated 
or degraded, virtuous or vicious, on the Lord's side or against him. 
Our Board feel this, and feel their perfect inadequacy for the solemn 
duties devolving upon them. We need an Agent for the Tract 
cause here, and must have one — ^a man faithful, of talents, and 
judgment, and experience-«to labour exclusively and unqoalifiedly 
among us. I cannot, my dear sir, express in sufficiently strong 
language, our great and continual need of one. One of our Board, 

Mr. , whose heart, hand and purse, are ever at the command of 

his Master, will guaranty a room and a table for him. I most re- 
spectfully pray you and your Committee not to lose sight of so im- 
portant an object." 

From the Territory of Arkansas a professional gentleman writes 
thus : <* Until recently the existence of the American Tract Society 
was unknown here ; but a gentleman from St. Louis, 400 miles 
distant, not long since showed me 3 or 4 of your Tracts, in reading 
which I saw at once with what power such an engine might he 
wielded against the immorality and irreligion which are here so 
prevalent. At length one of our citizens brought from Alexandria, 
La.^ 300 miles distant, your Second Annual Report^ which gave us 



1 T 



182a.] THE Q^£STIO^*• ' 111 

the iofortnation we so much desired concerning the Society9 and vre 
have now formed an Auxiliary and collected ^26, 

« We are in latitude 33^, 42' ; 250 miles west of the Mississippi : 
20 miles south of us rolls the Red River, 1000 miles above its mouth, 
forming here the boundary line between the United States and the 
Mexican province of the Texas ; 60 nvles east is our steamboat 
landing on the Washita, 600 miles above its confluence with Red 
River ; 120 miles north is Little Rock, the seat of our territorial 
government, on the Arkansas, 800 miles above its mouth ; 120 
miles west, is Fort Towsnn, the limit of White Settlements. 

*' The space within these boundaries includes five counties ; the 
whole of them, we may say, destitute of the stated ordinances of 
the Gospel, though they contain 12,000 inhabitants. The soil is 
exuberantly fertile, and the climate extremely healthy and delicious. 
It would seem as if Providence designed this for a terrestrial Para- 
dise. But why is it, that those countries most favoured by nature 
are permitted to continue the strong holds of Satan ? The mass of 
the people are poor and illiterate, and those who possess the means, 
seem to be straining every effort to vest their property in Slaves. 
The human intellect is debased, and vice, infidelity, and moral 
turpitude prevail What can be dune ? What will you do for us ? 
The friends of Christ among us are few, poor and weak, and have 
been disheartened ; but our courage is again reviving Come and 
belpus* Give us weapons, and God will give us strength. Provide 
us the means, and we will trus> in the God of battles for the event." 

** One thing in our situation,'' writes a Clergyman on the Missis- 
sippi, *^ makes my heart ache when I think of it. There is not, I 
do not hesitate to say, so extensive a field for the operations of an 
efficient Bible and Tract Society in the United States ; no, not on 
the Continent ; and yet our Societies here are just struggling for 
existence. I do sicken when I behold it. Christians in the older 
States must send us Agents, and give us their aid. Get your map 
and trace out the extent of the Mississippi and all its tributaries, 
and see what is the magnitude of our wants." 

We have other letters, one received while we have been writing 
this article, urging upon the Society with equal earnestness to 
send Tracts, and faithful men, into the valley of the Mississippi; 
but the above extracts must suffice. 

The que&tion whether a number of the Society's presses must be 
stopped for want of pecuniary means, has become a practical one, 
and must soon be decided. We appeal to the friends of God and 
the immortal souls of our dying fellow men ; we appeal to the 
friends of our country and our kindred who are perishing for lack 
of vision ; we appeal to those who wish to see the triumphs of the 
Redeemer's Cross, the march of his Gospel, and his speedy reign on 
the earth ; we appeal to every thing that is generous, and compas- 
sionate, and expansive, and noble in the Christian's heart ;<— and 
say, Brethren, let not this work be hindered for want of pecuniary 
means. Think how our cup of blessings overflows ; how God has 
lavished his mercies upon us ; and bow much he has done for the 
redemption of our oirn immortal spirits* Think of the bitterness of 



11£ LONDON RSLIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETT. [S^pt. 

iitirepented sin, as we have felt it in our own hearts ; and say^ 
JViUtce not do so much for our perishing countrymen as to suppli^them 
ioilh Tracts ? When God in bis Providence has commenced this 
work, and a thousand sacred incentives urge to its advancement, 
shall it cease for want of pecuniary aid ? 

We are assured that the Committee will not curtail their opera- 
tions until actually compelled, whatever pecuniary burdens may 
come upon them ; but they are already such as cannot perroanenily 
be borne. We can only leave it with the friends 'of evangelical 
truth, and with God, who holds their hearts in his hands, to deter- 
mine what shall be the result. 



liOXDON TRACT SOCIETY. 

The more we see of this noble Institution, the more are we 
delighted with its truly excellent character. Its recent interesting 
anniversary, of which we gave some account in our last, must have 
told on the hearts of all present, as it has also upon thousands to 
whom the intelligence of the proceedings on that occasion has been 
communicated. We are particularly struck with the spirit of fra- 
ternal confidence and love, exhibited at the anniversary, as ex- 
isting among Christians of difierent denominations and different 
countries — the sense of the sacredness of the work in which the 
Society is engaged, and of dependance on God for a blessing— the 
encouragement He ha^ given to press forward, and the confidence, 
which we doubt not He has inspired, that the means of grace now 
used, shall be blessed in the moral emancipation of the world. We 
add the two following testimonies to the usefulness of TractSi ex- 
tracted from the addresses, ^ 

REV. J. BLACKBURN.— /n/ic^e/ Club dispersed. 

He knew, by happy experience, that the most important results 
had followed the distribution of Tracts. A Lady connected with a 
northern branch of the Christian Instruction Society, went along a 
little street where there was a synagogue of Satan. In one of the 
humble dwellings of that street, met ten or twelve infidels on the 
Lord's day, to read the infidel publications, and to strengthen each 
other in their blasphemous opinions concerning God and the Chris- 
tian religion. It would have been a noble work if a band of Minis- 
ters had dispersed the assembly, and especially if they had brought 
their leader to the throne of grace. But it was the honourable task 
of an humble, widowed Christian lady to achieve the work. She 
left a Tract at the house ; it was read by the individual who acted 
as the chaplain of the party. He fell before the evidence contained 
in the Tract ; the Spirit of God applied the reading of it to his mind ; 
he communicated his views to the others, the meeting was dis- 
persed, and the man who was a notorious blasphemer, now assisted 



18£8.] TH£ PRESENT. 115 

at a prayer-meeting^, and was one of the active co-operators in that 
work in which the Society was engaged. 

REV. GEORGE CLAYTON.— Con»cr*io» oj an Infidel lady, 

A young female, whom he had the honour to number among his 
flock) a young lady of education, accomplishments, and large ex- 
pectations, had devoted herself in a very eminent degree to the dis- 
tribution of Tracts : she leaves one, and then in about a fortnight 
calls in to inquire after it. While engaged in her accustomed pur* 
suits, she dropped a Tract at a house in which the mistress of the 
family was a professed and avowed infidel. She had met with some 
inconsistency in a religious professor of high note, which so asto* 
nished her, that she fancied all relie;ion was a dream, and the Bible 
itself a cheat. She was at length, after some difficulty, prevailed 
upon to peruse the Tract. She read it, she pondered over it, she 
was convinced, she was brought under the means of religious in> 
struction. She believed, she brou£:ht forth fruit meet for repent- 
ance. She was received into the fold of Christ, and she has walked 
consistently and steadfastly in the apostles' doctrine and fellowship, 
and in breaking of bread, and in prayer ; and he trusted that her 
immortal spirit would shine in the crown of that devoted young* 
female, who thus saved a soul from death, and covered a multitude 
of sins. 

Thus we might leave the ninety and nine, who comparatively 
need no repentance, and go after the single sheep which was lost ; 
and li we found it, we might call in our neighbours and friends, 
saying, '< Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep which was 
lost.*' O, if Richmond, who was numbered among the early friends 
of this Institution, had received these glad tidings in the mansions 
of bliss, where there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over 
one sinner that repenteth, his golden harp had been struck afresh 
to that immortal song, << Thou hast redeemed us from all kindred, 
and tongues, and people." 



PRESENT 

OF AN ENTIRE SET OF THE LONDON SOCIETyS 

PUBLICATIONS, 

Exirael of a Letter from Mr. WUliam Jane*, ^sdst. See. of the Religiolu 
Tract Society, dated London, May 21, 1828. 

Tour esteemed letters^ by the Rev. W. Fatten, duly arrived, and 
} am directed by the Committee to thank the American Tract So. 
^ety for the present of your publications bound. We cannot d6 
better than imitate a good example, and therefore our Committee 
present you, in return, the whole of our Traett bound, amtitting of 
tdnnU ninety volumet. I trust, my friend and brother, that our 
Societies will ever go on mest harmoniously together. We feel tb^ 
liveliest interest in your prosperity, and urge you forward in yoar 
^eat and gToriQui work. We trast « that by one Spifii w« bEr« «U 

10» 



114 LAST HOURS. OF RET. LEOH RICHHOITI]^. [Sept. 

been baptised into one body-/' and therefore the members of our 
Societies are united together in Christ Jesus our Lord. We have 
just held our anniversary, the particulars of which you will obtain 
from the paper I have sent you. Rev. Mr. Fatten, of your city, and 
Rot. Mr. Allen, of Philadelphia, gave us much interesting informa- 
tion. Our meeting has revived and strengthened our zeal, and we 
feel determined to prosecute with increased vigour the cause en- 
trusted to our management. Our circulation last year, amounted 
to nearly 10,000,000 of Tracts, exclusive of the Tracts published in 
foreign languages, at our expense. 

Believe me to bci my dear Brother, yours truly, &c. 



LAST HOURS OF REV. LEGH RICHAIONir. 

[From a Letter written by one of his Daughters.] 

*< He had a great dislike to keep his bed ; and I cannot bat 
acknowledge the goodness of God that it was not necessary, lie 
rose every day to the last, and sat as usual in his study, only getting 
up a little later, and going to bed earlier, as his strength gradually 
failed him. The last fortnight he was very silent, and appeared 
constantly in prayer and meditation, waiting his dismissal} and the 
end of his earthly pilgrimage. At this time nothing seemed to 
disturb him ; and he appeared to realize the full import of that 
blessed promise, * Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose mind 
is stayed on- thee.* I have often thought he exemplified the faitb 
his favourite Leighton commends, ' Let thy soul roll itself on God, 
and adventure there all its weight." It was indeed an unspeakable 
delight to us to observe the unruffled calm of his soul ; and it con- 
firmed our minds in the truth and value of the doctrines he had 
taught for thirty years. We had seen our beloved father prostrate 
in soul before God, under a constciousness of in-dwelling sin ; we 
had heard him bemoaning himself, after a long life of usefulness, 
as an unprofitable servant, renouncing again and again all hope of 
salvation by his own goodness, and fleeing to Jesus as his only 
refuge. To use his own words, * ft is only by coming to Christ as 
a little child, and as for the first time, that I can get peace.* Yet, 
though for a time perplexed, he was not forsaken. We saw him 
comforted of God, and proving what he had often said to me, 
< Christ has firm hold of you, however feeble your grasp of him ;" 
and now we saw him strong in faith, and in the last hour of dis- 
solving nature, rejoice in the sure and certain hope of the glory of 
God. He did indeed find, to use the dying words of my beloved 
brother, ' the rest that Christ gives is sweet.* He was §ilent, but it 
was a most expressive silence, and revealed emotions of joy and 
praise not to be described. Many touching circumstances occurred^ 
which showed both the man and the Christian ; but they are of too 
delicate a nature to be communicated beyond the circle of his owo' 
family. 

'< Two days before his death he received a letter mentioning the 
conversion of two persons (one of whom was,a clergyman), by the 
perusat of hisTract, <Tbi^ Pairt^jeh's DAt7aHT£R.' When the 



1^.] 



LAST H0TTK3 OF RET. L£43H RfCHMOND* 115 



letter was given to him he seemed too feeble to open it himself, and 
desiried Henry (his son) to read it to him. The contents deeply 
interested hiai. He raised himself in his chair, lifted up his hand^ 
and then let it fall down again, while he repeatedly shook his heaiK 
His manner spoke the greatest humility, as if he would say, ' How 
unworthy of such an honour !* For a few moments it seemed to 
administer a cordial to his fainting spirit, and led our minds, in 
reference to our dear father, to contemplate the near fulfilment of 
that promise, * They that turn many to righteousness shall shine as 
the stars for ever and ever.* 

»* About five o'clock, on Tuesday, the 8th of May, 1827, we per- 
suaded him to go to bed, but we little thought death was so near. 
He could not walk, and we were going to ring for a servant to assist 
him ; but he said, ' I should like Henry to carry me.* He was 
wasted to a skeleton : Henry took him up with great ease, and we 
all followed. I shall never forget this most afiecting moment : it 
was a moment of anguish to me more than the last scene. He 
seemed to know that be was leaving the study never to return to it :> 
his look told me that he knew it, This was his favourite room, 
where, for more than twenty years, he had constantly carried on'his 
pursuits. There he had written his books, studied his sermous, 
instructed his children, conversed with his flock, and ofTered daily 
sacrifices of praise and prayer. I watched him as Henry carried 
him out ; his countenance preserved the same look of fixed com- 
posure. He raised his head, and gave one searching look round the 
room, on his books, his table, his chair, his wife, his children ; and 
then the door closed on him for ever ! He gave the same look 
round the gallery through which we passed, as if he was bidding 
farewell to every thing. There was a peculiar expression in his 
countenance which I cannot describe ; it seemed to say, ' Behold, 
I die ; but God will be with you !* Henry seated him in a chair ; 
and he sat to be undressed, like a little dependant child, in deep 
6ilcuce, but without the ruffling of a feature. 

<* About nine he seemed rather wandering,' and made an effort to 
speak ; but we could not make out his meaning ; only we perceived 
he was thinking about his church, for we heard him say several 
times, < It will be all confusion !' Mamma asked him. what would 
be confusion ? f The church ! There will be such qonfusion in my 
church !' 

*^ About ten o*clock, he signified to mamma, in a gentle whisper^ 
that he wished to be left alone, to send us all away, and draw iho 
Curtains round him. 

' *^ About half-past ten Mrs. 6. tapped at my door, and told me to 
come and look at my father. She said she could hardly tell whether 
there was any change or not. I hurried to him. He raised his 
.eyes to heaven and then closed them. I put my cheek upon his ; 
find I believe at that instant I felt, for 1 could not hear, his dying 
sigh. I thought he was sleeping, and continued looking at him, 
till Hannah said, < Tour dear papa is in heaven.' I did not think 
him dead ', and I rnbbed his still warm hands, and kissed his pale 
cheek, and entreated him to speak one word to roe ; but I soon 
found it was the silenpe of death. All turned to poor mamma, whp 
was insensible ; and I was thus left alone with my dear father, 
kneding Deside Itiin wi{h his^haod in mine.^ Jhe filme holy calhi 



116 VSEFUXITESS. OF TRACTS. [Sept, 

•at on his countenance, and teemed to toy, *> Tbaitks be to God, 
WHO HAS 6ITBW ME THE VICTORY !* '^'^Frotti MemoiT of tht Rtv. U 
JUchmond, by Rn, T. 5. Grimshawe. 



vssnr&amss or t&acvs. 

A SEN£CA INDIAN YOUTH CONVERTED BY A TRACT. 

[Communicated by a Missionary.] 

The friends of the Tract cause may, perhaps, be gratified io the 
publication of the following fact, which came under my own obser- 
vation, and which you are at liberty to use in any way, which may 
tend to awaken an increased linterest in the noble enterprise in 
which you are engaged. 

At one of the Mission stations among the Seneca Indians, of 
which I have the particular superintendance, an Indian youth had, 
by punctual attendance on the Mission School, become so far ad- 
vanced in the knowledge of English and in general intelligence, as 
to be very profitably employed in the translation of one of the 
Gospels into his native tongue, for the benefit of the Tribe. After 
finishing the portion assigned to him, one evening in the month of 
March, I perceived he was unusually dejected. I asked if he were 
sick. His reply was, '* I am not well, and have not been for several 
days:— but my sins give me much more (rouble than my sickness"— 
and burst into tears. On becoming a little composed, he put into 
my hand a Tract, and said, •* The reading of this Tract has given 
me feelings I never had before : it has made me feel that 1 am a 
guilty, undone sinner, and that I must be lost, eternally, if God 
do not have mercy." It was the Tract entitled ** The Widow's Son,'* 
(No. 36.) '* I feel," continued he, *' that my situation is the same 
with that young man's, whose feelings are there described.'* AAer 
addressing him in the manner which 1 thought his present state of 
feeling required, he left the room weeping, and I believe, went out 
ftito the grove and cried unto God. He continued anxious about 
his soul for several weeks. He now states, that, one evening, as he 
was calling upon God for mercy and salvation through the Lord 
Jesus, and almost in despair, these words came into his mind very 
forcibly : '* Thy prayer is heard :^* *^ sin no more." He believes these 
words were applied to his heart by the power of the Holy Spirit. 
He rose from his knees, willing to throw himself at his Saviour's 
feet. His feelings — his views of God and the Savioar were chan- 
ged — every thing was changed. He is now rejoicing in a com- 
fortable hope of eternal life, and says he is willing to do any thing, 
or suffer any thing whereby God may be glorified. I am happy to 
State, that thus far his conduct and appearance indicate the reality 
of the change — and it is our prayer, that God niay yet use him a|i 
an important instrument of good to his perishing fellow-men. 



1^28.] V^EFVJ,Vfi:i8 OF TRACTS. 117 

TRACTS BLESSED TO AN INTEMPERATE HAN 

, IN S. C— HIGHLY VALUED IN THE INTERIOR. 

[Communicated by the S. Carolina Branch.] 

Some Tracts carried from the city, were given to a man at 
Orangeburg, who habitually indulged in gross intoxication. About 
three weeks from the time of receiving them, he called on the family 
who had put them into his hands, thanked them very heartily tot 
their kindness, and stated, not only that he had broken off entirely 
from the use of ardent spirits, but that he indulged the hope the 
Tracts had been blessed to the salvation of his soul ; that by the 
grace of God he had commenced altogether a new life. The family- 
have affirmed, that his appearance, and as far as they know, his con- 
duct, corresponded with his assertions. 

Another instance will show the estimation in which Tracts are 
held in the interior. A gentleman passing from this place through 
North-Carolina, took a bundle of Tracts, and adopted the practice, 
wherever he spent the night, of laying out some, in such a manner 
that the family might peruse them in the evening, if they chose, and 
of leaving a few in the morning where they were acceptable. 
When his stock was almost exhausted, as he was gathering t^ienr 
up one morning, he remarked to a young lady standing by, that he 
had but a few Tracts lefl, but he would Leave a part of them, if they 
would accept them, and handed her one, that he thought suitable^ 
She replied that she would prefer one or two of the others, if equally 
agreeable to him, as she bad that otie already. The lady of the 
house then observed, that her daugbter, fearing the gentleman 
would not be able to leave that Tract, had sai up Vktarly the tchoh 
night to copy it. This fact needs no illustration. 



THE TRACT 

'* QUENCH NOT THE SPIRIT." 
[Communicated to the American Tract Society, Boston, by an Aux. in N. H.J 

A young gentleman, in this village, had been for some time in the 
habit of conversing occasionally with a young man, a friend and re- 
lation of his, in a neighbouring town, on religious subjects, but with 
little apparent success. He at length sent to him a number of Tracts^ 
among which was the one entitled "Quenchnol the Spirit." (No. 174.) 
This Tract has been the instrument under God of awakening him to 
a deep conviction of sin, especially of the sin of quenching the 
Spirit ; it recalled to his recollections numerous instances of the 
strivings of the Spirit with him, with a deep and heart-felt sense of 
his guilt in resisting its holy influences. This conviction has re- 
sulted, as the subject of it humbly hDpes, in that joy in believing — 
in that new creation of heart and life in Christ Jesus, which is 
known only to those who are taught by the Holy Spirit. 

Nor was this the only blessed fruit of this single Tract. The case 
of this individual, as I am informed, was the commencement of a 
work of grace and the outpourings of the Spirit, in the town where 
be resides— « work which still continues, and from which there ,is 
reason to hope many precious souls have been, and will be, gathered 
intQ tl|e fold of the Gre^t Shepherd of Souli. 



118 



EECEIPTS^ 



RECEIPTS 



[S^pt. 



INTO THE TREASURY OF THE ABIBRICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 
During (Ac mtnih inding August 15, 1&28. 

FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 



VER.— Middlclbunr, E. Brewster, Ag 

MASS.— >Bo6ton, American Tract Society, J. Tappan, Tr. • 

do. Evangelical, Nathaniel R. Cobb, Tr. . 
North Adams, Berkshire Co. Dea. Eli Northani, Tr. . 

Sandisfield,ftu8selMorley,Tr 

Sheffield, Rev. James Bradford, A? 

R. I6L.~Providenc«, Stephen S. Wardwell, Sec. 

CONN.— Gomwall, Jedidiah Calhoun, Sec. . . . . . 

Middletown, Luke O. Lyman, Sec 

New-Haven, A. Townsend, Jun. Tr. 

do. by their Aux. at Branford, 

do. *< <* North Branford, .... 

do. Fem. Mrs. Eliza Willard, Tr. 

N. YORK'— Ancram, Rev. Herman Vedder. Ag 

Aub«rn, piark B. Hotchkiss) Ag. . . i , , 
Baiabridge, Fem. Mrs. Cynthia Munger, Sec. .... 

Bloomingbargh, Fem. Mrs. S. Van vechten, Sec^ .... 
darmel, Tern. Miss EUubeth Beld^n, Sec. .' , 
do« Red MiUs, Fem. Mrs. Susan Jcdinston, Sec. • , • 

OenterviUe, Fem. Mercy L- Hubbard, Sec 

DepoiitiDelawareCo. Rev. Eiisha Wise, Tr. ..... 

Fishkia Landing* Fem. Miss M. W. Teller, Sec. . . . 

Fort Edward, Zadock Wheeler, Esq. Pres 

Fresh Ponds, L. I., Joseph Willets, Tr. ..... . 

Newburgh, R. B. Williams, Tr 

New-York City, Alfred Edwards, Tr 

do. Fem. Mrs. J. R Hurd, Tr 

do. S Baptist Ch., E. Pierson, Tr. .... 

Fatchoguejlev. Noah Hallock GUIet, Sec. . . . . . 

Patterson, Fem. Miss Elizabeth Hayt, Sec 

Pike, Alleghany Co. Rev. Anson TuthiU, Tr. 

Salina, 

Scotchtown, John McWilliams, Tr. . . . . . 

gyracuse, Pliny Dickinson, Tr. 

H^ughcanack, Rev, Herman Vedder, Ag. . . * - . • 
Wafden, Orange Co. Rev. J. McJiro8ey,Pre8. ..... 

K. JER.— AmweUjFem. Mr8.H. Ski]lman,Tr. . . . . 

Jersey City, Fem. Mrs. Sarah Olcott, Sec ..... 

Lower Preehiild, Dr. James EngUsh, Sec 

New-Brunswick, Peter Dayton, Tr. - 

New-Hope and Lambertsville, Ellen W. Studdiford, of L., Sec . 

New- Vernon, Jonathan Oliver, Tr. 

Princeton, Fem. Miss F. W. Mnrford, Tr. 

do. Nassau Hall, Samael HubbeU, Sec 

FENN.~-Ea8ton, Eliza A. Wilson, &ec 

Philadelphia Branch,^. Murray, Gen. Ag. ^ . . . . . 

Rttsburgh, Luke Loomis, Sec 

VIR. — Charlotteville, (Alberm. Co. Aux.) Rev. Francis Bowman, Tr. 
Germanna, Orange Co., Wilderness P. O-, Wm. A* Almond, Sec 

Crosport, Naval, Rev. E. McLaughlin, Sec 

Leesburg, Roberdeau Anoin, Sec 

Petersburg, William Nifibet, Sec 

Staunton, Joseph Cowan, Tr. . . - 

Winchester, Daniel Gold, Tr 

N. CAR.— Salem, Stokes Co. H. G. CJauder, Sec .... 

ALA.— Huntsville, Samuel Ooltart, Ag 

Russeiville, Fem. Mrs. H. T. Nooe, Ag 

HISS.— Jefferson Go. James H. Montgomery, Sec. . . . 
TENN.— Knoxville, ( East Tennessee Aux.) James Park, Tr. 
OHIO.— Hodson, Portage Co. Rev. Wm. flanford, Ag. 

««m «****• f™™ sundry Auxiliaries, 

IXID.«MndisoD, Rev. J. H. Johasioo, Sec. » < 



Fr.Tr. 


Don. i 


20 OO 


^ 


90 00 




357 57 




900 


300 


13 13 


4 .77 


22 50 


7 50 


76 00 




17 25 


6 75 


38 83 




7 38 






125 




6 37 


900 


300 


7 27 


242 


44 00 


• 


4 00 


. 


15 00 


500 


15 00 


500 


1121 


3 73 


4 07 


1 36 


g 00 


300 


500 




900 


5 31 


659 3 41 


19 55 




211 00 




50 00 




2&00 




1 GO 




22 96 


7 66 


4 01 


1 83 


640 


2 13 


11 38 


3 79 


19 88 


6 62 


3 00 


1 00 


18 00 


6 00 


6 00 




300 




16 57 




10 00 


500 


7 .'iO 


250 


12 38 


4 12 


Jl a5 


3 75 


25 00 




300 


500 


600 00 




250 00 




19 50 




5 00 




52 50 


17 50 




260 


40 00 


■ 


32 50 


750 


65 00 


500 


15 00 


5 00 


17 60 






260 


18 75 


6SS6 


700 


18 00 


6 46 


5 87 




1165 



IQOOI 



Secittiei mV .SuxUiari/, fir 3^iicl<. 

OHIO — Gamblur, KnDibosnlT, 
Pnrvr Book, TncI, god S. 8. 
Sac H. T. C. WIdif. Stc 91 01 

Trsas lolil at ILe Depmlloir la 



oiiBg-'cinftlll'af iiOJ 30 00 

V. VORK.— BIwniJiigGraH.Rf* 



FinnliiElon,MiirtGridlF7. S 

do. If» Qrldlej, by bis 

faUiet.Hr.M-GridlfT, S 

HBiifiird. Rfv. Sunnrl BprliiE, br 

UlrtfM'Aui.Tr.Sor. ! 

Mnnb GrRDwieli, Mrii Sirafa 

««cr, E 

Norlb BinniDgliiD, RcT. Jcacpli 



Do. Re. Selb WiUillon. bv lill 
Churcb imri CaBg. (In pari dI 



Do.' WllllaDi'lVliiliocti. Jun. 
OrHncCo. Rev.Gto^gBBlcpbeIl- 






N. JEB^Ncwarii, Bon. Tbco- 

' n FrelliiEbii:n«i, G 

Jjimial Memttrt—gS aeh. 



BrMiT. Wnn. EIniiD, 
F. CkiMHH'D, J, Cram, 

Peck ,'EMnHtt Plot, 



?rsi 



norfJ^in Notiiand, 
Otha- 



Wincb'ilcr, J. 3. (390, J. [. 



aim 


kIHI" 


"niMll'Er..B. P.Ay- 




B.Danl 


«t Milli, Di. Robert 


MOO 


Tbe above 
forTrac 


beyoDd Ihc AUegbB- 


aioo 


BccftrT 


.2.^ s;!S 



OF TH£ 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 

No. 212. A Serious In^uirt.— pp. 8. This Inquiry is no other 
than, ^re you ready to die and appear before Qod f and the Tract is 
occupied with an attempt to aid the reader, by comparing his own 
"heart with the grand evidences of pietj laid down in the Word of 
God, to answer the question, so that he shall not be deceived in 
his hopes for eternity. 

No. 213. Thb Incorrigible Sinker forewarned of mS 
Doom.-— pp. 8. This Tract, from the pen of Rev. Dr. Woodbridge, of 
Hadley, Mass. is founded on the words, ** He that being often re- 
proved, hardeneih his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed^ and tfuU wUhout 
remedy." It shows the impei)itent man how he has been reproved 
by God's Word, his ministers, his works, his judgments, his Spirit, 
and by conscience; how he has hardened his neck under these 
reproofs ; and that, continuing impenitent, his destruction is ** mth" 
out remedj/,*' 

No. 214. More than o»e viundred Scriptural and Incon- 
trovertible Arguments for the Supreme Divinity of our 
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.— pp. 28. In this Tract is com- 
pressed, in a solemn, well arranged, clear and convincing manner, 
the array of incontrovertible arguments on this subject, with which 
the Scriptures so much abound. It is longer than some Tracts j 
but the important Epithet, MuUum in parvo, may well be applied to it. 

No. 215. Importance of Salvation. — pp. 8. A pungent so* 
lemn appeal to the reader, chiefly " persuading him by the terrors 
of the Lord,'* to consider the Importance of Salvation. 

No. 216. A Word for the Bible.— pp. 4. Containing a brief 
and glowing appeal in behalf of i^e Bible ; and furnishing common 
readers with a beautiful digest of the argumenta with which they may 
successfully encounter infidelity. 

No. 217. History op Amelia Gale.— pp. 8. She was a poor 
woman in England, who lived 66 years in great " ignorance, misery 
and sin ;'* when, by the power of Divine grace, she was made " a 
new creature," For the last 16 years of her life, she was enabled 
strikingly to exemplify the effect of the religion of Christ on the 
heart and character, especially by her activity and zeal in the cause 
of Christian benevolence. Though poor and entirely dependent, 
she, by her own personal sacrifices and efforts, besides supporting 
herself, actually contributed, on an average, about six pounds (26 
dollars) a year to Missionary and other benevolent institutions ', and 
she died, at the age of 72, happy in the presenee of that Saviour in 
whose service she had, for many years, found so much enjoyment, 
after having so long wandered from himi in the hard ways of trans- 
gression. 



OBZXiBSSN'S TBACVS BOUXTD. 

Of the 2d and 3d series 3 volumes, each comprising 256 page|, 
are neatly bound ; price 20 cents a volume. Al^o, 2 volumes of the 
4th and dth series, each comprising about theaame number of pages ; 
price 30 cents a volume. Discount to Auifuiarl^ the ^am^ as on 
other Trst^ts 



THE AMERICAN 



S« page 1»-Llfe of Jobo Ban; 



<Par 111* Amerian TncI Ua(iiliK'> 

«0V& Xir OAITASA. 

"Made by a Member of Union Colligt, in ramjiany teiih a Ckrilfiait 
Fncad, far Tract DittrihUion. 

Od cammeDcing our lour, wbicb citended through a dulabce of 
1600 mjles, and occupied fire and a half week», we were prOTidetl 
nith 23.650 pagei of TracU. We proceeded from SctaeDCctady, on 
the Erie canal, to Buflalo ; aeporated al Black Rock, and lilet U thf 
Fails of Niagara; there lepHraled ajw«t and met M YorfcviUe ; thence 
proceeded together to Montreal ; and thence to Wbileball, where we 
again leparated, and met at Union College, In tbe Canadas we tra-- 
-velled nearly 300 milei on foou 

Most of bie Tract! with which we were proTided, we haTC dislrf- 
buted among Sabbath-breakere, and iwearen, sod trarelleri, and 
children, and headj of familiei, and Sabbath achooll, and day ichooli ; 
and a large portion or tbe whole in new lettlementi. In the tchosli 
and new lettlemeota we left but one Tract of a kind, placing them in 
|h« bandi of tome penau of rood report, on a plan lomewbal umitor 

trpO. IH. 11 [Whqli H». W. 



12£ tOUR m CAlfADA^ [Oct 

to that of a circulating library. As every person for whom these 
Tracts were designed could read each one, much good may be ex- 
pected to result from the distribution of a few in each place. In thti 
new settlements between York and Port Hope, in U. C, we seldoin 
passed a house without leaving a Tract ; and sent several small par- 
ens to the new settlements in the rear of this stage road. 

In all the distance we travelled on the Erie canal, we found no 
Tracts, except a very few brought on board by passengers ; and se- 
veral capUiins told us that their boats had never been supplied with 
Tracts by any other means. We communicated with oAcers of the 
Bochester Auxiliary Tract Society respecting this deficiency, and 
were assured that systematic measures for supplying it should be 
immediately adopted. A small case ought undoubtedly to be placed 
in each cabin, bearing the inscription, " The Passengers' Libbart," 
and a small box to be connected with the bottom of the case, to re* 
cetve the contributions of those friendly to the cause. 

To labourers on the Welland canal in U. C, to boatmen on the Lft- 
chine canal in L. C, and to boatmen on the Northern canal in N. T., 
we gave Tracts. We visited ten or fiAeen boats upon the Northern 
canaJ, and found no Tracts, except in the last, which had but od^. 
When we gave the captain of this boat a few, he thanked us, and said, 
" When I am in Troy on the Sabbath day, I always receive Tracts 
from the distributor." 

Our attention was, in the course of our reut^, directed to the steam- 
boats, vessels, and other v^ater-craft on Lake Erie, Lake Ontario, and 
the river St. Lawrence. We were happy to learn that the Tract 
Society in Buffalo did supply the vessels upon Lake Erie. The Tract 
Societies in Rochester and li/ewiston, and in Kings,t<Mi, J^. C, will 
supply the steam-boats and vessels that touch at their ports. The 
Kingston Tract Society will, also turn its attention to the boats upon 
the Bay of Quinte and the river St. Lawrence ; and in this effort the 
Montreal Tract Society will also doubtless be engaged. 

We formed five Auxiliary Tract Societies: one in Tonnewanfa^ 
Niagara co.; one in Stamford and Thorold, in Up. Can.; one between 
York and Port Hope; one in Murray, and one in Fredericksburgh. 

Christendom is unacquainted with the efforts the Church is begin- 
ning to make. Within the limits of our short journey we saw many 
persons who had never seen or heard of a Tract until we placed one 
id their fauids. We saw many people who had never heard of the 
Bible Society, and were equally ignorant of Missionary operations. 

The Tracts we distributed were, with very few exceptions, eagerly 
aM thankfidly received by all. By the inhabitants of Stamford and 
Thorold we were desired to present to the American Society theiir 
gratitude for the Tracts we left in their schools and distributed to in> 
dividuals among them. For otir labours, we received the thanks of 
societies and of individuals. At a conference of the Montreal Auxili- 
ary Religious Tract Society, the members were so highly gratified 
with the statement of our labours, as, by a public resolution, not only 
to tender us their congratulations and thanks, bat also to give us ai 
many Tracts as we needed. 

In the new settlements in Canada there is need of Bibles. There 
lOre Bible Societies in the Canadas, but a mighty increase of effort h 
^cessary to supply every family in the provinces with a Bible. The 
Bi^man Catholic Church is so hostile to the ctrcuUitioa of U^« 3criI^ 



1828.] TOITR in CANADA* 123 

tares, and its influence is so ezteasive and powerful in Lower Canada, 
that it is doubtful when the day shall come^ when the Bible there will 
be placed in every family. Most of the Catholic laity seem very ig- 
norant of the sacred claims of the Bible ; and that the priests bum the 
Bibles they find in the hands of their laity, is an authenticated fact. 

The Canadas present a wide field for Missionary labours. The 
question, ** Can you send us living Ministers ?" when we gave Tracts 
to the people, was often asked us. In difiierent parts of the upper 
province, we travelled, sometimes twenty, and sometimes forty miles, 
without seeing a single house for religious worship. Intemperance, 
Sabbath-breaking, and swearing, exist to an alarming extent in manv 
places. Infidelity, too, does not want her advocates. The Christianas 
heart must bleed, his eye weep, when he looks over the desolations of 
Zion, and in the prospect sees the strong-holds of Satan among ac- 
countable beings ; yes, strong-holds, that have never been invaded by 
TracU, and but seldom by Bibles or by Eyangelists. Such places are 
not of very rare occurrence to the traveller in Canada. The Metho- 
dist denomination have been the principcd means in the reformation 
of the Indians, who, a few years since, might almost have been styled 
a tribe of drunkards. Upon receiving the Gospel, they became civil- 
ized, and adopted the sentiments and habits of the friends of tempe- 
rance. 

TRACTS THE PRINCIPAL MEANS OF A RETIVAL, 

In Ontario County, continues the above narrative, the Rev. Mr. D. 
purchased and distributed eight dollars' worth of Tracts among the 
people of his charge, in the spring of 1827 ; a revival followed ; they 
were supposed to be the principal means ; and we were informed that 
the effects of those Tracts upon that people were still very apparent, 
in continuing, through the blessing of the Holy Spirit, the work of 
grace among them. 

A respectable Presbyterian, in Stamford, U. C, informed us, that 
Tracts had been very useful in that place. About five years since, 
the people were very inattentive to the appointments of God's house, 
and frequently very disorderly in it. By the circulation of Religious 
Tracts through Sabbath schools, these etils have been corrected, and 
a taste for religious intelligence created. In this place there is now a 
Tract Society. 

A Gentleman in York, U. C, who is active in the cause of Christ, 
has, in the country and villages adjacent to the town, a number of 
Sabbath schools under his immediate care. These he frequedtly 
visits on the Sabbath day, always being carefhl to have a number of 
Tracts in his pocket for gratuitous distribution. One morning, as he 
was resting upon the root of a large tree, a hunter came up to him, to 
whom he presented a Tract.. The hunter confessed his sui, resolved 
to leave the forest, and to observe the Sabbath d^. A little before 
they parted, the hunter said he had rested to the bottle, and to the 
gun, to stifle convictions. 

CONVERSION OF A CANADIAN HUNTER BY A 

TRACT* 

Mr. H. was one day passing through a small piece of woods, necr 
irork,U.. Canada, to a Sabbath school. Seeing a hunter about to 



t^ TRACT SOCIETT OF FARIS, FRANCE. [Oct* 

cross the path, he asked him if he was upon the direct road to such 
a place. The hunter told him he was not ; that he must retur» 
nearly to York, and take a different road. Mr. H. thanked hini> 
kindly, and taking a Tract from his pocket, said, *'I ha^e myself 
read this little book with pleasure. If it shall be as useful to you a» 
it has been to me, you will never regret it.'' ** What is it?'' said the 
hunter. '* It is of the utmost importance to you, my friend," said H; 
*^ Take it. Read it, and then read it again, and then read it to your 
family. " The hunter thanked him.^ Mr. H. went on his way. After 
the lapse of a^few months, Mr. H. attended a prayer-meeting in that 
vicinity. Al the dose of the exercises a man came to him, and after 
passing the usual compliments, told him that he was the hunter to 
whom ne had, some months before, on a Sabbath mornins', given a 
little book ; and then added—*' That book brought me to tne prayer- 
meeting this morning. I feel thankful to you for it. My mind has 
been troubled. I have read the Bible. Since you have been so kind 
to me, I may as well tell you the history of my life. / used to he a 
mere devil txt home, and was not much better abroad. Liquor was mu 
ruin, Whiskey'-whidcey was my ruin. I have read the little booK 
several times : I have read it to my famfly, as they were unable tQ 
read it for themselves. But every time I read it, and my Bible, I felt 
worse. Sometimes I think there is no mercy for me. My wife tol4 
me I had better look for the man who gave it to me«" Mr. H. gave 
him the best instruction in his power fivm the Scriptures, and left 
him. In a few weeks he wcus in the same neighbourhood, and saw the 
hunter. The hunter was tiien indulging a trembling hope in the Lord 
JesUs. *' I have reason," said the hunter, " to bless God for the little 
book. I have ryot spent my money in the usual way, nor abused my 
family, smce I received it." " Search the Scriptures" was the title of 
the Tract. 

The Christian may distribute Tracts, because they will teach the 
truth— their lessons will be learned — ^their pupils will become teacher^ ^ 
—knowledge among men will be increased, and souls be saved. Let 
Tracts, therefore, be scattered ; and though many of them, like many 
sermons preached, may not produce any salutary effect visible to tb^ 
human eye, yet their distribution wiU not be in vain. 



TRACT SOCIETY OF PARIS, FRANCE. 

The anniversary of this Society was celebrated on the 22d of 
April, in a hall. No. 10 St. Mmrk-street, which was crowded to over« 
flowing. Rev. Mr. Stapfer presided. It is sufficient to say, that the 
evangelical labours of this Society, modest and unhonoured as they 
are in the eyes of the world, are more and more appreciated ; and 
that, through the blessing of Grod, it is pursuing its course with a firm 
step. It appeared from the Report, which was read by. Mr. Lutte-^ 
roth, the Secretary, that within the pa&t year, t^e Society had put into 
circulation 172,812 Tracts, being an increase of 23,607 above the 
issues of the previous year. In this estimate are included 16,000 
Almanacs of Good Advice, which is 4000 more than were circulated 
IQ \85?7^ a^nd lp,0Q0 more than in 1836. Eight new Tracts haye beea 



ldi^8.] xfS^&vxnLvtt&s or taacts. 1£5 

published, and one broad-sheet. The Tract Society at New-Tork has 
adopted several publications of the Paris Tract Society, and reprinted 
them in French. Finally, the instances of sinners who had forsaken 
the paths of vice, and of worldly men who had been awakened from 
their indifference by means of Tracts, proved to the assembly that 
the blessing of God had rested upon the Society. The donations of 
the year amounted to 5632 francs ($1056,) and the products of sales 
to 6606 francs ($1051.) The expenditures were 10,780 francs. We 
recollect that, just before the annual meeting a year previous, the 
treasury presented a deficiency of between 2000 and 3000 francs. 
Some person remarked, at that juncture, that this circumstance 
augured well for the future; and so it has proved: it quickened the 
zeal of the Society's friends, increased its receipts, and in this way 
enabled it to extend considerably the field of its labours. 

After the reading of the Report, addresses were made by Mr. Ros- 
selotti, Count Ver Huell, Rev. Mr. Juillerat, Rev. Mr. Scholl, Secre- 
tary of the London Tract Society, Rev. Mr. Jaquier, and Mr. Buffum,.. 
a Quaker, from Rhode Island, whose language was interpreted by 
Rev. Mr. Monod, Jun. 

In the proper place, Mr. Wilkes read a letter from New- York, en- 
closing $214, the result of a contribution in the United States in favour 
of the Paris Tract Society. " This letter," remarks the Archives, 
" afforded a striking illustration of the truth of a sentiment which had 
been advanced by the preceding speaker (Mr. Juillierat,) viz. that aU< 
Christians, whatever may be their country, are bound together by 
one tie, one love, one spirit, one hope. Scarcely was the deficit 
known in America, which appeared a year ago in the receipts of this. 
Society, when a subscription was opened, and' in a few days the sum^ 
was raised which we have mentioned above." 

A Mihister in England declared (said Mr. Scholl) that in his parish, 
at least 60 persons had been converted,^ who derived their first reli- 
gious impressions from the reading of Tracts. A vicious young man, 
who, with a company of wicked beings like himself, had entered into 
a church in London for the purpose of stealing, was so struck with 
this single passage of the law which was posted on the wall, " Thou 
ishaU 7iot stealf*^ that he immediately lefl his vagabond companions^ 
and changed his life, and is- now one of the most zealous Tract distri-* 
butors in London. 

The meeting was closed with prayer by Rev. Mr. Monod, Jun.,. 
having been opened with the same solemnity by. his father. As th& 
assembly retired, a collection was taken up,, and at the same time- 
there was an abundant distribution of Tracts. 



CONVERSION OF A PROFANE COLOURED MAN AND Hlg^ 
WIFE, IN THE CITY OF NEW-YORK, 

% means of Tracts and perwnal Convertation^ 
[CiMnuanicfttfld by a pioos Lady.] 

We are well acquainted with the Lady by whom the foUowiutg ^cta- 
i^ate Been modestly communicated, " to encourage the hearts of others^ 



i^ l7d£FULIY£S» OF TtULCI^s [Oct> 

wbp are prayerfiiUy sending forth these silent MJasionaries/^ Such 
conversations and efforts with immortal beings around her are no rark 
occurrence ; and were her example imitated by all the disciples oP 
Christ, we have no doubt the number of conversions by means of 
Tracts would be a hundred fold increased.. 

In December, 1827, a colbured woman called on me, to ask some 
advice in her temporal concerns, which I gave, and then made the 
inquiry., how stood the account between Grod and her sotU 7 Her adh 
swer proved that she was in an unconverted, careless state ; and she 
was exhorted to *' repent and believe in the Lord Jesus Christ." Itk 
a short time she came again — the same strain of conversation was 
resumed — ^the same hardened state of mind was apparent. I endea-> 
voured to alarm her, by showing the awful condition of a soul out of 
Christ. She wept. I asked, '' Will you not promise, that from this 
time you will seriously consider this subject, and pray to God for a 
change of heart and an interest in Christ ?*' She promised — ^but, as 
r then feared, and as she afterwards acknowledged, only to put a 
stop to the conversation. " The omnipresence of God," I added, 
'^ will be a constant witness whether you keep your promise or not.^ 
She went her way ; and in her walk home, ruminating upon what had 
passed, laboured to quiet her mind and ^ti clear of her responsibi- 
lity. " Why, I never have prayed," she said to herself, " and don't-^ 
know how ; and therefore i cannot pray. 

Some Tracts had been given her, which, on entering her dwelling, 
she laid on her table.. One of them, " The Swearer^s Prayer" her 
husband, an unconverted, profane man, took up and read. He was 
instantly convicted of sin; From that time he was never heard to 
swear; but became serious, and a constant attendant on religiou5 
meetings. About three weeks afterwards, the wife, who had nevev 
been easy in her mind since her promise, being alone one evening, 
felt as if she could bear the struggles of her heart no longer, and thai 
she must try to pray. She then had recourse to the Tracts and read 
them ; but her distress only increased. She often came to the indi- 
vidual who gave her the Tracts, to tell her trouble, and request 
prayer in her behalf. 

The man and wife continued in much anguish of soul for about four 
months. Unable to help one another, the man would sometimes go 
out of the city, where he could, unobserved, give full vent to his 
cries and tears. The Lord had compassion on them ; and, within 
one week of each other, they both received the witness of the Spiril 
that they were born again. They have since made a profession o^ 
religion in the Methodist Church. 

The same Lady who communicated the above, mentions, that a 
man, to whom she had presented the ^* Life of Colonel Gardiner ^l 
was, on reading it, melted to tears, and exclaimed — " That is a 
change of heart I have never experienced." — Another man^ to whom, 
she presented a Tract, returned*, conversed on the state of his soul^ 
and wept, saying, ''be fidt that it was high time- to seek jn earnest 
for salvation."— A Jewess, to whom she gaye a Tract, and who has 
seemed anxious for her sphritual static, has oHen^called to ''unburden. 



Ur^fi.} BLSSsmcr 017 TAB ** EISE AITD PftOGa£5S/^ 1^ 



« 



Iter mind to her," appears unhappy, and has receiyed a Testamenf^ 
j^romising to read it with prayer for the Divine blessing. 

CONVERSIOI^S BY THE TRACT « ON REPENTANCE/' 

» 
];Coinmu]iicated at a Conference of Churches in Conneeticut, by a Delegate.] 

Id a town not far from New Haven, Conn, on Good Friday, in 
April last, a pious father, while passing through the street, observed 
a paper partly covered with snow, which he found to be Tract 
No. 183, On Repentance. He carried it home, and read it to his 
family. On the next morning, his daughter read it, retired to her 
room, and formed a solemn resolution not to part with it, till she had 
found that repentance which it reeommended. Her anxiety and 
distress increased to such a degree, that her friends and neighbours 
were alarmed, and greatly solemnized by such striking evidence of 
the powerful operations of the Spirit of God on her Heart. It was not 
long, before the Lord Jesus, as is believed, appeared for her, and 
spake peace to her soul. — Her brother and another young man were 
deeply affected with the scene ; were convicted of their sins ; brought 
to cry to God for mercy ; and soon, as is hoped, to surrender them- 
-selves also to Christ. 

At the time this narrative was related, two others of the friends- 
and acquaintance of the young Lady were earnestly inquiring '^ whiat. 
itiey must do to be saved.'' 

:blessing on the <<rise and progress.?' 

[Communicated by an Episcopal Clergyman.] 
We are gratified to record an instance of conversion by means of 
this excellent work„ which has recently been stereotyped and perpe>- 
ijiated by ^e American Tract Society. We believe the day of judge- 
ment will show it to be but one instance out of' a great multitude, in 
which this publication has been blessed in bringing souls to repent? 
ance. 

In a country parish in Maryland, lived a gay, and wealthy, and 
fashionable young woman. She had been regardless of her soul, 
and had thought nothing of the concerns of eterni^. — ^A poor beggar 
came to her father's door to ask assistance. The young lady met htm. 
aft the door. The old man asked, in return for her kindness, if she 
had any knowledge of Grod or care for htr soul. She was obliged to 
reply in ^e negative. He took from his pocket a torn and dirty 
remnant of a book, which he begged her to read. She received u 
with A degree of shame, and read it carefully at, her leisure. That 
book was sanctified to her conversion ; and she has been for several 
years a pious and exemplary member of the Churdi. The old beg- 
gar was made thus the instrument of her salvation ; and the book he 
gave her was JDoddridge*s Bite and frogreu ofSsligion in the SoUl. 

CONVERSION BY THE <»DAT OF JUDGJVENT." 

A Clergyman in New-Toik city says, that a young Lady, who was; 
examined for admission into the Church, and who gave satisfactory 
evidence ^ having been truly converted to God, ib i^Iatiiig her nUA, 



1S& AUEBtCJJg TRACT SOCIETY* [Qct 

ffOUB ezpefience, ascribed Iter first senons imprenions to tte reading 
of the Tract entitled " The Day of Judgment," (No. 32,) as tbe means 
which, she trusted, God had blessed to the saving of her sool. 

JkMSBJOJUa THJLOT BOOZBT'S'. 

At the stated meeting of the Executive Committee, September 15, 
the General Agent reported as follows : 

" Amount of nies dnrtoi; tbe month endm§^ this day, . • . . $3,741 88 

** Receipts during tbe same period, ^ , 3,003 19 

-*• Amount of bills presented on the 1 3th Snst. by the printer, and folder, 

and binder, .... 1,534 22 

f* Cash then in tbe treasury, (ezdusiTe of #351 , due this day for paper,) 345 73 

'<*D^ciency of treoaory to meet bills dae,^ $],1T8 4d 

** Amount of obligations for paper, which must be paid within faie 

nontks f 16,111 61 

It appears by the above, compared with previous reports of the 
General Agent, that the Society is now under greater pecuniary obli- 
gations than at any previout time ; while, if it be considered that the 
fall sales are but j.ust commencing — ^that Agents are already engaged 
to operate extensively at the West — and that three Tracts are now 
entirely wanting in the General Depository— it will be apparent, that 
the amount of the Society^s operations cannot be reasonably curtailed. 

Indeed, we are sure it is the united voice of the Evangelical com- 
munity, that, while our country is so destitute of the privileges of the 
Crospel, and while living Ministers to supply the moral wastes cannot 
be obtained, the operations of this Society muri &e, not cwrtailed, but 
greatly extended. Such, we have no doubt, are the designs of Provi- 
dence—and any other prospect, especially whee the wants of 6,000,000 
beyond the mountains are considered, could not but give pain, it would 
seem, io every pious heart. 

Tico things only are requisite, on the part of the Christian commu^ 
nity ; and, with the continued smiles of {Evidence, this work shall go 
on, and our whole country be supplied unih Traets-^hut each of them re* 
quires every Christian to come promptly forward to the discharge of duty : 

1. Every Christian must contribute according to his ability. Ne 
mere wish for the Society's success, nor mere sympathy with its wants, 
will enable it to meet such obligations as, it appears above, now rest up- 
on it. There must be prompt, and liberal, and extensive contributions. 

2. Every Christian must do what is in his power to render every 
Auxiliaiy Tract Society active ; to extend the circulation of Tracts, 
wherever his influence can reach; and especially to supply all the 
destitute to whom he can gain access. There is not one Christian in 
the countiy, who has access to his fellow-beings, who is no^ bound tP- 
be'an active distributor of Tracts. 

We wish every individual, who hopes he loves the cause of Christ, 
to consider whether he has such evidence of hia own good estate as 
he could desire, if he does not actually, both contribute of his earthly 
substance, and put forth his active exertions, in such a cause as this. 

EXERTIONS OF A MOUS FEMALE.— Gto thou and do likewise^. 

A female in the Western District of New-York, whose unceasing 
fidelity to the cause we have long observed, thus writes : 

Perceiving in the published statements, the exhausted state of the 
funds of the American Tract Society, 1 enclose $20, from the Ladies 
here, to constitute tbeir Pastor a Life Member, and $6, a donfttion 



18£8.} 1^51tSTLVAl7IA BBAliCH. 1^9 

fit>m our Female Auxilioiy. It is now four years since our little 
Auxiliny was commenced on a small scale, since which I have been 
instrumental in forming tix other Societies in neighbouring towns.. 
I have receired, sold and distributed, about 150,000 pages of Tracts ; 
hare paid for ell I hare received, and sent about ^30, at different 
times, as donations to. aid the Parent Society. I have bad no help in 
this labour, except that my husband has sometimes written for me, 
and assisted in making out the accounts, (his business not permitting 
him to do more.) I do not wish my poor name repeated, but I wish 
to provoka others to go6d works ; fbr if a feeble woman, who has 
done the labour of her family a great proportion of the time, could do 
so much, what can a healthy woman, who has leisure, accomplish ?•— 
I have not heard of any conversion by means of the Tracts I have 
distributed ; but I do not believe 150,000 pages of such precious 
truths, accompanied in many instances with prayer, will return void^ 
No; it will accomplish the end whereto it has been sent, and eternity,, 
if not time, will unfold the blessed result. 



No friend of Tracts will soon forget, that the Committee of this 
Branch, in April last, unanimously 

'' Rbsolted— *jn^, with relianee on the Divine otd, we will have 
formed in e^try inherited towiuMp, and in every congregation that 
will grant pemUssionf in the States of Pennsylvania and Delaware, 
a Tract Society, fremous to the first of January y 1830.'' 

We cheerfuUy mtroduce this resolution again into our pages, because: 
we feel that it must commend itself to every friend of Tracts ; nor dQ 
we see why the Christians of our country are not bound to carry the 
spirit of this resolution uito effect, throughout the whole United States. 
—We rejoice in the example which has been set by this spirited Branch ; 
and also to see that they are adopting vigorous measures for the entire 
flilfilment of their purpose. The Executive Committee have just 
issued a circular, calling forth the efforts of Evangelical Christians — • 
Agents are already active in many places — the Students of the Theo- 
logical Seminary at Gettysburg have resolved to carry the resolution 
into execution in Adams County — some AuxUiaries have resolved to 
double their contributions, and others greatly to increase their efforts. 

We feel that the Parent Institution, and every Branch and Auxiliaiy 
throughout the land, should draw a motive to renewed zeal i^om the 
eiample of this Branch. 

aBBSCAXr CHMXSTUBLV AJJUULHJLO. 

The Branch Tract Society at Philadelphia have just published a 
German Almanac, in the common quarto sixe, on fine paper, and con> 
tabuing much matter and anecdote, instructive and intefesting to every 
class of the German population. 

It is very desirable that this work should meet with an eztensiva 
patronage, that the Society may be induced to issue it in future years. 

Orders should be addressed to the Pennsylvania Branch Dract So*- 
ciety, comer of Fourth and Arch-streets, Phuaddphia, 

oBMiamait aucakao fob im9. 

The friends of the Society are requested to observe the notice in 
|he Christian Almanac on page 2 of the cover. It Is prepared with 
much care, and adapted to almoii erery part of (he United States^ 






RE0EIPT3. 



•RECIXFTS 



lOct' 



INTO THE TBEASUltY OF TBE AMBRICAN TBACT SOCIETY, 
Durimg tk» month tnditf StftmAer td^ 18S& 



FROM AUXILIARY TRAOT SOCIETIES 

VER.— Fawlet, Rev. Fayette Shepherd, Sec. 

M ASS.— ToUand, Pern. Ifirs. Betiey Twitdag, See 

Ware, (E. Par.) Rev Puraont Cookm, Tr. 

Williamstown South, Galeb Brown, Sec. _ 

R. ISL.— Pawcatttck in Westerly, Geo. P. Maxson, Sec. 

Providence, S. S. Wardwell, Sec. . 

CONN.— Bosrah, Miw PhUura Hiiathigtosi» Tr. 

Botrahville, Uavilah Mowiy, Sec . 

Colchester, Ool. Guv Bigelow, Tr. . 

Kewent in Lisbon, F. Tracy, (Jewett dty P. O.) Ag. 

New Haven, A. Townsend, Jun. Tr. 

do. Fern. Mrs. Elixa WHIard, Xr. . 

do. Theol. Sem. Z. Mead, Sec 
2f orwich Falls, Wm. G. GHman, Sec 

do. Fern. Mrs. Isaac FranelSi Sec 

Salem, Fern. Sally Hyde, Aff. 
Salbbury, Fem. Julia A. Doc^e, Ag, 
Sharon, Charles F. Sedgwick, Sec . 
Watertown, Bela Hotdikiss, Tr. . 
N. YORK.— Bedford, Westchester Oo. Fen. Mrs. S. Nichols, Tr 
Canaan Four Ooraers, Fem. Mrs. E. C. Warner, Sec 
Carmel, Red Mills, Fem. Mrs. Susan Jolmston, Sec 
Fort Govlngtos, Rev. John A. Savage, Sec 
Hunteft Graene Go. EL J. Stimpsoa, Sec . 
Islip and Huntington, L. L. H. Brewster, Sec 
La Fayette, Fem. M. W. CblMs, Sec 
I^ons, Erastiis Dean,Tr. 

New Roehelle^ Fem. Miss Sophia Brewster, Sec . 
New-Yorl( City Tract Society, Alfred Udwaids, Tr. 

do. Vandewater-su-eet Church, Oharles Harris, Tr. 

Oweero, Tioga Co. (E. Jury Dist) Ool. Oharles B. Pixley, Tr. 
Phiihpstown* Fern. Ann E. Horton, Sec . 
Rhioebeck, Fem. Mrs. C. Davidson, Sec . 
Rochester, Levi A. Ward, Tr. . . , 

Scotchtown, Samuel W. Brown, Tr. , 

Springfield, Fem. Mrs. Lsstitia H. How^ Sec 
Utica, Geo. 8. Wilson, Sec, .... 
N. JER.— Dutch Neck, Rev. D. DerwcU, Ag. 
BarliDgen, Fem. Mary Skillman, Tr. 
Littleton, Silas B Condict, Tr. . . . 

Lower Freehold, Or. James English, See, . 
Morristown, Fem. Mrs. Lewis Hills, Tr. . « 

Newark, Fem. Miss Maria L. Dey, Sec. . 
Newton, Wbitfield S. Johnson, Tr. . 
PENN.— Erie, Fem. Emily Wight, Sec. . 
Philadelphia Branch, N. Murray, Qen. Ag. 
Wattsburg, Erie Co. James Nelson, Esq. Bee. 
MD.— Baltimore Branch, Samuel Young, Sec 
VIR.— Pisgah) (Otter Bridge P. 0.) iohn Leftwick, Tr. 
S<uTgwonvnle,Fen.MnkH. E. Ctary.Tr. . 
N. CAR — ^Emannel's Ch. of Lincolnton, D. Reinbardt, P. VL Sec 
KEN.— Danville, Michael G. Youce, Ag. 
Louisville, William Mix, Sec 
OHIO.— Cincinnati, Henry B. Funk, Tr. 
Genoa, Del Go. E. Copeland, Sec. . 
2anesvn)e and Putnam, MarV Billings, Sec 
MtOH. TER— Ann Arbour, Fem. Harriet G. Mills, Sec 



F«rTr, 

10 00 

11 85 
2^ 00 

750 

300 

152 00 

14 09 

13 50 
327 

10 22 

14 00 

22fi0 
750 
690 
262 
7 50 

18 61 
750 

590 

15 00 
350 

10 00 

15 00 

tsoo 

8000 

550 

700 

525 

24 00 

80 00 

92 85 

750 

600 

96 

246 

90 25 

20 00 

800 

16 50 
30 00 
15 00 

100 00 

750 

750 

725 

43 50 

100 00 

aooQ 

750 

4195 

600 



Hen. 

15 00 
S75 

2.60. 
60 

4 70 

4 50 

3 0» 

5 00 
7 78 
750 
2£0 
2 47 

250 

6 21 
250 
lOQ 



350 

8 81 

20 00 

5 00 



1 75 



50 

500 

82 

6 7S 
74 55 
12 OO 

5 90 



860 
S50 



350 

13 75 

600 



Societies not Auxiliary , for Tracts. 
N. CAR<— Robeson Co. Fern. Be- 

nevolent Society, Ann Brown, 

Sec 15 00 

Unity Cong. Lincoln Co. Fem. Mrs. 

Mary Burton, Tr. . .5 00 

Tracts sold at Qen. Depositoiy te 

individuals, . . . . S46 56 



Direetors/or Life 

CONN.— Litchfield, Hon. Benjamin 
Tallmadge, . . 100 00 

New Haven, E.F. Backus, . .50 00 

N.YORK.^Blooniinggrove,Heze- > 

kiah Howell, hi part of 950, . . 10 00 

N. York City, Rev. Thomas E. Ter^ 
milye, by his Cb. and Cod|[. . . 50 OQ 



t£CEIPTS. 



Members for Life. 

'V£R.~Orwell, Rev. SberRMm Kd- 

locvr, bj Fern. Auz. Tract Soe. . 20 00 
St. AlbanV Bcv. Sylvester Nash, by 

Fein.Aux.Tr. Soc.(ln part offaO) 15 00 
do. Rev. Wortbinirtan Snaltb, by 

Fein.Aux.Tr.Soe.(inpartof $20) 15 00 
MASS.— PbUUpstown, Rev. Joseph 

Chickering, ha part of f30) . 10 00 

CONN^BiMgeportjAUetlaBaT, SO 00 

do. ElUa Elmitead, . . SO 00 

do. Mary T. Ckmdit, by Mrs. Mary 

Hamlin, SO 00 

do. Catharine M. Vail, for Tracts 

for srratQitous di8tributkm» . SO 00 
do. Cath.M. Basset, (hi part of ISO) 5 00 
do. Mary Cornelius. do. . 10 00 
do. t7atharine O. Fish, do. . 5 00 
. do. l8abX}.Plsh,byMrs.E.F. do. . 6 00 
tlo. Emetine Hawley, do. . 5 00 
do. Ellen Porter, do . 5 00 

Green's Farms, Edward 8. Hyde, 

by bis father, BIr. Jos. Hyde, . 90 00 

ClreenwifCh, Rev. Isaac Lewis, D. D. 90 00 

Kew Haven, Mrs.CharlesAtwater, 20 00 

do. Elisba HuU, . . . . 20 00 

do. Dyer White, . 90 00 

do. Jas.Brewster,(inpartof|SO) 5 00 

do. M. A. Durand, do. . 5 00 

do. Claudius Herrlck, do. . 5 00 

do. Dr. Eli Ives, do. . 5 00 

do. Titus Street, do. . 5 00 

. do. Awos Townsend, do. . 10 00 

do. Mrs.HenriettaP.Whitney,do. 10 00 

Norfolk, Joseph Bartlett, Esq. . 20 00 

Korwalk, Miss Polly Benedict, (in 

part of iSO) . . . 10 00 

Aharon, WiUiam M.Smitb, . . 20 00 
Wilton,W.Marvu),byWJIarvin,e8q.90 00 
do. Jawley Olmsted, . . SO 00 

N. YORK.— Albany, Rev. Henry R. 

Weed, by Mr. James Boyd, . 35 00 
^dford, B«v. Jacob Green, tlO by 



181 



Fern. Anx. Tract Soc and $10 tqr 

a few individuals of his Church, 90 OOf 94 ; Mrs. Molly Northrop, $1, 
BIoomkuMove, WiUiam Stronr, ""-^ — *"" ' — ' - 

(infulloftaO) . . .15 00 

.Brooklyn, Miss Catharine M. Ans- 

tfal^ f90; Miss Emily A. Austin, 

$20 ; Miss Sarah EvaUna Austin, 

$30 ; Daniel Austin, |9&-by their 

mother, Mrs. Sarah E. Austin, . 80 00 
do. Mrs. Sarah E. Austin, . . 20 00 
do. N. Denton, . . . 90 €0 

FishkUl lAndinjT, Mrs. touba C. 

Heyer, by Ladies of R^fD.Ch. .90 00 
Hunter, Rev. Ualvin Dur(y, by a 

member of his Church, . . 20 00 
Islip, L. I., Henry Brewster, . . 20 00 
Jamesville, Rev.Seth S. Porter, by 

Ladles, (in part of $90; 5 00 

Jay, Rev.Hen.Slater, byXad. do. 11 00 
Livonia, Llvtaigston Co. MhN Maria 

Beecher, 90 00 

Mount Morris, Reuben Sleeper, Cia 

— 10 oof 

20 00 
Ann Eliza 
Jervis,!^ her brother, J.B.Jervis, 80 00 
WindbaiB,GreeneCo. Foster Morss, 90 00 
K. CAR^MoeksviUe, Rowaa Co. 
Rev. Wm. C. HaB, by Ladies of 
Unity iiulJo|i|ia Gmis. • • 90 00 



jDouni morns, veuoen an 

part of ISO). 
Newbargh, Levi Dodce, 
Rome, Oneida Co. Mus i 



Annual Members, 

N. TORK^N. York Cily,Wm.W. 

Jbckton, 2 00 

yUL— Eastville, Wm. Q. Smith, « 9 00 

Other Donations* 

N. HAMP.->Pelharo, Rev.' John H. 

Church, . . . . . 5 00 
St. AJbenVr, a Friend, . . . 8 <X> 
MASS.-^Ando¥er, Mrs. fi. Porter, 

for Tracts beyond Alleghany, . 00 
Boston, A. Jewell, . . . . 1 00 
CONN.— Brooklyn, a Friend, . 5 00 
Cornwall, Gustavtts Rouse, fl 59; 

Mrs.Chsn'lotteR.Rouse,^!. . 2 5Q 
Coventry, Mrs. Medad Loomi9, 50 

New Haven, Abraham Bradley, $5 ; 

Leonard Bradley, $1, . 6 00 
do. Ellhu Sanford, |l ; I. Towns- 
end, $1, 3 00 

do. Young Men^s Benevolent Assoc . 

E.8.M&or,Tr.forTr.bey.Alleg. 10 00 
Norwich, female Friend, . . 1 00 
Salisbury, a Lady, . . . . I 00 
Warren, J. A. Turner, 50 cts ; L. 

Bronsoo, 19 cts €2 

WilfaM, Levi Scrivner, . . 2 00 

N. YORK— Albany, U. B. Water- 

vliete, 4 00 

Brooklyn, Miss E. Nitchie, . .15 00 
Ctfaiton, Ladle*, . . . . 2 16 
Islip, two Friends, .... 75 
Litue Falls, a few imiividuals, . 12 00 
Ncwborgh, a Lady, • . . . 10 00 
New-York City, a Friend, |9 50*, 
' do. $1 ; do. ^ ; fern. Friend, 1 1 , 6 50 
do. J4i. 50 cts. ; l).Bi Moore, 76 cts. 1 96 

do. M. W. 25 00 

do. Mr. Wbitcomb, profit on Chris- 
tian Almanac, . 1 00 
OwegOtTiogaCo. collected at month- 
ly Concert, 25 00 



Rochester, " Monroe,^ . . . 5 00 
South Salem, Mrs. Molly Gilbert, 

•4 ; Mrs. Molly Northrop, $1, . 5 00 

Springfield, a marriage fee, . . 1 00 

Troy, a Friend, . . . 1 68 

N. JER— Baskenridge, W. M. L. 90 00 
Middieburg, a Subscriber to the 

New-York Observer, . . 7 00 

Morristown, 3 Ladies, . . . 16 00 

Rabway, Job Squier, , . 5 00 
PENN— Troy, Alonxo Baldwin, of 

wliich $1 is for Tracte for Sand w. 

Islands, and $1 for Tracts for £. 

Indies, 3 00 

VIR.— Lexington, John D. Pazton, 10 00 

Morgan town, Eugenius M. Wilson, 5 00 

N. CAR^— A Femah>, . 6 50 
S. CAR.— Chariestoii, Rev. John 

Dickson, 5 oq 

OHIO.— Tallmadge, Ch. and Cong. 9 00 

Frieiid at the West, . . . 5 00 



The above list contains donations— 
For Tracts beyond the Alleghany, $13 00 
For gratuitoas distribaika, . . 90 00 
For Sandwich Islands, . 1 OO 

For East IncBes, . , .100 



Whole amH of Danat. $1,00 90 
Rec for TraeU teld, 1,589 99 



13,00316 



OF THB 

AMERICAN TRACt SOCIETY. 

^o» 218. The Life of Rev. Jobk Bveyas, author of the Pil.- 
Gam's pROOBEBs. — pp. 12. This is a brief and well prepared memoir 
of this interesting man, whose honour it was, amidst persecution and 
reproaches, to suffer much, and do much for the cause of the Redeemer. 
!He was, in early life, exceedingly depraved; his subsequent spiritual 
conflicts were most severe ; and the triumphs of grace in his heart, at 
length, most conspicuous. He lay twelve years in prison, where he 
wrote the ** Pilgrim's Progress," doubtless one of the most useful of all 
human publications. For many years he was a faithful preacher of 
^the Grospel; and he t>ublished, in all, on various subjects, about 60 
Treatises. 

No. 219. John Robins, the Sailor.— pp. 8. This is an interest- 
ing narrative, illdstrating the power and permanency of early impres- 
sions, made on the mind in Sabbath Schools, in restraining from ein 
and governing the conduct in riper years, and, under the blessing of 
the Holy Spirit, guiding the soul to Christ. 

No. 220. The Bible the Best of BooKs.~>pp. 4. *This is a ebon 
and striking appeal in behalf of the Bible, bringing home to th^ heart 
the preciousness of the truths it reveals, and the power of the internal 
evidence that it is from God. It is well calculated to defend the mind 
irom the cavils and misrepresentations of Infidelity. 

" A CHEERFUL GIVER." 

An eminent Lawyer, to whom, on account of his pressing engsLee- 
tnents, we wrote with much hesitation for a list of Courts for tne 
Christian Almanac for 1829, replied as follows : 

I send you the list of Courts, with my annual contribution to the 
Tract Society, ami wish I could do more. The Ladies have been 
forming here an Auxiliary Tract Society, t^iat I hope will do much 
for you and the blessed cause amongst us. As they made me their 
lawyer to draw their constitution, I took the liberty of inserting u 
clause, that the solicitors should also be Tract distribviorsj and report 
monthly. The Ladies have entered into this interesting business witii 
great zeal ; and I pray to the Great Head of the Church to bless their 
means to the multitudes in our town who are now fast pressing on io 
the retributions of a dread eternity. To look over the desolations of 
«in in our wretched world. My Dear Brother) is overwhelming. 
ma^r we be faithful to our Master, his cause, and the souls of- oar "im- 
penitent fellow-men. 

A GRATEFUL DAUGHTER. 

Enclosed, writes an anonymous individual, are $12, to aid the.Ame- 
rican Tract Society in distributing Tracts in the destitute parts Of our 
country. It is but a mite ; but it is given with a cheerful heart, and 
fervent prayer that He, whose eye is over all, will direct its disposal, 
and accompany it with his blessing.— This sum is part of a yearly gift 
of a kind parent to a daughter, who in this way wislies to express her 
gratitude to the Author oTall our blessings. 

AVAILING SYMPATHY. 

I have thought ogatn, writes one, of the ** Question now "before the 
American Tract Society," published in the last Magazine. I am-^orr^ 
twtniy-fivt dollars; and en^ose the money. If 600 friends of the 
Society would do the ^ame, it would be relieved ftom its present em- 
barrassments. 



THE AMERICAN 

3L.ni. HOTSMBim, 1828. NO. 



The SBlrymu] tirin^of ■ letUi Dn 



orFiosKS or svnit'S' ajtoliaxt 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETF. 

You have pTobahlj been apprised, through the Ameiicui Tract 
Magaime and olhcrwiie, of the argent claimi A>t apecial eflbrti boit 
deTolTiDg on ihii InatilutioD. Ever; week briogi new eridenee of 
the Diiine bleuing OD the Sodety'g publicatknu, and neir incitenienU 
to efibn, eapeciallj for the eiteniiTe deithute portitmt of the country. 
In eudeaTOuring' to AiIAl the tiuit repoied in them, the Committee of 
the Sodc^ liiTe been compelled to Infolve thetnielre* nndw large 

Vol. lil. ]2 [VTboui Ho. 3iS. 



134 TO THE OFFICERS OF EVERT AUXIWART [NoT* 

pecuniary obligations, which have now swollen to the amount of about 
f 16,003, chiefly for paper on which the Tract* are printed, which 
must be met within the period of five or six months, exclusive of all 
other expenses of the Society. The Treasury is now entirely empty ; 
and the Society having no permanent ftind whatever, liberal pecuni- 
ary aid will be essential to its continued success. For this the Com- 
mittee look to various sources, but their chief dependaneCj for funds, 
as well as for the instrumentality by which the publications are cir- 
culated, is on the Society's Auxiliaries: and the responsibility of ren- 
dering each of them, under the blessing of God, perseveringly active, 
rests mainly on its Officers, especially its Treasurer, Secretary, and 

Solicitors. 

The following have occurred to us as among the causes which may 
reiider an Auxiliary inefficient; and we invite to them the conscien- 
tious attention and regard of every Officer of such an Institution, into 
whose hands this article may fall: 

1. No Officer of an Auxiliary should be inactive because tlu re- 
sponsibility of conducting its concerns is shared by himself in connexion 
7cith others. There is a peculiar sacredness in the obligations of 
Christian responsibility : they cannot be transferred to others, or in 
any way evaded. Our Saviour, when the work of redemption was to 
be performed, referred it not to others, but " once offered up himself; 
and he expects every one of his followers to stand in his lot, and fulfil 
the obligations devolving on him. By being associated with others, 
we often become in a high degree responsible, not only for our own 
faithfulness, but theirs also ; and if the Auxiliary with which any 
reader of these lines is connected is now languishing, shall he not feel 
under sacred obligations immediately to rouse himself, and, as far as 
possible, those around him, to effort; th^t,. liy the blessing q{ God on 
faithful and persevering exertions, the important objects for which 
the Auxiliary was formed may be secured. 

2. Let no one consider the work of promoting the circulation of 
Tracts unimportant and unworthy of his exertions. The Cross itself 
is a stumbling-block and foolishness to many ; but, to the eye of Chris- 
tian faith, nothing which pertains to the salvation of the soul is unim- 
portant. The proudest spirits have been bowed in sweet subjection 
to Christ, through his blessing on the simplest portions of his truth ; 
and Religious Tracts have been honoured by God himself as an emi- 
nent means of salvation to multitudes. These publications must be 
diffused throughout our whole population ; and the day of judgment 
will show that the work was gj-eatj in its consequences for eternity. 

3. Let the Officers of no Auxiliary be discouraged, if no palpable 
conversions have yet resulted from their efforts. It cannot.be expected 
that the effecta of Tracts will be fully known in this mnorld; and what 






1BS8.J OT TB£ AUfiRIOAN TRACV SOCIETY* 195 

ever means men majr use, God will show them, that the conyersion of 
the heart is his own pecnliar worlc. Evidences enough of the Divine 
blessing on Tracts have been broaght to light, to afford the most ample 
encouragement : our duty is still to use the means, with prayer for 
the attending influences of the Holy Spirit, and reliance on Grod to 
employ them for the promotion of his own glory. • 

4. The variety of other benevolent objects demanding attention should 
not be suffered to distract the efforts of an Auxiliary. All the benevor 
lent Institutions of the age must be sustained. They are all united in 
one labour of love ; and the Tract cause will be found a handmaid to 
all the rest. 

6. The failure of an annual meetir^f or of the regular election of 
Officers, should not be suffered to hinder the success of an Auxiliary. 
It should be understood, in all cases, that the Officers retain their sta- 
tions till a new election takes place. All our benevolent Institutions 
are conducted entirely on the principle of Christian confidence ; and 
no want of formality in unessential matters should be suffered to in- 
terfere with the utmost activity of any branch or department of all 
their operations. 

6. Each individual should examine himself, lest the want of active 
and living piety in his own heart should render him inefficient. The 
promotion of the Tract cause, as of all the other departments of Chris- 
tian benevolence. Is a worK oTjtrttW. trpcmlns to the glory of God, 
and the eternal welfare of the souls of men. It calls oflon for ardu- 
ous service and persevering sacrifices and self-denial, without the 
prospect of earthly reward ; and when piety languishes in the heart, 
who can be expected to'continue faithful to the trust ? 

7. No Auxiliary should cease its efforts, till every destitute family 
to whom it has access is supplied with Tracts^ and the Parent Society 
has been furnished with means for supplying the whole field of useful- 
ness which is open before it. Each of these points is of vital impor- 
tance. Almost every Auxiliary has around it many families, who do 
not visit the house of God, and who absent themselves from almost 
all the means of grace, and many of whom are actually perishing for 
lack of knowledge, it may be, almost under the very doors of the 
sanctuary ; and if the Auxiliary located in their vicinity will not do 
so much as to supply them with Tracts^ who shall ever convey to them 
the messages of salvation ? The wants of the Parent Society are also, 
and will doubtless long continue to be, great and urgent. Just so large 
a portion of the funds of each Auxiliary as can be afforded, even if it 
be the whole, should be, from year to year, committed to the Parent 
Society as a donation. 

The Committee of the Parent Institution regard the Officers of each 
Auxiliary na fellow-labourers in the cause of the Redeemer; and while 



136 FOREIGN CORRESPONDENCE. [NoT. 

they feel bound themselves to press forward in the work, would gladly 
animate the efforts of others, that, by their united and perseyering 
exertions, this cause may, under the blessing of God, be rendered 
eminently successful. 



ro&Bxcm coRRSsvoxmssrca. 

From the Seeretariet of the Religious Tract Society for (Hatgow and 
the West of Scotland, dated July 12, 1828. 

It is with very sincere pleasure that we have now to acknowledge, 
in name, and by appointment of the Committee of the " Religious 
Tract Society for Glasgow and the West of Scotland," your much 
esteemed communication of the 29th of March, accompanied with 
the valuable donation of a full bound set of your publications, and an- 
other unbound, for the use of the members of our Committee. Most 
cordially do we thank you for this substantial proof of your kind re- 
membrance, and we accept it as a token of your Christian regard. 
We cau make but a small return in kind ; but such as it is we now 
send yOu, accompanied with a few copies of our last Annual Report. 
In the volume of our Tracts, you will find several that are extracts, or 
reprints from the publications of other Societies : the greater propor- 
tion of them are, however, original ; and perhaps some of them, on 
review, may be honoured with a place in your catalogue, and reprinted 
for transatlantic circulation. 

We have perused with much pleasure many of your Magazines, 
Tracts, and Repons. We have been delighted, and we hope, in some 
measure recited and animated, by the examples of Christian zeal 
and liberality manifested amongst you ; and it is our desire to follow 
in the same path, though it be at a humble distance. 

We have at present preparing for publication, a brief Memoir of 
Mrs. Paterson, of Petersburg h, extracted from her Life by Mr. Swan ; 
and a brief Sketch of the Life of your amiable and excellent country- 
woman, Mrs. Huntingdon, partly extracted from her Memoirs, and 
partly re^written. We have just published a Discourse of Dr. Ward- 
law's condensed, entitled, ''What is a Christian 1" and an abridgment 
of two Discourseg, bj Dr. Dwigbt, on the Resurrection of Christ, with 
the view of meeting some of the cavils which are found to be urged 
against Revelation amongst the lower classes. We have also lately 
repul)lished Extracts from Dr. Chalmers's Evidences, with the same 
view. - ♦ 

Since our last annual meeting in April, we have printed upwards of 
33,000 Tracts ourselves, besides what we have ordered from London 
and elsewhere. Our circulation is also increasing, particularly amongst 
seamen, and we trust that the Lord will yet command a blessing, so 
that some of them may prove as messengers of salvation to those who 
'* do business on the great waters," and who see the wonders of God 
on the mighty deep. They are every where favourably received 
amongst them ; and as they are often favoured v^ith leisure hours for 
reading and reflection, the arrow of conviction may perhaps find its 
way to their heart. May ** the good Lord*' direct its course ! 

We are opening up also a correspondence with some parts of tho 
Highlands of Scotland, with the view of procuring some able Mint- 



18^.] I7BE1PULNESS OF TRACTS. 157 

ten to translate some of our best Ti'acts into Gaelic ; tliey are much 
wanted there— ^hey have few works of any kind in their own dialect 
— and the long winter evenings, which they spend in their secluded 
hamlets in relating legendary tales, or in listless indolence, when we 
can put mto their hands these blessed messengers of good tidings in 
their own language, the language which they love and cherish with 
affection and enthusiasm, will, we trust, be devoted to the far nobler 
purpose of reading and hearing what Qod has done for our guilty 
world, in sending his own Son as the Redeemer of lost mankind. 

Whilst we send you our affectionate and Christian remembrances, 
•may we also be allowed to use the language of exhortation and ex- 
citement?— Go on, then, in your course of benevolent exertion— 
never think you have done enough in this best of causes. May past 
success have only the effect of animating you to greater diligence and 
greater faithiiilness in discharging your important trust; and whilst 
you are thus scattering every where the good seed of the word, may 
the '' great Husbandman*' water with his blessing the seed which is 
sown in your own hearts also, and make you to abound more and more 
in every good word and work. 

Though separated from you by the wide rolling ocean, we feel 
joined in heart in the service of our common Lord— «ne tie of Chris- 
tian brotherhood unites us all — one object, we trust, we all pursue-— 
one Leader we follow, and one home we have in view. May we all 
join at length the general assembly of the redeemed in heaven, and 
have the joy of meeting there many who shall have been brought to 
wash their robes and make them white in the blood of the Lamb, 
through the perusal of the Tracts we are now ensaged in circulating 
amongst them .' With Christian regard, esteem, he. 



William Ferguson, 7 «j^^^,^ .^. 
William Wardlaw, ] «««^««"<J'- 



vsfiFV&svasss or traots. 

CONVERSION OF A DEAF AN0 DUMB YOUNG LADY IN 
ILLINOIS BY MEANS OF TRACTS. 

Miss Aliena Rice, the writer of the following letter, says a corre- 
spondent of the New- York Observer, was bom deaf and dumb. Her 
parents emigrated to this country a few years ago, leaving this child 
at the Hartford Asylum. About four years ago she also came to this 
country, in company with the late Rev. Salmon Giddings. After a 
residence of about two years, some Tracts fell into her hands, which 
awakened her to her lost condition as a sinner against God, and led 
her to a diligent search for religion— which she found. . 

The letter contains much peculiarity of expression-rwhich ia not 
surprising in one who never heard the sound of a human voice. At 
the time of her conversion, she was about eighteen years of age. 

EXTBACTS FROM HER I.ETTEB. TO HER FATHER^ 

StX'MHe Frainty lUinoit, Sept. 16, 1827. 
Mt DSA111.T BCLOTBD Fathzr— -1 b«ve nothing to communicale 
yeu but about the surpriaiag and happgr ehange I felt, such as I ba<l 



13& UfiitFULNEdd 0^ TRACTS. [NoT. 

not felt before. I am much indined to write to ^ou, because I lore 
you as mj kind and affectionate father. But, alas f I am very much 
afraid, because perhaps you will not listen condescendingly to my 
serious anxieties for your poor immortal soult which must absolutely 
be either happy in heaven or miserable in hell ! I will, with fear, 
tell you about my change. Alas I 1 beseech you to read the foUpw- 
ing lines, and also to feel concerned about your jnreciotu soul, for 
your Saviour's cause. I wish to tell you of your spiritual danger, as 
you are very old, but young no more. Your age yet Increases, and 
is fifty-two years. How patient and merciful God has been, and is 
now, to bear with you, while you live in an unconverted state. He 
now waits for you to come unto Christ before your death. I am in- 
wardly distressed, beyond expression, concerning your poor soul, 
and my parents' spiritual welfare. I daily beseech God to conde- 
icend to give you inclination to repent of your sins, and turn your 
face unto him for mercy. I plead to him, for your soul's sake, that 
God may spare you longer, that you may be converted, and be Christ's 
follower and friend. How happy you are, if you are a Christian ! It 
is true and truly so. 

I hope you will be surprised and awaked to hear what I tell you. 
I confess my bad behaviour towards- my mother, one day. After this 
day, in the morning, I suddenly received a packet of nine Religious 
Tracts and four letters. I read the Tracts, which struck my heart 
with confused sorrow and fear under God's suspending wrath, as I 
was ready to perish on the brink of eternal death ! I cannot express 
to jTou how I feel under his Holy Spirit, and I am much changed. 
Frequently in the nights I could not sleep but till late, and I was con- 
stantly awaking while others slept, because I was utterly guilty and 
very wicked, beyond a heathen's sins, and I am quite an unworthy 
sinner. Thus I felt sincere sorrow for my great sins, confessing to 
Christ them, beseeching him to give me Holy Spirit, and most willing 
to forsake sins and to follow him in the way of heayen. At length 1 
found his mercy out, and obtained peace through Christ, the blessed. 
Saviour's merits and blood. Oh ! I am very grateful to God for an- 
swering my poor prayers, and for giving me his Holy Spirit. I feel 
spiritual happiness, and sincere and willing desire to be Christ's con- 
stant friend, until I die. 

And tell me, ye parents, who are neglecting the spiritual nurture 
of your children, is there nothing appalling, nothing melting in the 
apprehension of their never-ending destruction 1 Do not your hearts 
recoil at the thought, that a son or daughter, dear to you as life ; one 
whom you have tenderly nursed; for whose interest you rise early, 
and resign many comforts, and encounter innumereble difficulties 
and dangers ; whose opening powers you often behold with delight^ 
and to whom you look forward as your support in old age ; that such 
a child should finally perish ; and perhaps, as it is dropping into the 
gulf of perdition, should fasten Its eyes upon the horrors of despair, 
and dharge its damnation to your neglect? I pray to you to read 
these despairing lines. Read the following dedarations, and tremble 
while you read them : — " The curse of the Lord is in the house of the 
wicked."' '* He win pour his fiiry upon the families which do not call 
on his name." I have copied these sentences from the Tracts, that 
you may know, and be stopped from increasing yoiar neglect. I 
meant, that you may not be cursed, but saved through Christ's sake» 



1828.] VSEFU&NES9 OF TBACT3. 1S9 

by repentance and faith in him. I am concerned about vour soul and 
theirs ; and cannot aroid telling you these religious saymgs, for your 
Spiritual welfare and your children's. Do pity them as ready perish' 
ing sinners, and stop them Irom the ways of more wickedness. 
I still remain your most idOfectionate daughter, 
Myfaiher, ifr. Riee. Aliena Rick. 



STRIKING INSTANCES OF CONVERSIONS BY 
MEANS OF TRACTS. 

[Communicated to the American Tract Society, Boston.] 

A respectable Clergyman, in whose congregation aTract Society waiT 
formed about one year ago, writes, " Tracts have contributed much 
to the moral and religious state of my people ; undoubtedly they were 
instrumental, among other means of grace, in promoting the truly 
pleasing and powerful revival of religion which we have witnessed 
the year past. A number, not less than four or five, who were sub- 
jects of that work of Divine grace, in telling what the Lord had done 
for their souls, made mention of the reading of Tracts as first arrest^ 
ing their attention ; among which were the ' Dmryman^s DaughteTf 
and ' The Way to he Saved.* A physician, who is a man of some de- 
gree of eminence in his profession, and who is at this time exerting a 
most salutary religious influence in the place, was brought to serious 
consideration by reading a single sentence in a Tract." 

A Lady called at a Tract Depository to purchase some Tracte, and 
fixing her eyes upon the " Dairyman^s Daughter" observed, whBe 
the tears were flowing from her eyes, *' I owe all my hopes of heaven 
to the reading of that Tract." 

A Clergyman in the State of New-York writes, that as he was, a 
few years since, riding on the shore of Cayuga Lake, he met a man 
on foot, who showed, by his reeling and falling, that be was intox- 
icated. ** Believing," says the writer, '* that I should not meet him 
again till the last great day, I felt that I ought, if practicable, to give 
him a word of admonition. Finding him too insensible to profit by 
any remarks I might make, I asked whether, if I should give him 
some Tracts, he would read them when sober. He said he could not 
read, but his wife could ; and he would carry them to her, and hear 
them read. I resolved to hazard the Tracts, and gave him about half 
a dozen. About two years afterward, I spent a night at Dea. McK — •*$, 
in the same neighbourhood. While there, I inquired for the intoxicated 
man and the Tracts, and was informed that the Tracts were blessed 
to the spiritual benefit of the man's wife ; she read them over and 
over, became convinced of her sins, found peace in Christ, and some 
time after died in the triumphs of faith. 

A Lady in Boston handed a few Tracts to a thoughtless boy, when 
calling on an errand. As he received them, his eye fell on the words^ 
" Seek first the kingdom of heaven, and all other things shall be added 
unto you." He immediately thought, I am seeing first the things of 
this world, and they afibrd me no happiness. The next day, whue in 
school, the same words returned to his mind, with the same emotions 
of his disobedience to the command. He took the Tract from his 
pocket, and leaning ovet his slate, read till he was so deeply afiected 
with a view of bis sinfulness and need of a change of heart, that he 



140 T78EFVX.NE8S OP TBACTS. [Nov. 

could no longer remain where be waa. He obtained permission to 
leaye the school, retarned home, and retired to his chamber. There 
he offered his first sincere prayer, and there resolved that he would 
serve the Lord. He has since become hopefully pious, immediately 
wished to do something^ for the cause of benevolence, and now de> 
sires to devote himself to preparation for the Gospel ministry.** 

The Tract ** To-Day" says a Student in Theology, was one even- 
ing presented to a Lady who had for a long time been convinced of 
sin, but had been putting off repentance till she bad in a great mea^ 
sure grieved the Holy Spirit. She retired and read the Tract. The 
Spirit sent home its warnings to her heart. She could no longer ven- 
ture on to-morrow ; but, sensible of her guilt, and with a broken heart, 
she that night, as it is believed, cordiidly embraced Jesus Christ as 
her Saviour. She soon after united with an Evangelical Church, of 
which she is now a worthy member. 

The ** Swearer^s Prayer" was given to a young man who' bad been 
distinguished for his ungovernable temper and daring profaneness. 
He read it; conviction seized his nund; he attended religious meet- 
ings, was instructed in the way of salvation, and was brought at 
length, as £Bur as man can judge, to sit at the feet of Jesus, clothed 
and in his -right mind. For nearly a year he has been a consistent 
professor of religion, a diligent teacher in a Sabbath School, and a 
member of this Society. 

A few months since, said a worthy Minister of the Gospel, a boy in 
this town found a Tract in his father's wood-house, which he pre- 
sented to his father, who was both a profane and intemperate man. 
He at first refused to accept it ; told his son he might keep it. '* O," 
replied the son, ** it's for you, father, and you must read it.'*' '' Where 
did you get it ?" replied the father ; '* who gave it to you ?" ** There 
did not any body give it to me," continued the son; '* I found it; and 
it's for you, father, it's for you, father, and you must read it." Over- 
come by the importunity of the child, the father read the Tracts and 
the Holy Spirit made it an arrow to his soul ; and from that time he 
has not been found guilty of using profane language, or of excessive 
drinking ; and both he and his Minister hope that he has become an 
heir of heaven. 



TRACTS BI.ESSED IN A REVITAJL OF RELIGION 

IN RHODE ISLAND. 

[From the Secrvtary of an AuxiUniy Tract Soci«ly.J 

We have reason to rejoice with joy unspeakable, for what the Lord 
has been, and is still doing among us. For some time past,, we have 
enjoyed a precious outpouring of the Holy Spirit ; and, blessed be 
his holy name, some of the Tracts circulated among us have been 
instrumental in awakening some souls exposed to ruin, who, as we 
trust, have lately passed from death unto life. We do not know that 
the reading of Tracts was the immediate instrument of occasioning 
the revival of religion here, but we are- credibly informed that, about 
the commencement of the work, a Tract caused, in the mind of a 
young lady, the solemn and anxious inquiry, " What must I do to be 
saved ?" which soon terminated in her coming forward to declare what 
the Lord had done for her soul. The work of grace then began te. 
increase ; and many, as we humbly hopC, have secured an interest ia 
the Saviour'* 



1&S18.] AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETT. 141 

THE TRACT, «A STRANGE THING,*' BLESSED 

TO A 1J!fiyERSAI.IST. 

We hope there has been some good done, writes the Secretary of 
the Auxiliary Tract Society at Aubnrn, since our connexion with the 
Parent Society. Qne individual in this county, who was in senti- 
ment a UniTersalist, and a man of some influence in society, we have 
reason to believe, has been led to forsake his refuges of lies and flee 
to Christ, the only Ark of safety, through the Divine blessing on the 
readmg of the Tract entitled A Sirangt Thing. 

TWO YOFNG PERSONS IN NEW-YORK AWAKENED 

BY TRACTS. 

A member of a Baptist Church in the city of New- York informs, 
that two young persons, in giving a public relation of their religious 
experience, each referred to a Tract as the means, under the agency 
of the Holy Spirit, of awakening their attention to th^ concerns of the 
soul. ^One of these Tracts was the Dairyman't Daughter; the other 
the Dcty of Judgment. 

TRACTS STOLEN AND BLESSED. 

-[Commimicated for the Bostoa Recorder, by a GvntlemBD in that city .J 

In the fall of 18i25, I was journeying in the State of New-York. 
Before I commenced my tour, 1 had provided myself with an assort- 
ment of Tracts, having known, from experience, the pleasure of dis- 
tributing them. I usually kept my Tracts under my wagon-seat, 
and was not at all rarpifnl to take- thfim tojodyJodgiil^ alright. One 
morning, on going to my wagon, I was not a little surprised to find 
that some of my proper^ had been stolen ; and, among other thingis, 
my whole depotitory of Tracts was gone. I cannot now say how large 
an amount of Tracts'! lost, but I recollect that I had about fifty of the 
" Swearer's Prayer" 

A few dayft ago, a Lady called at my house in this city, and in- 
formed me, that my Tracts were found safely deposited in a barrel, 
and were committed to her for distribution, and had been circulated 
over an extent of more than one hundred miles. And judge, if you 
can, what was my joy and gratitude, when she told me that one of 
those Swearer's Prefers was giyen to a man who had been swearing 
very profanely at his oxen, and with '* salutary pang reached his re- 
beluous heart"->led him to refiection, reformation, and repentance. 

Here you have a Report from one of those Tracts ; and when the 
light of eternity shall burst upon our vision, we may be astonished to 
behold the amazing amount of moral and religious influence which the 
remainder of those Tracts were instrumental in efiecting. R. 



lOJklH T&A.OT SOOXBT'ff'. 

The fbllowing extracts from letters, enclosing donations to aid the 
Society in its present wiut of funds, are indicative of the attachment 
to the cause of Tracts, and of Christian benevolence un general, which 
we believe very extensively pervades the Christian community. While 
such a spirit reigos in the hearts of Christians, accompanied, as we 
hope it dways is, by prayer for the Divine bleasing, the conductors of 



142 



RECKIPTB. 



[Nov. 



our Benevolent Institutions, it would seem, can nerer become discou 
raged or remiss in their work. 

$20 FOR 'a heathen CHILD IN GEYIiON. 

The enclosed $20, to constitute J. L. a bestfaen child in Ceylon, a 
Life Member of the American Tract Society, is raised by a few indi- 
viduals, who hope they love the cause of Christ, and, as connected 
with it, the cause of Tracts and the cause of Missions ; and knowings 
the pressing wants of your Society, feel desirous of casting their " mite'' 
Into the Treasury of the Lord, and thus aiding, in their humble way, to 
send Tracts to the destitute in our own country and in foreign lands. 

$20 FROM A YOUNG CI4ERGYMAN. 

I have read with the deepest interest the question now before the 
A. T. S. viz. " Shall this Society essentially curtail its operations for 
want of pecuniary aid ?" and while my inmost soul was pained that 
such a question should ever be wafted on a gale of the 19th century, 
before my eye had sketched over the impressive array of appalling 
facts appended to it, my own heart instinctively responded. No, no, 
no. But Giod's hand is in this — he means to try the strength of your 
faith. Oh, for Christ's sake, and for the sake of uninstructed and un- 
evangelized millions, let not your Committee hold back their hands 
from shaking that lofty and spreading Gospel Tree, whose falling and 
scattered leaves are for the healing of the nations : and the prayers of 
the Aarons.and the Hurs of God's people will stay and strengthen 
their weary arms. Prayers, I said ; not those dead prayers which, 
like dead faith, send up no fragrant perfume ; but those which shall 
come up for a memorial before God, because accompanied with the 
ulUTtS of «vuicn prayer is the implied pledge. 

Will you, my Brother, accept the enclosed sum, which my wife and 
myself send as a thank-offering to the Lord, for a rich blessing he has 
recently loaned us, in the birth of a little daughter ? 

RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

During the tnontk intding October J 5, 1828. 

KROM AUXIUARY T«AOT SOCIETIES 

VER.— Burlington, Anx. Dep. John Wickware, Sec. 
Tlamouth. Youngs Men's, Arra Andros, Sec 
Waterford, Rev. Thomas Hall, Ag. . 
MASS.— Boston, Amer. Tr. Soc J. Tappan, Tr. . 

do. do. lo akl in sending Tracts to the 
Springfield, S. Warriner, Jun. Tr. . 
Stockbridge, M. Fairchild, Tr. 
Tyringham, Fern. Miss T. B. Brewer, Ag. . 
OONN.— Black Rock, Capt. G. Siunras Pres. 
Hartford, Connecticut Br. Charles Hosnker, Sec. . 
Lyme, 1st Soc. Oliver J. Lay, Tr. . 
Ifew Haven, A* Towasend, Jon. Tr. 

do. Fem. Mrs. Ellca WUIard, Tr. 

New London, Robert Coil, Tr. . . 

Norwich, Fem. Miss Sarah BackaSi Sec. . 
Ridgefield. Rev. Nathan Barton, Ag. 
Sharon, Charles F. Sedgwick, Sec. . 
South Britain, Miss Eliza J. Averill, Tr. . 
N. YORK— Allianv; M. York State Br. G. Gates, Sec. 
Bath, Steuben Go. James G. Higgins, Tr. . 
Carmel, Red Mills, Fem. Mrs. Siisan Johnston, Sec. 
Coeymans, Dr. Benj. B. Fredenburgh, Sec. 
Cold Spring, Putnam Co. Fem. Miss E.ixa Warren, Sec. 



West 



ForTr, 
13 02 
8 08 

3015 51 

15 92 
500 

6 n 

400 
276 OU 

15 00 

06 

5S5 

3169 

20 35 

3 60 

SOO 

196 

136 66 

25 00 
190 
800 

10 13 



Don. 

2 1 9 

S S8 

300 00 

10 00 

3 08 
300 

5 00 

^5 
10 56 
24 65 



65 
25 00 

33T 



18£8.] 



BECEIPTS. 



143 



Conewaueo, Lyman Beacb, Tr. .... 

Corhitb, Breton Oo. Fem. Mrs. Suaao Ann Saflbrd, Sec. 

Elbridge, Fem.Xydia Clark, Sec. . 

Ellington, Z. Davenport, Tr. . . . 

Hempstead, L. I., Eldred Piatt, Sec. 

Huntington, L. I., Fem. Mrs. Henrietta Smitb, Tr. 

itbaca, (Tompkbu Co. Ani.) Daniel L. Bishop, Tr. 

Jamestown, Fern. Elmira Eddy, Sec 

Lodi, Erie Co. Joseph Pfainib, Tr. . 

Marbletown, Isaac D. Dloom, Tr. 

MajrviUe, Gbatauque Co. A. Potter, Sec. . 

Montgomery, John F. Scott, See. 

Mount Pleasant, A. Dunn^, Tr. . 

Newburgb, R. B. Williams, Tr. . 

N. York City Aux. Alfred Edwards^Tr. . 

do. Juv. in S. School, No. 8, Scotch Pr. Cb. J. P. Red 

neld. Sec. •••..• 
Penn Yan, Fem. Mrs. Martha Gould, Sec. . 
PbillipstowD, Fem. Mrs. Ann E. Horton, Sec 
Rochester^ Levi A.Ward, Tr. . . . 

Souib East, Putnam Co. Samuel Brewster, Tr. 
Tompkinsville, Slat. Island, T. Fardon, Tr. 
Troy, A. Loveland, Tr. .... 

Westfield, Fem. Mrs. C. C. Oake8,.Sec 
N. JER.— Bloonifietd, Jav. A. Armstrong, Sec. 
Luwrenoeville, Fem. Maria L. PbUUiis, Sec. 
MUlstooe, Fem. Mrs. Peter Staats, Tr. 
Pennington, Fem. Eliza A. Rue, Sec 
Perth Amboy, Mrs. Margaret Morris, Tr. . 
Princeton, Fem. Miss F. W. Morford, Tr. . 

do. Nassau Hall, Samuel Hubbell, Sec. 
Readingtown, (North Branch,) M. Wyckofi*, Sec. . 
Spotswood, Dr. C. Johukon, Sec. 
DiS. COL<— Georgetown, James McVean, Sec 
Washington City, John Coyl^, Jun. Sec. 
VIR.— Lunenburg Palish, Richmond Co. William Garland, Sec 
Norfolk, Robert Robertson, Ag. 
Prince ISdward, Un. Tbeo. Sem. John McEwen, Tr. 
Richmond, Wiltiani F. Micou, Tr. . 
Winchester, Daniel Guld,Tr. 
N. GAR.— Salem, Stokes Co. Wro. L. Bentien, Sec. 
GEO.— Darien, Bayard E. Hand, Tr. 
KEN — Uopkinsville, (Christian Co. Aux.) Wm. B.Atterbury, Sec, 
Paris, Fem. Mrs. Alice "forber. Sec. ... 

OHIO.— Elyria, (Lorain Co. Aui.) Rev. Daniel W. Latbrop, Sec 
Jefferson, (Ashtabula Co. Aus ) Rev. Perry Pratt, Sec 
PaioeKville, B«'i\jRniin Pepoon, Sec 
Wooster, (Wayne Co. Aux.; Samuel Quinby, Ag. . 
IND.— Indianapolis, Isaac Coe, Esq. Pres. . 



For.Tr, 


Don. 




87 


2 70 


90 


4 00 


4 00 


2 61 




6 94 


2 31 


UOO 


6 00 


100 00 




5 95 


1 92 


11 63 


S 84 


536 


1 76 


3 60 




C 75 


2 25 


SOO 


1 00 


19 08 




76 00 




6 00 




44 00 


3 00 


6 00 


200 


50 00 




450 


1 60 


3 00 




60 00 




6 56 


2 19 


69 10 


25 27 


4 67 


9 33 


4 12 


1 88 


8 00 




1 60 




IS 00 




800 


10 75 


2 92 


97 


8 98 


S f*9 


37 60 


12 60 


52 60 


12 60 


22 50 


7 60 


760 




aooo 




17 75 




50 00 




.7 60 


2 60 


62 26 


17 76 


16 00 


500 


12 00 


800 


8 66 




34 00 




16 84 


6 61 


16 76 


525 


49 00 





4 66 
7 67 



Societies not Auxiliary^ for Tracts. 

N. YORK.— China,;,Genesee Co. W. 

Hinckley, Tr 2 25 

Germantown,Fem.Mrs.Overbaugb, 

Tr. 

Moravia, Cayuga Co. 

VIR.— Fredericksburgb, Pr. Book 

and Tract Soc R. T. Thorn, Tr. 
N. CAR.— Bol>eson Co. Fem. Ben. 

Society, . . • . • 
UP. CAN.— Broekvllle, Leeds Co 

Fem. Philena Smart, Sec . 
Tracts sold at the Depository to in 

dividuals, .... 

Directorafor Lift* 

CONN.— New Haven, Rev Xeonard 
Bacon, by Gent, of his Soc (bt 
part of $50,) . . ' . 



N.YORK.— Albany ,Rev. John Ches- 
ter, D. D. by Children and a few 
Friends of his Cong. . . 50 00 

Catskill, Edgar D. Day, esq. by his 
father, Orrin Day, esq. . 60 00 

do. Samuel S. Day, by do. . . 50 00 

Cimton, Rev. A. S. Norton, D. D. 
by Ladies, (in part of $60,) . . 13 00 

Rochester, Mon.Co. Rev. William 
James, by Ladies, . . 60 00 

Members for Idfe. 

MASS.— WestSpringfield, Col. Da- 
niel Mwrick, . 20 00 

R. ffilL.— Providence, Ezra W.Flet- 
cher, SO 00 

CONN.— Bridgeport, MIm Isabella 
G. Fish, by Mrs. Eltea FUh, (in 
fuUoftaO,) . . . . . 15 00 
16 00| Camon, Rev. Jairat Burt, by Ladies, 90 00 



6 74 

400 

SO 50 

SOO 55 



144 



BECEIPTS. 



East Windsor, 1st Soc. Rev. Sam. 

W. Whelpley, by Fem, A. T. S. 20 00 
Meriden, Rev. Charies J. Hinsdale, 

by Ladieji, 20 00 

New Haven, WilUam J. Forbes, . 20 00 
do. Sidney Hall, • . . 20 00 

do. WiUiam Lefliaswen, esq. . 20 00 
do. Charles B. Liims, by Ycun|^ 
Hen's Ben. Assoc, for Tracts be- 
yond AUeg^hany, . . . 30 00 
do. James E. F. Morse, by his 

uncle, Sidney E. Horse, . . 90 00 
do. Witiiam K. Townsend, . . SO 00 
do. Claudias Herrick, (in part of 

$20,) 15 00 

do. A. Townsend, Jun. (in full of 

$20,) 10 00 

New London, Miss Lucy M. Wood- 

bridgre, (in full of $20,) . . 10 00 
North StoningtoD, Mrs. Cyrus Wil- 
liams, 20 00 

Sim&bury, Rev. Allen McLean, by 

his Church and Cong. . 20 00 

Woodstock, 1st Soc. Rev. Ralph S. 

Crampton, by Ladies, . . . SO 00 
N. Y0RK.--~Cat8kill, Mrs. Sarah 

Benton, 20 00 

do. Dr. Abel Brace, . . . 25 00 
do. Hrs. Cook, $20; Miss Cook, 

$20; by Thomas B. Cook, esq. . 40 00 
do. Haj.EzraHawiey, '. .20 00 
do. Henry McKinstry, . . . 20 00 
Cooperstowo, Georg^e Pomeroy, . 20 00 
Durham, Dea. BenJ. Chapman, (in 

fuUof$20,) 15 00 

Hudson, Rev.Wm.Gbester,bv Lad. 20 00 
New burgh, Mrs. Jane B. McCfarrel, 

by Ladles of Assoc. Ret. Ch . 20 00 
N. York City, Rev. Henry Chase, 
. Abriners' Ch. by a Friend to Sea- 
men, 20 00 

do. Hrs. Edward Probyn, . . SO 00 
do. Hrs. Henry S. Richards, . 20 00 
N. JER — Newark, Mrs. Hary G. 

Condil, 20 00 

PENN.^ Bethany, Rev. Joel Camp- 
bell, by a Lady of his Uong. . 20 00 
OHIO.~£llswortb, Sallv B. Le(- 

finffwell, by her sran<imotber, . 20 <)0 
M ALT A.— Me'iiterranean, Mrs. Eli- 
zabeth Hallock, by herself and 
her brother, Wm. A. Haiiock, in- 
cluding $5, received by him for 
services at Fhit Bush, . . . 30 00 
GEYLON.>-Oodoov ille, JoannaLa- 
throp, (a heathen child,) by a few 
individuals of Norwich, Conn. . SO 00 

Jlanual Members^ $t each, 

N. YORK.— Flushinsr, Isaac Peck, 2 00 
N. York Citv, Hrs. Hary J.Aldls, 
Mn. Ann Bostwick, . . . 4 00 

Oilier Donations. 

MASS.— Bo8ton,Aan>n RuMell,pf«- 
mium for Tract, <f The Destiny of 
the Heathen,** . . . 50 00 

Hampshire Co. a Lady, for Tl«ets 
for Upper Canada, . . 3 00 



CONN^Bridgeport, a Lady, avails 
of a gold cfaaio, .... 

do. do. avails of ornaments, 

Brooklyn, oolketed at monthly con- 
cert, 

Goshen, George Stanley, 

Greenwich, KezlahHowe, $1 ; Lau- 
ra Howe, $2, . 

do. Rachel Howe, 

Litchfield, S. Farms, Fem. Friend, 
IS; two Ladies, $1, . 

New Haven, John M. Gooly, $3 ; a 
Friend, $1, • • • • • 

do. Mrs. Mary Higgins, 

North Canaan, Samuel F. Adams, 
esq. . . . • 

NortbWopdbuiy , Ladles, forTracts 
for Tennessee, 

Stafford, a few Females, . 

Windsor, Rev. John BartleCt, 

N. YORiC— Catskill, Daniel and 
Hiram Crane, $1 each, , 

do. aFriend, $5; Hen. H. Hyde, $3, 

do. Rev. David Porter, D. D. 

do. Mrs. Sarah Porter, . ^ . 

do. Heniy Whitdesey, 

Edenville, William R. Dusenbury, 

Flat Bash, Fem. Bible and Tract 
Soc. Mrs. Ellen Strong, Pres. . 

Jamaica, (L. I ) S. L. L. 

N. York City, A. C. B. $1 ; J. Arm- 
strong, $1, 

do. Fem . Tract Soc. Canal- st. Ch . 

do. fem. Friend, avails of a goid 
watch, chain and key, 

do. do. avails of an ornament, 

do. aFriend, $5;* do. $2, . . 

do. a Lady, $lO; do. the perfor- 
mance of a vow, $5, . • 

do. William Primrose, 

Niagara Falls, Wm.H.Cbilds, . 

Pittetown, a Fiiend, $1 } do. fem. 
Friend, $1, 

Rochester, Peter A. Peshine, 

South East, Mrs. Esther Baldwin, 

Spencer, Tioga Co. a Friend, 

Westfield, a female Friend, 

N. JER^-A Friend, 

Hanover, William O. Ford, 

P£NN.—Honesdale, Wayne Co. in- 
dividuals, . . . . 25 25 

Montrose, Mr. Foster, . 2 00 

VIR.— A Friend, . . 100 00 

Augusta Co. Joseph Browo, Esq. . 10 00 

N. CAR.— A Lady, avails of a gold 
watch-chain, 

OHIO.— Austiobarg, collected at a 
meeting of Grand River Presb. 

Harper«Deld and Genoa Congs. . 



3 04 
1 3S 


10 00 
5 00 


3 00 
50 


300 


4 00 
300 


5 00 


11 50 
5 00 
1 00 


2 00 
800 
500 
200 
10 00 
600 


12 30 

50 


2 00 

800 


14 00 
1 00 
7 00 


15 00 
800 
6 00 


200 
300 

50 
1 00 

50 
500 



5 00 



2 50 

13 14 

4 8$ 



The above list ecmtaina doi»tSon»— 

For TracU for Tennessee, . ttl 50 

do. beyond the Alleghany, 3S0 00 

do. for Upper Canada, 8 QO 

do. for Premium Tract, . 50 00 



Whole amH of Donat. $1,859 8S 
ae& for Tracts sold, 3,901 18 ^. 
' Total, $fi>7gl 



01 



THE AMERICAN 



Be«"Founl.ofJuJj" Serici IV. No.lK pi 



AFFOmTHENT OF A GEKBRAX. AeElfT 



roa TBB VAI.Z.BT or vha msanMUMU. 

Thii Ereat VaUc7, eilenduig: from the AlIcghaDj to the Rocky 
UonDtaini, and rrom the Qulfor Mciico 10 the NonheiD L>k«, em- 
bracei a tarritoir verr TutQe, cBpaUe of luitaiDing a dente popula- 
tion, and larger ia «Sleot Iban all the remaining terrilot]' nuder the 
juiltdlctibD of ibe United Slateg. In 17M, the actual civiliEed popu- 
altan eziitini; witbiu these buuodaries vai leu than 160.000; it notr 
exceedi 4,000,000 ; Bod, accardiug to the beat calculstiooi that can 
he made, it viU be, in 4e year 1S6D, nearly or quite 12,000,000; will 
exceed the vbole remaining population of our cdudIij ; tuid be en- 
tilled to a pTedominant iniuvice in our Mtioual councits. Manjr ■ 
child, who r«adi ibeie lints, ouy lee the day, when the Volley of the 
MiwiHippi will antnace one, ef the moat popuiaus and powerful na- 
liouB in CtuiMeodom. Thfn it a m^eaty and a (oIcnuMty in tbii 
laarch of population, which ou^l deeply to aSact the mind, and to 
^ Ukto nUMt Mriouily Into the account in onr plana of uieiulnesi. 
Vou irr. 13 [Wholi No. 36. 



146 GEN. AGENT FOR THE VALXiET OF THE MISSISSIPPI. [Bef^ 

The spiritual welfare of 4,000,000 of souls is an object, that mighf 
well command, the resour<»s of the world ; but when we arc to con- 
sult, not only for them, but for their children and children's children ;; 
and when in a few years they are to increase from 4,000,000 to 
8,000,000; and then to 12,000,000, 20,000,000, and onward; the im- 
portance of supplying them with the €k>8pel outweighs all humaD 
estimation. 

We know there are now some floufishing Churches in- the Valley 
of the Mississippi, and that they embrace many active Christians who 
are laboring for the cause of Christ ; but, at the same time, we are as- 
sured that the population, taken as a whole, is very partially supplied 
with the Institutions of religion ; that infidelity and vice are, in many 
parts, alarmingly prevalent; and that there is a powerful and prevaU" 
ing tendency to that moral deterioration, which threatens- the destruc-* 
tion of all civil and temporal blessings, and exposes the soul to all the 
miseries of the second death. And if ever the voice of Providence 
indicated to any one people the duty of conferriRg spiritual blessings 
on any other, we believe it now directs this portion of our country to^ 
send the knowledge of Divine truth to the destitute beyond the moun- 
tains. Our own happiness and prosperity are most deeply involved — 
we are identified with them as a nation ; they are not only our neigh' 
bors, but many of them are our children, and kindred, and friends ^ 
Evangelical Christians, scattered thoughout the whole territory, are 
ready to second our efforts ; we have no national prejudices to en- 
counter ; no new languages *^ loantf and probably in no other spot 
on earth is there promise, that the same amount of efToit will be ikC- 
tended with so great success. J^ 

The duty of immediately sending the Gospel fo tlMTcstltute in that 
interesting portion of our country, is now^ we believe, almost uniyer- 
sally acknowledged; and the consideration Aos pressed vnlh great 
weight on the minds of the Committee of the American Trmct S&etety, 
thatf iohile there are not qualified jareachers of the Gospel in existence 
to supply their wantSf Tracts ca^, wtthout dslat, be printed ani» 
SENT to fcVERY FAMILY. The Committee \\&ve felt, that, beai:ing, in 
some degree, the responsibility of conducting the Tract, operations of 
the country, they must not slumber an hour over this subject \ but 
must enter immediately on the work: and in this view, they have 
now commissioned and sent forth Ret. Ornan Easthait, who has 
be£n three years engaged In faithful labors for the Tract cause, as a 
General Agent of the Society for the Valley of the Mississippi ; and 
have appointed three other faithftil men to labor 'm connexion with 
him. Rev^ Mr. Eastman, in company with Mr. Charles E. Furman, 
left the city of New-York on the 17th November for this service, ex- 
pecting to meet the two other Agents appointed, after his arrival be- 
yond the mounfains'. 



!«£&.] FO&EIGM CORRESPONDENCE. 14 T 

Their object will be to form large Auxiliaries, having Depositories, 
itn all the priocipal towns ; and then to form Auxiliary Tract Associa- 
tions in every town, and village, and neighborhood around; till, if 
possible, one or more Tracts ** directing the sinner to the Saviour/* 
shall be placed in every family. All who can be induced to associate 
themselves with these Auxiliaries, will be supplied with Tracts at the 
cost prices : to all who have not the ability to pay for them, or who, 
knowing not their value and caring not for their souls' salvation, will 
do nothing to supply themselves, it will be felt a duty to carry Tracts 
and deliver them, as God's message^ ^'without money and without 
price." 

The Committee now look to the Christian public to sustain them n 
this important measwre. It will /require g^^at personal efforts on the 
part of all Ckiistians scattered throughout the Valley of the Mississippi; 
and liberal pecuniary contributions from the friends of the cause in 
every portion of the country. These Agents must be sustained, and 
their number probably be soon increased ; and Tracts must be fur- 
nished for the supply of all the Auxiliaries formed, and for all the 
gratuitous distributions to the destitute. If there are 4,000,000 in the 
Valley of the Mississippi, and each family contains 7 individuals, the 
expense of sending two Tracts of the usual sise to each family wUl 
exceed $11,400. But far more than this must be done every year, or 
the provision made by Tracts for the spiritual wants of tl^ftt popular 
tion will be «mall indeed. 

The Committee have felt that God called them to enter upon, and 
faithfully to prosecute this work, notwithstanding the Society's very 
limited pecuniary means. We hope the objectwill.be remembered by 
Christians in their prayers, especially on the first Monday of every 
month ; for, with the blessing of God, we believe it wiB appear, in the 
4ay of judgment, to have been among the very important movements 
.«f the Christifui Church, 



TO&BZOS OOlAZISPOinDBnOll. 

greecb:. 

It will be remembered, that, when the Rev. Jonas King sailed from 
this country, a few months since, as a Missionary and an Agent for 
the distribution of food and clothing in Greece, the Committee of the 
American Tract Society appropriated $300, to aid him in procuring 
translations of the Society's publications in modem Greek, from the 
Mission press at Malta. Returns from Rev. Mr. King, dated imme- 
diately after his arrival in Greece, present that country as now a most 
interesting field for Tract operations. It would appear from the lan- 
guage of the Count Capo D'Istrias, President of Greece, that the te^. 
•poral wants of Greece are yet very diatresslog:--'' I w31 give you," 



148 ^OBEION CORRESPONDENCE. [D«C. 

0aid be, " the wkole of the Morea for your field-^there yon will find 
riUag^ee laid waele, thousands without a shelter, without food, witfaewt 
dothJDg*'— ttiid yet Rev. jD^. King writes, that the caU for the Gospel 
and books u Ml m^re targeni. 

''Multitudes," says he, in a letter to the Ladies of the Greek Com- 
mittee in New-Torfc, '' were callmg on me to ber the Gospel. I know 
not that I ever saw people so abtolutefy kungri^loT books as l^ey are 
as this place. Not more than three or foor have asked me for charity 
<— himdxeds have asked me for books. I have many things which in> 
terest me exceedingly, which I wish to conununicate, but cannot now, 
as the Herald, by which I send this, is to sail>t two o'clock to-mor- 
row morning. Suffice it to say, that the way is perfectly opened for 
ane to establish schools to almost any extent. If you cwi send me 
fifty thousand dollars, I can employ it for that purpose. CouUl not 
the ladies of New-York collect money enough for building a school- 
house, and the establishment of a school of superior order for females 
in Greece ? Would not such an act of chanty in the ladies of your city 
be to them a more brilliant ornament than ehaias of gold and pearls ? 
I have t<Mlay had another interview with the President, and he has 
invited me to visit the schools which he has established here, and 
then to come to Egina, (where he is going to>morrow morning,) to be 
introduced by him to the Bishop in that place, and to visit the schools 
irhich he has there eetablished." 



SOUTH AMERICA. 

The following letters show the great and urgent call for efibrts te 
prevent the universal prevalence of ignorance and auperstkion ia the 
South Amecican states. 

WANT OF CHILBREN'S TRACTS IN SPANISH. 

I am writing, says an intelligent friend in South America, by this 
packet, to the London S. S. Union, from whom we have been kindly 
supplied with some books and lessons which we greatly needed, re- 
questing them to use their influence in furnishing a lot of children's 
books in Spanish to supply this country, in which the demand is al- 
ready considerable, and cannot fail soon to become extensive. The 
same subject I named to you nearly a year ago, and every month has 
increased my conviction of its importance. The elements of educa- 
tion are difibsiug to some extent in this city, and gradually in the vil- 
lages of the country ; and there is**-not a scarcity— bat an alKolute 
desHttUion of that fund of amusement and instruaion to which chil<- 
dren in the United States and England have access. A few primers 
and catechisms, which, beside the rudiments of spelling, contain 
little but the grossest absurdities of Popery— the Popish edition of 
the Ten Conunandments, with the second left out, and the ainth made 
into two, to conceal the deception—- the Sevea Sacraments, and Seven 
Mortal Sins, he. &c. — these, my dear Sir, are oi/ the books which, 
in a vast multitude of cases, the children see.. Those who are taught 
in the government schools, read the Scripture Lessons of Lancaster, 
but have no books at all. 

For the youth, whieh might form our Bible classes, there are 



{B28.] T0EEI6N CORRESPONDENCE* 149 

"* books of devotion^" in which whatever of Popeiy is not in words, is 
supplied by pictures^ with which the books are filled. Here is pur- 
gatory, with the angels coming down from heaven and holding up, 
by the hair, out of the flames, the souls of those for whom the priest 
is saying mass ; while the anguish depicted in the countenances ofthe 
poor wretches for whom no mass is saying, and on whom the exa»> 
grated devils are exerting all their fury, is sufficient to wring a dol- 
lar even from the hardhearted miser, to purchase a temporary relief 
to the departed spirit of his father or wife. 

I neither forget nor undervalue the copies of Scripture, and the 
works of the London Translation Society, which have been put in 
circulation here. This Society has circulated to some extent here, in 
Spanish, Paley's Evidences, Bogue's Essay, Doddridge's Rise and 
Progress, Wilberforce's View, 2 vols, of Milner's Church History, 
and some smallex books. But I repeat, these are not children's books 
— ^they leave this partieular department as destitute as it was before : 
and it should not for a moment be forgotten, that ofthe Spanish read* 
ers here, more than nine tenths are children. I formerly stated to 
you, that the Tracts which we have in Spanish are not adapted to 
children : indeed, with the exception of *' James Covey" and " Little 
Henry,'' a few copies of each of which have been put into my hands, 
I have not seen a Spanish Tract at all calculated for this parti<:ular 
object. 

Now I need not say to you. Sir, or to the Committee, that this state 
of things cannot long remain. These opening minds unit have food-^ 
food of a more interestmg, if not a more profitable kind, than muti- 
lated commandments, ave Marias, invocations of saints, and pictures 
of purgatory. I have no fear but that everUually they will receive 
this food from the same benevolent sources which are difAising through 
so many thousand channels in Europe and the United States, moral 
and intellectual aliment to the minds of children and youth. But I 
«{o fear, veiy much fear, that before the conductors of these nutritious 
sources of moral life arc fully alive to the importance of this field, and 
of occupving it immediately y we shall have poured in upon the chil- 
dren such a flood of French infidelity as came in upon their fathers 
before the labours of the Translation Society were oommeoeed, and 
which is now multiplying the difficulties in the way of that Society an 
hundred fold. 

Ton know a little what it costs to substitute sense for nonsense in 
the hands of children, and can very clearly perceive what would be 
the consequence of such an event as I have supposed — an event which 
I most earnestly pray may never occur in this country ; yet one, the 
occurrence of which, in all human probability, can be avoided only 
by the speedy interposition of our Tract and Sunday School Soctetiea. 

ACC£PTABL£N£SS OF TRACTS IN S. A9I£iUCA« 

[From Rev. Wm. Torrey, at Buenos Ayres.] 

Yesterdav I received, through the politeness of Commodore Biddle, 
a bundle of Tracts, for which 1 suppose myself indebted to your kind' 
ness. As, however, it came to me accompanied by no letter, bill, or 
date, I can judge only by the contents, a considerable part of which 
is what I requested of you in June last. 

The pa<^age was opened in Montevideo and part of it distriboted 
and, but for the kind attentions of Mr. Zimniernian, would ^1 have' 

15» 



ibO DOUESiic coaaE8POND£nG£. [Dec. 

shared the same fate. The cause of this was, that my direction was 
covered with another to Colonel Forbes, stating the contents to be 
'' Tracts from the American Society.'* Commodore Biddle, supposing 
that such a bundle of Tracts could be sent to Colonel Forbes onlj for 
distribution, thought it would be as well to commence the work in 
Monte Video, which he accordingly did. Mr. Zimmerman, on disco- 
▼ering it, sent him a note saying to whom they belonged, and the 
Commodore immediately forwarded to me what remain^. 

The Spanish Tracts which the package contsuned, I consider quite 
a valuable acquintion, and have no doubt they will be useful. I hope 
you will print the Shepherd of Salisbury Plain in your second series. 
The English Tracts, especially the large ones with covers, came also 
very -providentially to our aid just now. Through the medium of the 
English boy school here, which contains QO or 60 scholars, the lending 
system has been put into operation to some extent. The teacher, 
who is a pious and very useful young man, and a member of our little 
Church, informed me recently that his whole stock, among which were 
several which I brought from New-York, had gone round his circuit. 
I think we shall now be able to introduce something of the same sys- 
tem in Spanish. 

A set of bound volumes for our library, and three or four sets of the 
second series bound, we still need. I see some proposals in the Ma- 
gazine for printing German Tracts. If you publish them, and will 
send me a few, I could dbpose of them very usefully in a German 
settlement about si;)i miles from the city. I could do the same with 
French and Italian Tracts here in town, as there are many of the la- 
boring classes here who speak those languages. The fitUL of labor, 
in retpect to TtmI drculaiion, knows no otf^ Umit than wmU arises 
either from want of lYaets, or want of haiids to circulate them. The 
latter, as respects Spanish and English T^^cts, is now the most 
pressing. 

The letter designates a number of Tracts, in English and Spanish, 
which have been found acceptable and useful ; and upwards of 70,000 
pages, in these languages and in French and German, have, within a 
few weekSj been granted by the Committee, and forwarded. 



From one of the Agents who has commenced services for the Society in 
the Valley of the Mssissij^; dated in Ohio, October, l828. 

1- am sorry that you haye not a better opportunity to judge of my 
qualifications for the Agency in the Valley of the Mississippi. I can 
plainly see the mischief of an unsuccessful attempt — but all that I can 
say for myself is, that you have my hectrt. 1 sought an education at the 
east, as I hoped, purely that I might be fitted to preach the Gospel to 
the perishing in this wilderness. My father was under pecuniftry em- 
barrassments, and could help me to no more than a horse and $5 in 
monev. I travelled to New-Hnven for less than that—- pardon me this 
boastmg. When I say that I am ready to devote my whole heart to 
the Tract service in this wilderness, it is not a mere creature of my 
imagination which I have in view. I pity the multitudes perishing 
for the btead of life, because I have seen them. The perils of this 



18^8.] AMERICAN TBACT SOCl£TT, £03T0:N l5l 

mighty forest I know by experience, having been bred in the midst of 
it. I have some con6dence that a love for Christ's cause prompts me 
to risk my life among the fevers of the west, rather than seek a retreat 
in delightful New England. It seems to me, that the plan of the Tract 
Society, to the eirtent of " cultivation" which you mention, has some 
decided advantages, for these new settlements, over the mere preach- 
ing of the Gospel. The Gospel, preached at long intervals, is like 
water spilled upon the ground — it never reaches a fourth part of the 
scattered population. The light does but just excite attention before 
it is gone, and the people are again in darkness. There are a multi- 
tude of places where there seems to me to be more hope of doing 
good by carrying your Society*s publications to every dwelling, and 
leaving them to be read and reflected on. 

When I first heard of your plan for the Valley of the Mississippi, I 
longed to be on the ground, helping to carry it into execution. I have 
increasing faith that it can be done and will be done, and will save a 
multitude of souls. If I understand the design, it is nothing less than 
that your agents shall visit every settlement west of the mountains^ and 
shall leave no one till they are sure your publications have reached, or 
toill reach, every houae, using in the meantime all possible exertions to 
replenish your treasury. I am ready to offer my services not only for 
one year, but till the plan is carried through, if I should prove profit- 
able to the Society. I have nothing to tie me to a particular spot. 
Send me wherever you please. I trust I do not hold my *' life dear 
unto myself," and have some confidence that I shall not be discou-^ 
raged at any obstacles peculiar to this country. *' The opposition of 
the human heart and the lukewarmness of Christians" is an obstacle 
too apparent not to be noticed. Jt stands against all faithful exer- 
tions for Christ every where. But if a man has a spark of Christian 
feeling, in such a service as this, it must kindle. I trust you will be 
perfectly free to discourage me, if you do not need my services, or 
find that better can be obtained, and shall expect to hear further from 
you in the course of a month. There is great ability on the W. Re- 
serve, if it were called forth. Wishing and hoping success for your 
cause so long as it is the auxiliary of our blessed Saviour's, I am, &k. 



ily&OO FROM THE AMERICAlf TRACT SOCIETY 
AT BOSTOir, FOR THE TAXLEY OF THE MIS- 
SISSIPPI. 

This Society has now made a donation of Sl»fiOO to aid the Society 
at New-Tork in promoting the cause of- Tracts in the Valley of the 
Mississippi; and has also given up its Corresponding Secretary, 
Rev. Mr. Eastman, as a General Agent for that wide and interesting 
field. On the 17th of November he left New- York on this important 
enterprize, in connexion with another faithful Agent ; both of whom 
have doubtless before this crossed the Alleghany Mountains and com- 
jnenced their eflbrts. The following extract will shovr in what light 
Rev. Mr. Eastman has regarded this Agency, and under what impres- 
sioQs the Society at Boston have enlisted in furthering the object for 
which it is undertaken. 



152 



RECEIPTS. 



[Dec 



tVom Rev. O. Eatifnan, previotu tB departing for Vol. o/Mtsissippi. 

The American Tract Society at Boston, at their last meeting, 
adopted a resolution cordially approving of the efibrts making to sup- 
ply the Valley of the Mississippi with Tracts, and pledging their aidf 
as far as practicable. The Committee have, for years, regarded thiH 
work as immensely important, and have deeply regretted that no 
more has actually been done for its accomplishment. Many of the 
inhabitants West of the mountains have gone thither from New Eng- 
land. They have left behind them the blessed institutions of their 
fathers. They have gone out from the sanctuary of the Lord. The 
Sabbath returns, but the people do not assemble to worship Jehovah. 
To many of them no one appears to proclaim the Gospel of Christ. 
That they should be immediately supplied with the means of grace, 
is evident to all ; and since Ministers to preach to them the Gospel 
cannot be obtained, it is almost equally evident that they ought im- 
mediately to be supplied with Tracts, Christians in New England 
have long felt the responsibility of taking an active part in sending 
them these portions of truth ; but it can hardly be said, that they have 
ever undertaken in earnest, and in the strength of the Lord, to do the 
work. The time seems now to have come for this work to be done. 
Many feel that it must be done. And we believe that, by the united 
exertions of Christians, and the blessing of God, it will be done spee- 
dily. Of the $1,500 now forwarded to the Society at New-York, 
about $1,200 have been contributed in Boston for the express purpose 
of supplying the West with Tracts ; and about $800, for the same ob- 
ject, have been raised in other parts of New England. This I know 
is but little, compared with the wants to be supplied. To furnish each 
individual of the 4,000,000 West of the Alleghany Mountains with 
one Tract of 10 pages, would cost $40,000; and as much as this 
should be done every year. Great exertions must still be made, not 
only in New England, but in other parts of the country. We believe 
they will be made ; and that eterni^ will reveal results, to our coun- 
try, and the souls of men, and the cause of Christ, greater and ipore 
glorious than the most sanguine friend of this cause has ever yet anti- 
cipated. 

We intended to have inserted some spirited resolutions of the Female Auxiliary 
of 8t. Ocoi^e's Church, New-York ; but these, with some other Short articles, are 
excluded by the list of receipts, the length of which, in the existing wants of the 
Society, gives us great pleat ure, and afibrds a new indication that Divine Providence 
will not suffer the great objects of this Institution to fail for want of pecuniary 
means. 

RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 
During the month ending November 15, 1828. 

FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. porTr. Pen. 

VER.—Middlebury, E Brewster, kg, . . . • 40 00 

MUton,E. Wellington, Tr II 25 3 75 

Shorehani, Levi O. Uirchard, Ag. . . . . 5 25 1 75 

do. Fem. Miss Nancy A. Hand. Tr. . . . 3 75 1 25 

MASS.~Becket, Cant. John Conant, Sec. . . . . 9 75 3 25 
Boston, Amer. Tr. Soc. J. Tappan, Tr.— for promoting the cause 

of Tracts West of the Alleghany Mountains, . . 2 00 1500 (tO 

New Marlborough, North Soc. Thomas Woodnifi*. Sec. . 7 37 2 45 

Otis, Mnjor Robert Iluntef, Tr. . . . . 18 OO 6 OU 

CONN.— Darlen, Rev. E.Fiatt, Sec 175 



1828.} 



RECEIPTS. 



1$9 



F. fir. HiU, Tr 



East Ooibeo, G«o. Stanley, Tr. . 
East Haildani, Fern. Mn. S. B. Parsons, Ag. 
Keot, Fen. ..•■*• 
New HaTen, A. Towneead, iusL, Tr. . 
do. by their Aax. at Shermau, 
do. Fein. Mrs. Hearietta F. Whitney, Tr. 
New Milford,E. Noble, Tr. .... 
Northford, Rev Matthew Noyes, Ag. 
Stoningtoo, Ih'.Geo. E. Palmer, Sec. 
Stratford, Asa Curtis, Tr. .... 
Westforook, Fein, Mrs. Lucy Selden, Sec. • 
West Chester, D. L. Parmetee, Tr. . . • , ^ 

N. YORK.— Athens, Greene Co. Fern. Mrs. Jobn Read, Tr 
AulMirn, Olark B. Hotdikiss, Ag. 

do. by their Fern. Aux. at Genoa, 

do. Ans. at Scipio, 

Bedford, Fern. Mrs. Satan N. Nichols, Sec. . 
Catskill, William H. Coit, Tr. . . ^ • 

Chatham, Colomb. C^ William A. tl utchimon. Sec 

do. do. Feiii. Miss Clarissa Curnini^, Sec. 

Cooperslown, Fem. Mrs. Martha Bowers, Tr. 
Geneva, James Boffert, Tr. . 
Hamilton ViUage, Henry O. Skinner, Sec . 
Harlaem, Fem. Mrs. Ann Ball, Tr. . 
Hemptitead, L. I., Robert Edls, Tr. . 
ifi>mer. Rev. John Ke<*p, Tr. . 

Hopewell in Fishkill, F^ro. Mrs. Gertrude B.FUigler, Sec 
Hudson, Alexander Snyder, Ag. 

«io. Fem. ..... 

Islip and Huatiagton South, L. I., H. Brewster, Sec. 
La Fayette, Fem. Jerosha Drake, Sec. 
Blount Morris, Fem. Mr*. Lueretia C. Sleeper, Sec 
New- Yorit City Aux. Alfred Edwards, Tr. . 

do. Fem. Mrs. J. R. Hurd, Tr. 

do. St. George's Gh. Fem. Mrs. 

Palmyra, Wayne Co. Lnms North, Sec. 
Pleasant Valley, J. Oabaudao, Tr. . 
Pougbkeeprie, L. J. Van Kleek, Tr. . 
Red Hook, Fem. .... 

Southampton, L. I., Rev. P. H. Shaw, Pres. 

Union Village, Moses H.White, Tr. . 

Upper Bovine, Jairus Douglass, Tr. . 

VIraltoD, Fem. Irene Headtey, Sec . 

Waterlown. {Jeff. Co. Aux.) Eli Farwell, Tr. 

N. JER.— Chester, William H. WoodhuU, Sec 

CIreenwicb, Warren Co. Fem. Mrs. Elixabetb K. 

Hackeltstown, Fem Mary Campbell, Sec . 

Mendham, Fern. Miss Ruth Dayton, Tr. 

Plaialteld, Juv. P. Martin, Tr. 

PENN.— Dundaff, Dr. William Terbell, Pres. 

Mount Pleasant, Wayne Co. Henry W. Stone, Tr. 

Philadelphia Bianch, Geo. W. Blight, Cor. Sec 

VIR.— Norfoifc, Robert Robertson, Ag. 

Oxford, James Johnson, Sec . 

Slurgeoaville, Fem. Mrs. H.E. Clary, Sec. 

N. CAR.— Milton, (Caswell Co. Aux.) M. P. Hnntlagtoa, Sec. 

KEN.— Lexington, Miss Margaret A.Blythe, Sec. 

niris, Fem. Mrs. Alice Bather, Sec. . 

CUilO.— Ellsworth, Rev. E. Rrmton, Sec . 

Farmivton, Rev. E. Bootoa. Ag. . 

Granvil&, Rev Jacob Little, Pres. . 

Johnstown, James Sloan, Sec. 

Trurabull Co. Dr. Charles Haddock, Tr. 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 

N. YORK.— Angelica, Allegh. Co. Mrs. Thomas, Tr. 

Hartwlck and Fly Creek, Beo. 8oc. . 

Lebanon, ...... 

VIR.— Lexington, Dep. John F. Canithers, Tr. 

N. OAR.— N. Car. Book Co. Rev. J.W. Dougiasf, Ag. 

Tracts sold at the Depository to individoals, kc . 



Oonover, Sec 



FerTr. 


32 05 


9M 


A25 


24 74 


37 50 


3 75 


33 38 


2 45 


625 


25 00 


19 51 


17 41 


825 


10 00 


6 16 


10 50 


800 


90 00 


20 00 


13 64 


760 


60 00 


9 94 


25 00 


1 47 


1 00 


300 


150 00 


ISI 00 


25 


15 06 


87 


16 00 


980 


480 


403 


11 10 


87 


21 00 


4 52 


15 75 


900 


460 


68 


760 


60 00 


13 12 


300 


7 60 


40 00 


100 00 


26 00 


763 


1 00 


12 00 


460 


13 00 


800 


600 


4 17 


822 


10 00 


810 04 



Don. 


33 40 


5 77 


1 75 


3 83 


12 50 


1 25 


7 43 


11 12 


4 14 


625 


10 00 


6 61 


162 


322 


75 


6 15 


3 60 



17 11 

381 

16 OQ 

1 OO 
1 OO 

5 82 

30O 
131 

2:^ 



525 
SOO 
225 
6» 
500 
360 



20O 
260 



264 
1 60 



12 00 
308 



154 



RECEIPTS, 



[Dec*. 



00 
00 



00 



Antwd jyinctors, 

N. YOILK.~0reeiirille, 6reea« Co. 

James Stevens, esq. . . 5 

fiL York Oitj, I>r. J. K. B. Rodgera, 6 

Directors for Life 
MASS.— Boston, Rer. Lyman Bee- 
cber, D. D. by Ladies,* for TraeU 

for the West, . . 60 00 

CONN.— HUforJ,ReT.BezaleelPiii- 
neo, b>- his Ch.andCon£^.(in part 
or$50,) . . . 25 00 

New-Haven, J.TrumbuII Backus, by 

hh father, E. F. Backos, . . 50 00 

N. YORK— Albany, Hon. S. Van 
Rensselaer, in part for perpetnat* 
ing Baxter's Saints* Rest, 100 

Brooklyn, Mrs. Sarah E. Austin, . 60 
do. N.W.Sanford, . . fiO 

Coxackie, Rev. Jeremiah Seari, by 

bis Ch. and Cong, (in part of $50,) 36 
Oanby, Tompkins Co. Jonathan B. 

Gosman, esq. . .50 

Crreeoville. Eliakim Reed, esq. (in 
full of #50, . . . . 30 

do. Rtr, Sylvester Wood- 

bridge, by Ladies, . 50 

New Canaan, Culumb Co. Rev. 

Azariah Olark, by his Ch. and 

t:!ong. (inpartor$50,} . .24 

New Lebanon, Rev. Silas GhiurdiUl, 

by his Cix. and Oon^. . . 50 

N.York Oity, Moses iUlen, . . 50 

W. W. Chester, . . 50 

Richard T. Haines, 500 

WiBiam M. Halsted, . 150 

Isaacs. Hone, . . 100 

Saqawl S. Howland, . 900 

JohnC. Johnson, (in full of f50,) SO 
P. Perit, . . . .50 

Anson Q. Phelps, . lOu 

John Rankin, , . . 100 

Peter Remaen, . . .50 

James Roosevelt, . 50 

BenJ. L. Swan, (in full of $50,) 30 
Arthur Tappan, . . 250 

F. A. Tracy, . . ,50 

Cot. Richard VarickyVice Pre» 200 
Richard M. White, • .50 

Marcuo Wilbur, . . 60 

DEL Wiimingtoo, Rev. Jo«eph 

Uowland Coit, by Mr. James 
Roosevelt, of N.York, . . 50 

MemJben for Life, 

Greenfield, (State unknown,} T. 

Redfield, l^ a Fem. Friend of 

Tracts, . . . 5iO 

N. HAMP.— Hanover, Prof. Chas. 

B. Hadduck, by Fem. Tr. a>c. . 20 
VER.— Bennington, Rev. Dapiei A. 

Clark, by Ladies, . . .20 

Clarendon, Rev. Henry HuSter, by 

Dr. J. C. Bliss, . . .SO 

CONN.— Bridgeport, Captain John 

Brooks, . .SO 

Uamden, Mount Carmel Soc. Rev. 

James Noyes, Jan. by Ladies, . 20 
Norfolk, Olivers. Butler, . .20 

Norwalk, Miss Mary P. Crosby, . SO 
^eybrook, 2d Ecel. Soc Rev. Aaron 

Hovey, by Gentlemen, . . 20 



iN. YbRK— Blooming Grove, Mrs. 
j Frances Howell, {in part of |90^) 
Durham, Miss Oaroline Chapman, . 
Mrs.D.Baldwio, (in part of (200 
Dennis Baldwin, do. 

Daniel B. Boothe, do. 
Alfred llandt do. 

Stephen Tibballs, Jun. do. • 
Rev. Setb Wiliiston, by his Ch. 
and Cong, (in full of $20 87,} 
Pishkill, Rev. Charles Whitehead, 

byF.A.T.S. 
Pishkill Village, Rev. Cornelius 
Westiirook, by his Oh. and Cong, 
(in full of $50,) . 
Govemeur, Rev. Richard C.Hand, 
by the late Mrs. Lucy S. Smith, 



00 by the late Mrs. Lucy S. Smith, . 20 00 
00 Lenox, Lydia Hall, (in part of $20,} 10 00 



56 
00 
00 
00 



00 
00 
00 
00 
00 
00 
00 
00 

uo 

00 
00 
00 
00 
00 
00 
00 

00 

00 
00 



00 



00 
00 
00 
00 
00 
00 



600 

so 00 

10 00 

500 

500 

10 00 

15 37 

20 00 



15 12 



N. York City, John Auchincloss, by 
bb father, Hugh Auchincioss, 
Miss Emma Beers, $20; and 
Miss Harriet Beers, $20; by 
their father, Mr. 0. Beers, . 
Ely Benedict, . 
Robert Bulold, . 
Edward Crary, . 
Benjamfaa H.Folger, . 
Jeremiah Gray, . 
Caleb 0. Halsted, 
Gabri<fl Havens, 
John HU ill, . 
James Horn, (in full of $20,) . 
Ebeneser Irving, 
Rev. Levi S. Ives, by a Friend, 

(in full of $20,) 
R. Leavitt, 

Miss Elita Lewis,^ , , 

F Markoe, . * 

Dr. John iVeilson, . . 

Francis Olmsted, 
C. Palmer, 
Daniel Parish, . 
T.Sherman, 

Mrs. Susan Sprinert by Ladies 
of Dr. Springes Ch. and Cong*. 
Edward W. Stuart, by his fa- 
ther, W. P. Stuart^ . 
S. G.Wheeler, . 
John Wheelwrighr, 
C. L. Woolley, . 
William W. Woolsey, . 
Henry I. Wvckofl*, 
Augustus Wynkoop, 
Owego, Tioga Co. Rev. Aaron Put- 
nam, by a Friend, (in pan of $20,) 
Pleasant Valley, Rev. John Clark, 
by his Ch. & Coug. (in full of $90.} 
Red Hook, Rev. Andrew N. Kittle, 
by Ladies, .... 
Saratoga Springs, Mr. Miles Beach, 
Summer IliU Locke, Rev. C. John- 
ston, by his wife, Mrs. Hannah H. 
West Durham, Rev. Linus H. Fel- 
lows, by Ladles, . 

do. Dea. Beni. Hubbard, 

by Young People^s Bible Soc. . 

N. JER. — liridgeion West, Rev. 

Brogun Hoff, by Fem. A. Tr. Soc 

00 New Brunswick, Miss Elia;. D.Grant, 

00 P£NN.^-Chambersburg, Rev. Ni- 

chola8Patterson,braFein.Friend, 

of Greenville, N,Y. 



00 



20 00 



40 00 
90 00 
25 00 
30 00 
SO 00 
20 00 
20 00 
90 00 
20 00 
10 00 
25 00 

10 00 
20 00 
30 00 
20 00 
SO 00 
25 00 
20 00 
20 00 
iSO 00 

40 00 

90 00 
3&00 
20 00 
95 00 
20 00 
25 00 
20 00 

13 44 

IS 75 

20 50 
20 00 

20 00 

20 00 

20 00 

90 00 
20 00 



30 Qd V 



1828.] Bt 

tMTiiiiHi Crali Onll, tati loka 
OJiT« CoH, |30| MorianOiHiH 
Coll, |Mi Uuberl miTti CdI>, 
tM; RotircU L.Call, Jun. tW; 

DK. OOL^AInudiiii, IUt. Elk) 

HvtUoii, bj Ladles . . 3C 

DEL.~ffllmlDtIon, Urj. RarrKl 



aal Manieri, $2 tack. 



J. Kin) 



lb R. Len 



OMn- Donalimi. 
N. HAMF.— Ebxlgr, Dn. Blike, 

ib« flnl Omis or > Pm^iiiii, 
R. ISL.— Piorldcon, Anidla L. F. 

CblMn, |l! chvJo UbUdi, U) 

Fn.chiid(,aacu.| j.ci>iid>,ii) 

R.Cblldi, I3cl>.i T. Pewnrim, 
35 cli-i ■ Prt™^ tl 1 W. "-• - 



N, yOKK — Aumn. Do. 

oijroid, . 

lUooilliDB Grate, UIh Ado 1 



H^Soa.-nm.i' 



Add Bouwltli, as < 



11,(10)] 



Dr. The- 

bbS^Iio'" " - " 
|io)HuTtnc^iiiMii,«ii.rc«il! 

UOi di>.«»ti)B.(8j da.|3|(il). 
from n«iab«n ui Cvdv^r- C^ 
IS Kt 1.11. Cobb, tiD! " " 



tir.A.W. Sor« t, *i i s ftaibini'li^ 
)t «. Y. Ob^ far Tr. fcr lbs Wtn, 

Piiiiibk«r»lr, a Fiiend, tis; Nr. 
TnHBUiTn.lliRei.AlDDiaWel- 
lan.ts!, .9 00 

-;(idinilr, ■ nwiribuilnn, . . fM 

Bund Luke, U. U. QrtEDryt «<[■ - 1 Oi> 
' 9E Snnloga Spiingi, n>ll«cl«l in Ftm. 
-|j Pnrer Uerilng in PiMb. Ob. . lO 00 

epFtngfield, oiffKo Co. ■ FrlcDd, 
- (■ nHtriur («^ . .100 

i.mfonl, Bfl. CO. ioJUidwiJi, . TT 



i:R.-Fniiikn]nl,EbtDr.' 



IHIO — FarmlDgtOD, BIlii Etlber 

do.' Snun Danfordi CO 

lminhi«,KiMnOn.Re..W.Sl)lirrow, « 00 
CANADA.— A FlitBi, . 8 Oo 

ForpromoUnr Ibt ciuh of Tmcli 

WntafAiTHh.Moiuiaini. |i,uaoa 

For Trmcli for Arbum^ , . S9 00 
irpttHling Buln<i S*1bU' 



JPVSZiXOATIOys 

OF THE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 



Spavish Tracts. 

Ko< 14. James Covej, . 4 p. 

15. Poor Jotepk, . 4 

16. Dairyman^ Dmghter, • 38 

17. Watchmaher & hU Family, 16 

18. Last Hwm of Hon. Francis 

Newport, .16 

19. African Servant, . 16 

20. life of Col. OanUner, . 90 

BROAOSBSXTs^-'-one haif sheet. 

Mo. I. Tbe Sinoer^s Help. 

3. Tbe Swearer^ Prayer, or his Oath 
Explained. 

3. WooderiolAdvantagetof Drank- 

enness. 

4. Tlie Tlieatre, the Cireuh and ifae 

Horse-race. 

Harobills— «i0e of one Tract page. 

No. 1. TMtlmoniM respecting tlieBiUe. 
2. The Saviour's InvUatioB. 



No. 3. 
4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

6. 

9. 
10. 
IL 

13* 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 



An Appeal to RcasoD. 

Ttie Oootrasr. 

TIm Swaarer** Pi«yer. 

Death. 

Tbe Grave. 

Heaven. 

HeU. 

Eternity. 

WImt an I?— Where am Ir- 

Wluther am 1 ffoloi^ 
Are yoa Preparei to Bte f 
A Question, 
liow Old art Tbou ? 
A Frobleo). 

A Hundred Years bence. 
Yet lacl^t tiiou oneTbiner. 
Important Questions. 
Tbe Soul a precious Jewel. 
A Wonder la Three Worlds. 
Reader. 

Where are you goiag ? 
A Caution. 
Time is short 






FBBlflami TRACTS. 

A beneTolent individoal has placed at the disposal of the American 
Tract Society the sum of nrrv dollars, to be awarded by tbe Pub- 
lisliing; Committee to the author of such a Tract as shall be " calcu* 
lated to attract attention and secure respect, while it plainly and briefly 
obviates the trite objections usually urged against the Bible, and states 
the plainest and most forcible proofs of its authenticity." 

The same individual has placed at the disposal of the Society the 
further sum of fiptt dollars, to be awarded by said Committee to 
the author of the best Tract on " The Extent of Female Influence, 
and the importance of exerting it in favor of Christianity." 

The Publishing' Committee will receive Tracts on the abdve sabjecU 
antil the first day of March, 1829. Communications mast be trans- 
mitted (post paid) to William A. Hallock, Corresponding Secretary of 
the American Tract Society, J^o. 144 NassauHStreet, New-Tork. The 
author's name must accompany the Tract in a sealed enrelope, which 
will not be opened unless in the instance of that accompanying tbe 
successful Tract. 

By order of the Publisbiag Committee of the American Tract Society. 

Jam£8 Milwor, Chakman* 
(Attest) W. A. Hallock, Cor. Sec. 

BAXTER'S SAINTS' REST. 

An anonymous indiridnal haying placed in the haodf^ the Com^ 
mittee $100, in part of the expense of 8tereottH>hig and perpetuating 
this most useful work, it has been manimously approved by the Pub- 
lishing Committee, and will be stereotyped as soott -as siifficient funds 
for perpetuaUng it shall be received. The wfatrle sum re(|uirite is 
^800. Inaildition to the $ 100 above referred to, the Chairman of 
tbe PubUshtng Committee and two other indiyiduals have each given 
$100, beside a donation of f60, received for the same object. Those 
"Who would wish to aid in perpetuating and circulating among tens of 
thousands a work which has perhaps bean- as mach blessed to tbe 
eternal welfare of the souls of men as any «ther mere huao produc- 
tion, have now the opportunity. 



^^ 



« 




t 



% 



1 



I 



t 



> 




