Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



jSM-U^s>r> 



1^1 A>,X-,>t«, 



!l^!1> 



V 




<? 



^/T 



f 



i 




v> 



*' 



Vfii^ 



»' 



"' « 



6^ 





^'\%\ 









<t^\a 



AMERICAN 
TRACT MAOAZINIi* 

FOR THE TEAlt iS3l. 

" vol/vl ^ ■ ' 



KPW-TORK. 

pjBIiSBED BY rtlE ABfEIliCAN .TRACT SOCIFTY' 

p. PuBlm-, Prinlot^ 

1331. 



>. 






t 



ZSBBZ 



Rev. John Breekenridge . 87 

IldBw and Rev. B. W. Noel . 103 

Rev. Dr. Cox ... 103 

Rev. Dr. Steinkopff, .103 

Mr. Peter Jones . . ]03 

Revi Edward prawley . 103 

Rev. Eustace Carey . . '103 

Rev. T. Woodroffin ^ . 104 
Mr. James Montgomery 



Sandwicb Islands . I 
Malta . . *. 
. Ceylon, Bombay 
North-American Indians 
Res^uUon . to supplgyineriean 

Forelg^Missioaafies 63, 8J^ 
Rev. .Mr. Ireckeo ridge's Ad- 

^ess in behalf of • . . ». 



S» 

291 U4, 133 
^ 3i 



Alexandria, p. C^P^male Auxiliary ''4 ^"^^.^S'^Zlln^t^^ 
'* Amelia Gde/'Tribttte to *. ^ 117 Huntsviile, Alabama Jluxilmry . 
^«mM» '^'^ Society Index io Subjects of Tracts i . . 

6th A^iyrtj»^iW^eport 61 Ii|dia. valueof fraSs in . . 

Recei^s 10, g 8?. 47. 59, 83, 95, Jaffna Tract Society, Ceylon 

v« ]07, lie, 131, 1S4, 163 Jefferson County, N. Y. AwSliary 

Recent pubKcaion* 30, 34, 58. 8B, Kingston, th,. Can. -W s3S^ 

«r *^«i I. 4 1^?. 154 Knoxvine, East fenn.Atfxiliary 

Want offraveling Agents 39, 46, 66, Lady, Donation from " -. ', 
^. . 115, 116 iet<er»/roi»*- 

Circular in beWf of For. lands 85 Prairie du Chiea ^ 
Sketch of Orfgln and Charac Bristol, England, IVact Soeiety 

tef of principal Series of -, *«-* -« n-:-— mI. JT* r^^^r 

Trafts . . ir 133 

Deficiency of Pecuniary Means 157 
How occasioned — ^pleafor Fusds 158 
Anerican Tract Sooiety, Boston~ 



17th Anniversary and Report 
Receipts of— communicatiofis 
from — See 'Amer. Tract 
^oclety^eceipts.' 
Arguments ojC a Tract Agent 
Ajrfcanms Terr, want of Tracts in 

Cbaraettfr mid habitsof the people 41 
Auburn, N; Y./uxiliary . . .38 
Authentic NiVrnHves desired . 154 
Authenticity o(Tracts . . 153 

Authors « Tracts 133, 151 



Port ail Prince, Hay# 

Carthagena 

Paris lyactSod«t|r 

Revt Miron Winslow 

Eugeoio Kincaid 

Dr. Edwin James 



I Glasgow Rel. Trapt SocieQf 



. Boston (England) Tfi^t^Sfietety 1 



87' 

135: 

44 

S5> 

150 
113^ 
133^ 
57 
67* 
55 
49 

46 
53 
SSI 
53 

104 

114 

115 

134 

125 



31 



Baltimore Branch 
Baptist Elder, aged . , 
Baptist General Tract SocieQr 
Boston Ciljr Tract S«ciety . 
Boston (England) Miit t^ociety . 
Canada, want df Tracts in, . 

Charleston, S. C. Tractcneetingto, 
Cherokee^ Tract in' . . . '. 134 
China, from tNi^vft of «r ., loi 
Cbippewi^, Tract in' . »^ A, 134 
Christian Abnanac, usefufn0*«9f '. 36 
Circular of Amerinui Tract Society 85 
Cumberland -Pres^fierku Church, 

Tract cause Iii| . . 115 

"Dairyman's Daughler," Dr. Mil- ^ 

Bor's viwt tovftave0f„A9l. 9,134, 153 
Darien, (Gedt-gMC; Aujrijlary * ^ • 55 
Donations, libeijl . 46,118, lS9« 131 
Evarts, Jeremi^,Esq.ta<thoac9of . 97 
Ftorence, (Alabami,) ^ufiliary, . f06 



Author of Tract ♦* Poor Sarah" 
50 iMuloH miiffunu Tract SoiUt^^ 
40 Dr, Milnor's visit Io . . . 
Resolutions on his return ''. 
Anniversaries, 1830 
Principles respecting fiction in 

Tracts . , • . . 

Duties of its respectire^A^nts 

io« V „?2d>nmversary and Report 

191 Mc*Ilvaine, Rev. C. R delegate to 

93 . ^.on^on ^foact SA^toty, ^ 

tM JgSlP'?*^efne«see) Auxiliary 

38 



% 



5 



littor. Rev: Dr. Report of his Ml«. 
. .i^r^'i f® London, ^ 

His visit totht Isle ot Wigff' 
cesidenee j>f tl^i> Dairy* • 



3 

6 

100 

3»6 
55 
106' 



majfs Da«^^, 



• ■* 



Progrew ^^JI^fj^Mn^ of U, VTi, 32; 
56,71,78,95,106,109,1 '^ 
QualificatioosvfUistrilKiters 



J06, 109, 113, 161 
-^ ,---'«rilKiters 13 

Influence on revivaUyof religion 40 
fo Hmfbrt, CMn. ».*^ 45- 
AlM»ndria, D, C. . ' jj^ ^45 ' 

4liTtoy, NT J. tesUmony of JfT 
dying distributer ... 56 



INDEX. 



Fart. 

ImporUnceof/udeiUtiiteplacef 75 

Siinial UeMiDg ia New-Ywk 

1b Wiaeiieiter, Virgiaia 

la New-York City 

TwriMony to e»calleiic« of 

Ib New-Orlaaaa . 

Montreal Tract Sociely 

Hew-Orleaas, Tract eauae ia 

Newport, R. I., Auxiliary 

Norwi^ €kyt Coon., Auxiliary 

Origin of Tracts 

Pkria Tract 8<«^ty , Letter from 

VaoB^lvania flraach, 4lh Annual 
JUport . « . 



« Yoang Cottager » in PhUadelpluB 
HandbiU, " wkere am I ?" A^ 



^•gt 



miai|nhia Yduth's Tract Society 

ffke'tPAwiteites*^ Early Piety 

FitlBlHirgh BIwich . 

** Poor Surah," AatBeaticity of 

Prairie dftObien, donation from . 

Pratulrargh, N. Y., Auxiliary 

PremiamB, award of 

Preiuiam Tuseta 

Prinee ^ward, Va.* Theological 

Seminary Auxiliary 
Seneca ladiana^Tractfor • 

** Shepherd of Salisbury Plain** 
Tobacco Cbewei^ '^neX blensed to 
Tract M agaaiBOf useAilness of 
Tracti, adaptation of, to all classes 
' AotheiRic Narratives desired 
Authenticity of 

Authors of . . 133,151 

Indei^tosttbieelsof . 150 

New, Bu1)iects fbr ... 130 

Sketcli of Origin and Character 

of {principal series 133 

T^veling Agencies ... 37 

Obstacles to be encountered 38 

• Repedy for defects of the system 38 

TradU, u^JubuM of— 
«« Qnenrii Bof the Spirit'* 18, 10, 4S, 54, 

80,106,117 
Tract and tne tobacco chewer 18 

praridential adaptation 19 

To a Swearer aJhd Sabbath-breaker 85 
IgnoraacOlid sil|i*stition encoun- 
tered .... S6 
In a CongregttioB llr Hsw-York 9C 

To an sibanwned female 8T 

7^ a yvug gentleman ui Philadelphia SB 

>'iy> a " " ' r..- ■— • Oft 

«Ob 

In the 

Near head of th^Wssissippi . 
«• Swearer's Prayer'* in Missouri 
Te one who was a Buisance |o the 

neighborlmod 
« Parley the Porttr** 
To a rwly*^" for t^ mialiftry . 
In pteWmg pauperism Bad oriMie 
TmraMiga Brought dowii 



78 To two heads of ftunilies 
106 To seven members of a fhmily 
100 A Welsh handbill . . 

113 Read in a Prayer-meeting 
15K *' Sabbath occupations** in VirgiaiB 
S2 To a Foreigner ia New-York 
1S8 " Dairyman's Daughter,** to eleven 
40 persmis . . . . 

17 To thirteen persons in one Tract 
133 district .... 

104 In Utica and Oneida county, N. Y. 

In accessions to the midistry 
94 In revivds«f religion 
57 To four in#viduab 
35 100 Tracts in an Academy 
23 " To-Day," found in a Garret 
. 153 ^ Bible above all Price** and '* Age 

40 ofReaaonf 

. 46 Toe Devotee in Calcutta '. 
20,83,83 To a young Brahmin . 
90, 47, 107, 130 To lads, &c. in Ceylon . 



S3 
53 
53 
54 
54 
54 
M 
78 

78 



78 

79 

. 79 

80,81 

. 80 

80 

81 

81 
103 
104 
114 
115 
117 
118 



In India 

118 To individuals ia Iqdiana 

43 Pour eonvemons ia Virginia 

134 To a Lady ..... 118 

18 *< Poor Sarah" .... 122 

54 In a family in Indiana . .• . 132 

151 To a'flU^oemaker, and an OvarscAr 128 

154 In a fAiiy of New Lights 128 

153 "Importance of ConsidersAiOn,*' to 

a young Gentleman 139 

«Visitt<LHouse of Mourning*' . 12^ 
See Monthly Distrlbutiim. 



38 

. 28 

29,114 

30,43. 

121 



y^mg genueman u i niiaoeipnia su oann dc 
lAaSveofCayloa* SO In Gana 

> fbe ^d'ffiay," as Baltimore 33 Troy, N. Y., 
te SedRa Indiatt language . 43 Utica, N. Y., 



• % 



Tracts, toant ef— 

In the Sandwich Idands 
On the Mediterranean *. 
In Ceylon and Bombay • . 
In our WtBstecn settleAiOttU 

12 
For Nortid American Indians 31 
In Arkaiisas Territory' '. 40 
In Valley of the Mississippi 49, 51, 

&, 115, 116 

Pressing, in one of the U.Sutcs 51 

Port-au-Prince— CarthageiiB S3 

ForaDepoaitoryvnOhio 57 

In Missouri and Illinois , 58 

In Indiana . . .11$ 

Sault St. Marie ... 124 

In Canada . . ^ • ^^ 

.jAuxiUary * . .. !^ 

Branch Tract Society 79 

43 Washington City Auxiliwy ' 1Q6 

43 <* Waterman," Honest ^ . 147, 153 
** Way to be Saved," in Gceek and 

44 ArmenoTurlii4i • 28 
44 Winchester, l&rginia, Auxiliary 106 
44 «<YottBf Cottager,** Dr.' Alifaor's 
50 ndl to grate of, &c. . 7 
53 



THE AMERICAN 

Stmt ^&M«$i9i9* 



JAKITART, 1831. 



8h UeBolror Ziiiat]iiH,O«aB0DB], No. II. 

.REV. DB. MILNOR'S REPORT 

0/ Aw gTOttiiioia Miuuin la a Btlegale to tht Rtligimit Tract Socitly 

To Ihe Eieculive CominUlce or Ihe Aioerican Tncl ^nctety, their 
ChsirBtan, who wb» honored with R commiHion ai (heir Delegate 16 
reprei eut thii Societ; at the Anniveriu; of the ttaligtou) Tract Sa> 
ciety in London, in tha%ioatli or May lait, lespectfully reports:' 

That he embarked for Liverpool on Ihe 16tb da? of March last, 
and, through the foodooi of Almigb<f God, airived, after alempes- 
luoUB paasaje, on the 14th of April; xnd bood afler hit nrriral in Lou- 
don eommunicaled with the Officers of the Religious Trad Society 
on the^bjeeti of hi< miaiion. He was very cordielly received by 
The Superintendent and Secretanei,Bndinvi(ed to attend araeeling of 
Ihe Committee an Tueidaj the STiii of April. He accordiogl; met 
the Commillee at 8 o'clock in the forenoon of that day, their cuitom 

Vet. VI. 1 ■ Wholu No. 58. 



£ R£V. DR. hilnor's REPORT. [Jan, 

being' to meet weekly and partake together of a plain breakfast, the 
busineu of the meeting being simultaneously commenced, and gene- 
rally centinaed for about two hours afler breakfast. Nothing could 
be more satisfactory than his reception, nor more kind than the ex- 
pressions of the Chairman and several members of the Committecr 
after a short address made by him, in which be communicated the re- 
solutions of this Board, expressing your kind and affectionate re- 
gards to those who had so nobly ledrjthe way in th6 Tract cause, and 
the sincere pleasure which it would at all times afford you to co-ope- 
rate with them in such manner as might best subserve the interests of 
the Redeemei's kingdom ; and also your sense of the great benefits 
likely to result from the Interchange of representatives at our Annuai 
Meetings. 

Theur method of conducting business is somewhat different from 
ours. The whole Committee meet weekly. Tracts are examined and 
reported on by special Committees, and any questions arising upon 
them coniidered and determined upon by the Committee at large ; 
the dutyof preparing them for the preiss being confided to one of the 
Secretaries. 

The Society held two Annual Meetings, one at the west end and 
the other at the east end of London. 

That termed the General Western Meeting, was held at Willis's 
Rooms, King-street, St. James's, on the 6th of May, which was at- 
tended by a large and respectable audience — the Marquis of Chol- 
mondelly presiding. From the abstract of the Report given by the 
Secretaries, the Rev. Mr. Jones and the Rev. Mr. Sibthorpe, it ap- 
peared that the total of the Society's receipts, during the past year, 
amounted to near £26,000 sterling, ($111,111 11,) and that they 
had issued near eleven millions Tracts. They have also published 
many interesting volumes, and circulated a large number of I'racts 
abroad in foreign languages. The address of the Rev. Mr. Sibthorpe 
was rendered very interesting by his relation of several anecdotes 
which had occurred in the course of his travels for the Society, 
evincive of the great utility of Tracts ; as was that of the Rev. Mr. 
Grimshawe, author of the Life of the late Rev. Legh Richmond, by 
some affecting allusions to that distinguished servantof Christ, whose 
few but excellent productions in this line have been attended with so 
singular a blessing from on high. Many other addresses were madeat 
this meeting, and among them one by your delegate, in which he en- 
deavored to comply with the spirit of your resolution! and ^th an 
intimation given to him by the London Committee to communicate 
all the information in his power as to the operations and results of 



1831.] REV. t)R. MILNO&'S ftEPORT.' S, 

Tract 1 ngtitutions in the United States. The Rev. Mr. Mcllvaine had 
not arrived in England at the time this meeting' was held. 

The second Annual Meeting Vals held at the London Tavern, Bi- 
fihopgate-street, after a numerously attended public breakfast, at 6 « 
o'clock in the morning of Friday, the 14th of May— 'the Rev. Mr. 
Mcllvaine having then arrived, but being too much indisposed to at- 
tend. The Hon. Thomas Erskine was in the Chair, and delivered an 
excellent opening address. He was followed by the Rev. Dr. Pye 
Smith, and your Delegate ; and then addresses were delivered by the 
Rev. Dr. Stewart, of Ireland ; the Rev. John Bodington, of Horton ; 
the Rev. J. Dyer ; the Rev. Dr. Wilson, of Malta, and some others. 
Your Delegate would have been happy to lay before you copies of 
these addresses, but the Society jiaving published no official report of 
them, and the hasty newspaper reports being too incorrect and un- 
faithful for that purpose, he is unable to do so. 

Subsequent to these Anniversaries your Delegate had the pleasure 
of attending several meetings of the Committee, accompanied, when 
his health permitted, by his esteemed colleague; and also frequently 
visited the Society's House. On these occasions every disposition 
was manifested to answer your Delegate's inquiries, and to commu- 
nicate the fullest information on every subject, both by the members 
of the Committee and the other officers of the Society. 

On his return to London, after an absence of two months, he had 
an early conference of considerable length with Mr. Lloyd, the only 
Secretary then in town ; and by particular desire, breakfasted and had 
his last Interview with the Committee on the morning of Tuesday the 
7th of September. Tour Delegate was addressed at this tn^eting by 
the Chairman, the Rev. Mr. Dyer, in a most feeling manner; and the 
resolutions of the Society hereunto annexed, marked A, were com^ 
municated, accompanied by every expression of Christian kindness 
and affeLCtion toward the American Society, its Committee, and its 
Delegates. Mr. M'llvaine's health not admitting of so early an at- 
tendance, he was not present, but joined us after the close of the 
meeting, and we had together a conversation of considerable length 
on various topics relating to the Tract cause, With Mr. Lloyd and 
.in intelligent and deeply engaged member of the Committee. 

Your Delegate having been charged by the Publishing Committee 
with the duty of inquiring into the principles on which the London 
Committee act in relation to the issuing of fictitious Tratts, would 
state, as the amount of the information obtained by him on that sub- 
ject, that the Committee of that Institution do not positively exclude 
all publications that might be considered as coming under this de- 
nomination. Such narratives as are avowedly anthentic, are only 
published by th« Committee under a full persuasion derived from 



4 Riv. oiu MtiiKoa** REPOftT. [Jan. 

saiisfaclory endence of the actual occurrence of all that they relate. 
In such pablications as do not come precisely under this de>cription^ 
all that is unnatural, forced and mai^ellous; also all loTe stories, or 
things calculated unduly to excite the passions and expectations, are 
particularly avoided. But when incideals have really occurred^ 
though in the cases of netrunu individuals rather than ene, and they 
are combined in a natural and instructive manner, the Tract is true 
to nature, and in thevievr.of that Committee hardly to be called a 
fiction. The combination of circumstances is only intended to make 
the instruction more clear and impressive. The slory is only the 
vehicle-^he attention of the reader is not fixed on the story as (the 
end; but only as the means to a further end, namely, the instruction 
of the reader. Such a use of fiction b not conceived to be impro* 
per in that Society's publieatioos. 

The same Committee having by a resolution requested your Dele« 
gate to make inquiry as to the origm, histoiy, and truth of such Tracts 
of the Society in London as have been republished by this Society, 
annexes a document, marked B, as containing all the information that 
could be obtained on that subject. 

The answer of Mr. Davis, the Superintendent of the Religious 
Tract Society of London, to various inquiries respecting the duties 
of its sereral officers, and the modes of its conducting business, will 
be found in a fourth document annexed, marked C. 

Your Delegate desires to record his devout gratitude to God for his 
protecting providence and care in the preservation of his life and 
health, and for that measure of ability with whidi he was enabled to 
discharge the important duties committed to his trust. He desires 
also to express his gratitude to the officers of the Religious Tract So- 
ciety in London, and to the members of the Committee, for the affec-> 
tionate and indulgent manner in which his public services were re- 
ceived ; for the pleasure he enjoyed at the interesting meetings of the 
Committee, and for the prompt and intelligent manner in which in- 
formation was afforded in answer to his various inquiries by the 
officers of the Society and the members of the Committee. 

Some packages transmitted hy the London Committee to this So» 
ciety accompany this report. 

It may not be improper to mention that your Delegate had a friend- 
ly conference with a meeting of the Committee of the Glasgow Tract 
Society, and that he had the pleasure of learning, while in Paris, that 
the Tract Society m that city was in a prosperous state, and it is 
hoped that the recent revolution in France will give a new spring to 
■ that and other evangelical enterprises throughout that kingdom. 

He was also enabled to distribute profiitably many of this Society 'a 
publications, and trmts he hat give« some aid to the cau^e of Tcw^ 



PMABoe, by «ddrenta «iT«rio«s naetu^g^ by lAtrodocing the sub- 
ject id private eompanies, uaA by the distribution of Tracts on thftt 
interesting snbject. All which is respectfhily submitted by the Com- 
miUee*s fellow-laborer and faithful Brother in Christ, 

New'Yorkf Nov. 16, 1830^ James Milnor. 



tM>CUMKKT H, ABOTE RIFXRIIXD TO. 

At a meeting of the Committee of the Religious Tract Society, 
held 7th Sept. 1830, the Rev. Dr. Milnor, of New-York, having at- 
tended the Committee, asf the representative of the American Tract 
Society, to take leave previously to his return home, it was 

Resolvedf This Committee request the Rev. Dr. Milnor to convey 
to the American Tract Society assurances of their earnest desire fo 
co-operate with that Institution at all times in promoting the various 
important efforts in which the Societies are respectively engaged. 
They have heard with much gratification and thankfulness of the sig- 
nal success with which it has pleased the Most High to crown the ex- 
ertions of their American brethren, whereby many souls have been 
brought from darkness to light, and the glad tidings of the Gospel 
of Christ have been widely diffused. 

The Committee would farther express the great pleasure they have 
derived from personal intercourse with the representatives of the 
American Tract Society: they trust that similar intercourse may, from 
time to time, be renewed ; being fully assured that such communica- 
tions strengthen those bonds of Christian affection by which England 
and the United Stages of America are connected, while the institu- 
tions of both countries will thereby be stimulated to increased exer- 
tions. To Dr. Milnor they feel especially indebted for the assistance 
he rendered at the Anniversary Meetings of the Religious Tract So- 
ciety, and they regret their inability to express the deep interest with 
which his accounts from their transatlantic brethren were received by 
the members and friends of the institution ass^bled on those oc- 
casions. 

in conclusion, the Committee of the Religious Tract Society would 
desire to record, though but in an imperfect manner, their fervent hope 
and full confidence that the Divine blessing will be farther vouchsafed 
to the labors of the American Tract Society. Their earnest prayers for 
its prosperity will be offered at the throne of grace, and they request' 
the like intercessions in their behalf may be presented by their be- 
loved American brethren, deeply feeling that the most active human 
efforts are of no avail without the Divine blessing, and that daily sup- 
plies of grace and strength are needed to enable both institutions to 
labor strenuously while it is day, seeing that the night cometh when 
no man can work. 

John Davis, Superintendent M. X. S. 



The information contained in document Bt alluded to above, will 
be embodied with other information respecting the origin of the 
American Society's Tracts, and will probably be inserted in a future 
number of this work. 

1» 



6 llBir. Dm. MILirOA'S BEFORt. [jKfl. 

From the infommtion contained in docnment Op it •ppMurt tlmt it 
is the duty of JUn Mm Ikwit, the Superintendent of the London 
Tract Society, to l^eep the Society 'i accounts, receiTe all moneys, 
pay all disbursements, make all purchases of paper, ^c, and exercise 
a general supervision of the Society's entire operations* Jlfi^. Wii' 
liam Jone#,the Assistant Secretary, is engaged about nine months in 
the year in visiting the Society's Au liliaries, of which there are be- 
tween four and five hundred, at their Anniversaries, when he usually 
takes part in the proceedings of the day. He also writes the An- 
nual Report, and carries on tiie greater part of the Society's Foreign 
. Correspondence. Jfr. Lloyd is wholly engaged in superintending 
the Society's publishing department, and exercises the editorship of 
all its publications, in which work he has two assistants. 

In addition to the above, the Society's establishment consists of 

two boys to goon errands ; two porters ; one warehouse-man in the 

. shop, one in the country department, and one to superintend the 

work brought in from the printers, binders, folders, and stitchers, 

. and to keep the stock reported, when any article is getting low, that 

it may be immediately re-printed. 

The Society occupies four adjoining houses, but no one resides on 
the premises. It establishes no Depositories of its publications, but 
endeavors to promote the formation of Auxiliaries in large towns, 
which purchase the publications in their Depositories, and remit at 
an early date. All the expenses of the establishment are defrayed 
from the small profit on publications sold, especially the book terieSf 
the Committee pledging themselves to appropriate the full amount 
of all donations received, in their gratuitous issues. 

The greater pare of the Society's publications are printed by steam 
machinery, from stereotype plates. All the printing, folding, and 
binding, are •done by individuals employed out of the Society's 
House — ^no part of this work being done by the Society itself. 

A discount of 26 per cent, is allowed to subscribers and Auxiliaries, 
and 10 per cent, fo booksellers. Of the Child's Companion 28,000 
copies, and of the Tract Magazine 19,000 are circulated monthly. 



REV. DR. MILNOR'S VISIT TO THi; 

ISLE OF WIGHT, 

Wiere lived the " Dairyman's Daughter,** the " Young Cottager,'' and 

the " African Servant." 

It is peculiarly gratifying to be enabled to present our readers with 
an extract from the Journal of a visit made by the Chairman of the 
Publishing and Executive Committees of the American Tract So- 
ciety, to the scene of the three invaluable Tracts above named, and 
to have his own testimony to their truth— especially as it has not un- 
frequently been intimated that the author, in writing them, drew very 
largely from the resources of his own imagination. There are those 
who are accustomed to consider the triumphs of Divine grace, not 



1851.] visit TO tfle ISLE OP wieHT. 7 

less than fine descriptions of natural scenery, as existing only in the 
regions of fancy, by some of whom these three Tracts especially have 
been singled out as fictitious. The sequel will serre to show on how 
very slight grounds such an intimation has been founded. 

We were now (savs the Journal) approaching Brading, where the 
'Rev. Legh Richmond commenced his ministry, were passing through 
the rich and delightful scenery which he so tastefully describes, and 
about to behold, and in some instances to press with our footsteps, 
those almost hallowed spots on which occurred events the remem- 
brance of which he has perpetuated in those memorable Tracts, the 
" Young Cottager," the " African Servant," <and the " Dairyman's 
Daughter.'* We had with us these invaluable Tracts, and employed 
ourselves in reading such parts of them especially as were calculated 
to direct our attention to the several places which he does not name, 
but describes with such fidelity to nature that the observant trsTeller 
needs no. other guide to point them out. 1 am glad that we can bear 
our testimony to the accuracy of his descriptions, because many have 
supposed them to be principally fanciful, and on this account much 
that adds greatly to the interest of his narrative, and is highly in- 
structive in showing the Christian the religious feeling with which 
the works of the great Creator should be viewed, and the profitable 
use to which their contemplation may be applied, has been in many 
editions of them omitted. Though not so intended by the curtailers 
of these Tracts, the retrenchment, in mv opinion, is an injustice to 
their lamented author, and an injury to tne narratives themselves. 

On arriving at Brading we drove immediately to the church-yard 
where are interred the remains of little Jane. There were several 
children playing near the gate. I asked a fine looking little girl if 
she could show us the grave of Jane, the Young Cottager. ** Oh yes/' 
she said, and advanced before us as our guide. After showing us the 
grave of Jane, and standing over if as long as we desired, in silent 
but afiecting meditation, she told us she would show us the verses on 
Mr. and Mrs. Berry's tomb-stone, that Jane had got by heart, and re- 
peated to Mr. Richmond. " Well, my dear," said I, " the reading of 
these verses helped Jane to become a good girl, and to die happy, did it 
not V* She answered, ** yes sir," as she did my next inquiry, whether 
she would not try to be as good a girl and die as happy as little Jane. 
The epitaphs which little Jane committed to memory, and especially 
the one on Mr. B's tomb-stone, which was probably the means, under 
God, of her first serious impressions, are both pious and afiecting; 
and their nfluence on the mind of this youthful candidate for heaven 
may show the simple means the Holy Spirit often employs to ac- 
complish the conversion of the soul to God. 

We went from the grave-yard into the church, a very ancient 
structure, not less, the sexton assured us, than eleven hundred years 
old. It has been enlarged since its first erection, and is remarkable 
for nothing, in its interior, but two singular tombs with wooden 
elBgies of the deceased, several plainer but apparently very old mo- 
numents of stone, and a most belter skelter inconvenient arrange- 
ment of the pews. Its location, however, is at once sequestered and 
convenient to the village, above which it is considerably elevated. 



8 YISIT TO THK ISLE OF WIGBT. [Jan. 

The partoDage,* a comfortable looking abode, if immedUiteiy ailja' 
cent to the church-jrard. From the church, the view of Bradiog 
Hareu, the bay beyond, the elevated hill on the right, and the slop- 
ing bank upon the left, and the other scenery described by Mr. Rich- 
mond in the Toung Cottager, as seen from this spot, are all just as 
there represented. On qur way from Brading to Sandown-bay the 
prospects were variegated and pleasing, and as we passed the fort 
we emerged upon one of the grandest views of the ocean through the 
hay we had yet seen. Here was pointed to us the high down which 
Mr. Richmond describes in the African Servant, the perpendicular 
cliff in which it terminates, and the jutting rock under which he dis- 
covered and conversed so interestingly with his sable friend, ^"othing 
could be more true to nature than the surrounding scenery as he de- 
scribes it in that Tract. 

We saw the cottage of the celebrated John Wilkes, in the garden 
of which are flourishing several rose-bushes, said to have been plant- 
ed by his Own hands. It is very near the water, but on an eminence 
so raised above it as to present an extensive sea-view. We then pro- 
ceeded on to the village of Shanklin, consisting of a few neat cot- 
tages, and stopped at a residence bearing nothing of a tavern aspect, 
but affording us the refreshment which we needed. After our lunch 
we walked down to what is called Shanklin Chine, a large romantic 
fissure or chasm in the cliff that fronts upon the sea. The descent to 
the beach is by an ordinary road, and then you return again through 
the chasm to Shanklin. No description extant of this singular spot 
is either so minutely accurate or so beautiful as that given by Mr. 
Richmond, in the ''Young Cottager," as one of his places of solitary 
religious meditation. We occupied the same " little hollow recess in 
the cliff" from which he surveyed and delineated the scenery around. 
We there read deliberately his graphic description of the various in- 
teresting objects that lay before him, and could discern no difference 
between it and the noble scene in actual view, except that a mist hid 
from us ''the towering spire'' of the Chichester cathedral, that in 
these peaceful times we beheld no " frigate standing into the bay,'^ 
and but few vessels of any description happened at that time to enliven 
the prospect. We lingered long upon and near the beach, and then 
proceeded up the chine, along the side of which the fishermen have 
formed a convenient footpath, with a resting place or two on the way, 
where an interesting point of observation happened to offer. Several 
neat cottages with small gardens have been erected within the fissure, 
each of which, while sheltered from the weather by its lofty sides, 
enjoys an extensive prospect of the sea. 

Returning to the village, we resumed our carriage, and passing by 
Shanklin church, a neat old edifice, we came to Bonchurch village, 
which is quietly seated in what is called the undercliff, a deep recess 
between a very lofty eminence or flown on the inland side, and a high 
l>ank toward the sea. We got out of the carnage and proceeded 
along the bank, for the sake of the view which it presented of some 
excellent scenery not before disclosed. Below the village we threaded 
the way down a footpath to the road, and got into our carriage, our 
course now lying up a valley between gently sloping but lofty hills 
on either side. Landscapes of peculiar beauty and variety, exhibiting 



1831.] TISIT TO THB ISLE OF WIGHT. 9 

numberless fields of grain nearly ripe for the harvest, herds of cat- 
tie and flocks of sheep, with here and there a company of haymaker^ 
busily employed, preiented themselves in OTer^changing aspects as 
we ascended or descended the successive slopes of this delightful 
valley. We had long in sight, and at length passed at some distance, 
the splendid seat and extensive park and grounds of Lord Yarbo^ 
rough, called Appnldurcomb. Travellers have given rapturous de« 
scriptions of the interior and its rich collections of paintings and 
sculpture. Of these we shall probably never .have a sight ; but it was 
commended to our notice by circumstances of a very different kind. 
It was there that the sister of the Dairyman's daughter died, whose 
funeral Mr. Richmond attended at the request of the latter; and 
where, on a visit about a week after, he had his first conversation 
with her whose religious experience, as narrated by that faithful 
minister, has had a more extensive influence in the world than ever 
attended any similar publication. He gives in the Dairyman's 
Daughter a correct account of the situation and appearance of Ap- 
pnldurcomb, and of the adjacent scenery. We saw ** the summit of 
the hill adjoining*' the venerable mansion, to which he ascended after 
the visit referred to ; the triangular pyramid of stone near which he 
sat down to meditate, and the magnificent surrounding prospect. In 
full view of this elevated spot we read his extended description, and 
turned southward, and south-eastward, and northward, and west« 
ward, and admired, as he had done, the unequalled beauty of the 
scene. Certainly neither of us had ever read the descriptive part of 
the Dairyman's Daughter with the like interest and emotions. My 
feelings obliged me to resign the book to my companions, and under 
the various emotions the narrative and the scene excited, it was diffi^ 
cult for any of us to prosecute our reading : but with an intensity 
of interest we gazed upon the lovely prospect until it could be na 
longer seen. 

We now approached Arreton, the village in the church-yard of 
which lie interred the mortal remains of Elizabeth Wallbridge, the- 
sainted daughter of the Dairyman. About a mile from it we stopped 
before the cottage from which her soul ascended to its rest, and were 
kindly received by her surviving brother, a man now advanced in 
years, and still a resident in the mansion of his birth. He showed us 
Elizabeth's Bible, in which was simply written, " Elizabeth Wall- 
bridge, daughter of Joseph and Elizabeth Wallbridge; born 1771 — 
died 1801 ;" and took us up stairs into the room in which she ezpir-s, 
ed. We added our names to a long list in a book kept by her brother 
for the purpose, and then took our leave ; Mr. Wallbridge in a very 
respectful manner thanking us for our visit. 

Our simplicity in finding satisfaction in such a visit would be a 
fruitful subject of derision to men of the world ; but if they will in- 
dulge our simplicity, and we can enjoy feelings such as these scenes 
excited, let them laugh, and we will delight in every thing calculated 
to cherish the memory of the pious dead. 

On leaving the cottage our .path was the same as that over which 
moved the funeral procession of the Dairyman's Daughter, in the 
.manner so aifectingly described by Mr. Richmond. It lay through 
a narrow but excellent road, winding between high green hedges » 
find sometimes under an arch formed by the trees on either lid? % ^ 



10 



RECXfFTS. 



[Jan. 



lofty cultivated hill on the right, and a charmiog Tiew df the laxu- 
riaat ▼alley now and then breaking upon nt to the left. As we read 
the account of the solemn passage of the mourning yet rejoicing re- 
latives and friends of the deceased, we were ready almost to realize 
its actual vision, and hear the pious strains of melody as they thpn 
filled the air and ascended to the skies. Thus prepared, we reached 
Arreton Church, and leaving our carriage to ascend the hill without, 
us, we went to the grave of Elizabeth, read the beautiful lines which, 
love of her character and the- recollection of her triumphant death* 
have caused to be inscribed on her simple monument, meditated for 
awhile on her present glorious state, dropped a tear of sympathy, but 
not of sorrow, and silently retired. 

From this to Newport, our destined resting* place, we could only 
talk on things connected with the scenes, and incidents, and reflec- 
tions of the day ; uniting in the sentiment, that Paris, with all its 
palaces, and gardens, and paintings, and statues, had afforded nh 
such gratification to our eyes as the glorious works of God on whicii 
they had dwelt in this enchanting island ; and none of its multiplied 
attractions such an inward feast as the mental associations of thi$ 
day's travel had supplied. 



Netd Ptcfttkolitfw.— DIARY for 1831, 64 mo. in a pocket-book form ; cootainiag a 
^ text and a verse of a hymn for each day in^the year, with a blank <^po8ite for no« 
tin^ the memoranda of each day. Price, centa each. 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OP THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY 
During the month ending December 15, 1830. 

FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 

VER^— Clarendon, Mrs. Evelina Hodges, Sec. 
Marlborough, Feui. Mrs Huldab C* Newton, Ag. 

Shoreham, Levi O. Birchard, Ag 

St- Albans, Fern. Rev. Worthington Smith, Ag. 

MASS.— Lee, Hubbard Bartlett, Tr 

Sew Marlborough, (North Soc.) Harley Goodwin, Tr. 
Richmond, Berkshire Co. Abraham B. Rosseter, Sec. 
R. ISL. — Bristol, Fern. Miss Hannah Church, Sec. . 

CONN.— Danbnry, Horace Ball, Tr 

East Haddam, Fem. Mrs. S. B. Parsons, Ag. . 

Goehen, George Stanley, Sec 

Grassy Hill, in Lyme, Benjamin F. Gillet, Tr. 
Hartford, Conn. Branch, Charles Hosmer, Sec. . 
Humphreysville, Fem. Mrs. Hannah Thompson, Sec- 
Kent, Fem 

Middletown, Luke C. Lyman, Sec 

Do. by their Auxiliary, Chatham, .... 

\cw-Lond<M), Robert Coit, Tr 

Northford, Rev. Matthew Noyes, Ag 

Norwich, Fem. Miss Sarah Backus, Sec 

Haybrook, 2d Soc. Fem. Mrs. A. P. Champlin, Ag. 

Watertown, Benjamin De Forest, Ag 

West Greenwich, W. B. Sherwood, Sec 

Winchester Centre, Hiram Church, Tr 

S. YORK Aquibogue and Mattituck, Selden Herrick, Tr. 

Auburn, Clark B. Hotchkiss, Ag 

Berea, Montgomery Co. Fem, Miss Maria Houston, Tr. 
Bethlehem, Salisbury Mills, P. O. Robert Dennison, Tr. 

Bovina, John Hume, Tr 

Pridgehampton, L, I. Rev. Amzi Francis, Tr. , , 



ForTr. 


2 00 


900 


20 00 


2 90 


30 00 


2 15 


3 19 


19 87 


8 16 


13 68 


3 00 


350 00 


4 00 


30 00 


5 00 


900 


I 00 


2 76 


225 


40 00 


9 00 


1 89 


1 94 


i9n 



Don. 
2 0d 
1 00 


30 00 

2 15 

12 00 

22 00 

16 25 

4 09 

17 »i 

5 25 


6 00 

9 58 

12 09 

2 50 


4 42 
30 00 


19 00 


20 00 
75 


3 00 


\ 00 



1831.] 



RECEIFTi. 



U 



BHffalo» Orlando AUen, Tr 

Carmel,F«iii. Elizabeth Belden, Sec 

Cazenovia, Fern. Mrs. C.C. Hough} Af 

Chadiam, Columb. Co. Rev. Moses Raymond, Tr. . 

Do. do. Fem. Catharine Hutchinson, Tr. 

Claverack, Fern. Mrs. Richard Sluyter, Sec 

Clove, in Rochester, Ulster Co. Rev. B. B. Westftll, Pres. . 

Flatbush, Ulster Co. P. A. Overpongh, Tr 

Fresh Ponds, Josepli Willets, Tr 

Glen's Falls, E. Hawley, Ag 

Goshen, Orange Co. Dr. John S. Crane, Tr. 
Hempstead, Rockland Co. Fern. Miss Elizabeth Coe, Sec. 
Uarlsem, Fem. Miss Laetitia Doughty, Tr. .... 

Hopeville, William Clark, Tr 

Hunter, William W. Edwards, Pres 

Huntingt<», L. I. Fem. Mrs. Henrietta Brown, Tr. . 
Johnstown, (Montgomery Co. Aux.) Zenophon Hasrwood, Sec. 

Lansingburgh, Elias R. Parmelee, Sec 

New-Hackensack, M. W. Dwight, Tr 

New-Paltz, Ulster Co. Fem 

New- York City Tract Society, Alfred Edwards, Tr. . 
Do. by Fem. Aux. Mrs. J. R. Hurd, Tr. 

Poughkeepsie, Mrs. Phebe Bowne, Tr 

Prattsburgh, Flavel Loomis, Sec 

Rhinebeck, Fem. Mrs. C. Davidson, Sec 

Rochester, Monroe Co. Levi A. Ward, Tr 

Rochester, Ulster Co. Rev. B. B. Westfall, Pres. 

Sag Harbor, M. B. Osborn, Tr 

Scotchtown, John Mc Williams, Tr 

Setauket, L.I. Jesse S.Woodhull,Tr 

Smithtown, J. R. Hunting, Tr 

Somers, John Owen, Pres. 

Spencertown, Columb. Co. Rev. Joel Osborn, Ag. 
Springfield, Otsego Co. William L. Bigelow, Sec. . 
Sweet Hollow, in Huntington, L. h John Everitt, Tr. . 

Troy, Charles Lyman, Tr. . . 

Utica, Edward Vernon, Sec 

Windham, Greene Co. Fem. Abigail Pratt, Tr. 

N. JER— Bloomfield, Juv. J. Crane, Tr 

Elizabethtown, Union, J. J. Bryant, Tr 

Hackettstowo, Fem. Mary Campbell, Sec 

Harmony, in Greenwich, Fem. Ann T. Fair, Sec. . 
Morristown, Fem. Mrs. Sarah A. Mills, Tr. 

Oxford, Fem. Mrs. Sarah Sherrerd, Tr < 

Perth Amboy, Fem. Mrs. Margaret Maurice, Tr. 
Readingtown, (North Branch,) Martin Wyckoflf, Sec. 
SomerviUe, Fem. Mrs. Sophia Talmage, Tr. 

Stillwater, Fem. Sarali Roy, Tr 

Washington, Morris Co. Fem. niebe S. Miller, Tr. 

PENN. — ^Montrose, (Susquehanna Co. Aux.) Jerre Lyons, Tr. 

Philadelphia Branch, Frederick Erringer, Tr. 

DIS. COL — Alexandria, Fem. Mrs. E. S. Ladd, Sec. 

Washington City, John Kennedy, Tr 

VIR..—Lee8bttrg, W.A.Powell, Eeq.Tr. . . . . . 

Liberty,Bedford Co. Edward Phillips, Sec 

Petersburg, Thomas H. Boswell, Tr 

Shepherdstown, James McMurran, Tr. .... 
Winchester, Daniel Gold, Tr 

Do. by their Aux. Falling Water Cong. . 

Do. do. Gerrards Town, . . . . 

Do. do. White Post, .... 

N. CAR.--Saiem, Stokes Co. William Lewis Benzien, Sec. . 
Shiloh, Granville Co. Fern. Miss Priscilla S. Daniel, Ag. 
S. CAR.>-Little Pee Dee, Marion Dist. Malcolm Sufford, Sec. 



ForTr, 


jD0n< 


44 00 




650 






8 00 


450 




3 31 




4 00 


1 00 


8 30 




50 




3 50 




00 




13 75 




8 00 




5 75 


12 00 


3 62 




500 




6 54 




17 80 




36 94 


« 77 


12 00 


4 (K) 


1 00 




1275 47 




102 04 






21 00 


21 00 




500 




98 25 




6 44 




700 


13 00 


700 


5 00 


6 87 




5 00 




1 75 




2 77 




18 00 




16 75 




30 00 




200 00 




5 00 




.6 52 




90 48 




600 


2 00 


968 


756 




50 00 




20 00 


1 74 




10 00 




7 18 


5 00 


6 41 




320 




11 18 




1000 00 




42 50 




100 00 






10 00 


10 00 




50 00 




20 00 


10 00 


50 82 


20 OO 




2 00 




5 00 




3 00 




SO 00 


10 00 




6 00 


2 00 



la 



EECJBIPT6. 



KEN^^Rithmond, Fem. Bin. Siuan H. Inrine, Sec. . 
OHIO'-~CkiUieotlie«&«v.iohDP.Bui8iiias,Tr. ^ 
C;dlumbu«,Rev. JI«ine»Hog«,D.D. A«. • • 
Hudflon, (Portage Ck>. Auoc) Prof. B. Wrigbt, Tr. . » . 
MICH. TBR.— Mackinawrlloben Stewart, Esq.* Sec. 
1.. CAN.— Montreal Rev. G. W. PerkiM, Ag. » . 
SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 
N. YORK^— New Utrecht, Female Bible Mibb. and TrtKt Soc. Mra. 

Knapp, Tr ■ * ' * «! * 

N. JER.--Haiiibarf, Submx Co. Fem. Mrs. D. Haines, Tr. 
Paterson, 2d Re£ Dutch Church, Ralph Doremus, Tr. . 
Tracts sold at the Depository to individuals, . 



F&rTr. 


680 
4112 
59 00 
23 50 
11 00 


6 43 

6 21 

2 00 

253 28 



Don, 
50O 



JHredon far Life, 

MASS.— Bolton, S.ViS. Wilder* 
Esq. PreHdenit in part for per- 
fietuating the "Pilgrim's Pro- . 
gress," 100 00 

Dedham, Rev. Ebc4ezar Burgess, 
for do • • • •. 100 00 

CONN.— Litchfield, Hon. Benja- 
niinTallmadfe» . . . • .100 00 

Norwalk, Rev. Hemcy Benedict, by . 
Aux.Tr.Soc.(inftiUof|50,) 25 00 

N. YORK.— New-York City, Jo- 
seph ftrewster, in part for per- 
petuating "Bunyan's PUgrim's 
Kogress," V 100 00 

Rev. Wm. McMurray, D, D. by la 
dies of MarketHStreet church, . . 50 00 

John Rankin, in part for perpetu 
ating the "Pilgrim'8 Progress," 50 00 

Charles Starr, for do. do. 100 00 

Poughkeepsie, Isaac Roosevelt, by 

his father, Mr. Ja^. Roosevelt, . 50 00 
Members for Life, 
MASS.— Bernardston, Rev. Wm. 

Riddel, .20 00 

R. ISL.— Bristol, Miss Charlotte , « «« 

be Wolf, . 30 00,^ Camp 

CONN.— Hartford, Charles Bliss, 

(In full of 120,) ...... 1000 

N. YORK.- Albany, Wm. James, 

by Annanias Piatt, Bethlehem, .20 00 
Lansingburgb, Reverend John W. 



CONN.— Coventry, Mrs. Persia 
LiUie* 1 37 

Litchfield, First Ecclesiastical So- 
ciety, • 22 22 

N. YORK.— Albany, Samuel M. 
Hopkins, Esq. in part of a coun- 
sel fee 20 OO 

Caroline, Joseph Speed, ... 75 

Cooperstown, Session of Presbyte- 
rian Church, . . . . i. . • 

Granville, Rev. John Whiting and 
members of his Society, . . • 

Long Island, Piatt Bufiitt, Esq. . 

New-Hackensack, Mrs. Zephaniah 
Piatt, Ibr Val. Miss 

New-York city, LockwoodDe Fo- 
rest, $20— Mrs. Downy, 50ct8. 
J. P. F. $2— A Friend, f 1— Do. 
Thanl^-oifering for Val, Miss, $ 5, 8 00 
Fem. Friend, by J. Nitchie, Esq. 5 00 
" Legh Richmwid," in part for 
perpetuating the Young Cottager, 40 00 

,Orange County, A Priend, . . • 

Prattsburgh) Orren Daball, . . • 

Ripley, Chautauque County, L. 
Hopkins and ftimily, .... 

Sacket's Harbour, Miss Elizabeth 



6 00 

10 00 
5 00 

5 00 

20 50 



2 
5 



00 
00 



75 



Utica, Anonymous, by Mr. E. Vcr- 



8 00 
3 00 



2 
3 



00 
00 



IB 
00 



non, for Val. Miss. 
N. JER.— Readingtown, John Hall, 

$1— M.Wyckoff,tl 

PENN— Churchtown, A Friend, . 
VIR.— A Clergyman, by D. Gold, 

rjew-ior«i.«y, rrouo..^-. ««.,.-« «w 8^^ ; j 

^^'^f^r "'^'^"'^'' ^'" 10 OoUjaS^SnlJiV -Fayette J^ ^^^ 
N.''j'ER.?Te^i;gtiwn,Mr;. Ani \ Coun^. ^T^^^'^'itc?""- * 
MrVanLiew,bjAux.Tr.Soc. 20 OOlPaynsviUe, Thomas Fitch- - 

VIR.— Winchester, Mrs. Phebe 



1 00 



Gold, by Mr. Daniel Gold, . . 20 00 
Miss Anna D. HoUiday, by a friend, 
(infunoft20,) 10 00 

Other Donations, 

VER.— New-Haven, Rev. Joel 

Fisk,$2^ALady$3» • • • • ^ 00 
MASS.— A Friend, .••**• 25 JO 
Otis, Congregational Church, . . 5 00 



The above list contains donations— 
In part for perpetuating the " Pil- ^^ ^ 

grim's Progress,** . . . . $450 00 
Do. do. the " Young Cottager," 40 00 
For TracU for Valley of Miss. . 13 00 

Whole amount of Donations, $1,548 00 
Received for Tracts sold, 4,356 9 6 

Total, $5,904 96 



THE AMERICAN 

OL. Tf.) FBBBVAKT, 1831. (NO. I 



PROGRESS OF THB 

MONTHLY TRACT DISTRIBUTION. 

Th» ijglcm oreflbn it ecidenllj Disking ■ rapid progrut (brough- 
out Ihe counlry, snd liking s deeper and deeper hold of Ihe affectioiiB 
of Ibe people of God. At one meeting of the Commillee of the Atae- 
rion Tract Sociely, receMl; held, lelitri were receired from Ihirlj- 
four Auxtliiriet. each ape>liing wilh intsreat of the Monthly Dlatri- 
tmtinn u protecuted by t^mielTes. 

Let the thrttfiUowUlg Uena it tttured, and we an penuaded thai 
none can cftlmate too highly the importance of thii meani of tue- 
fulneiB. 

l.Tbat^MbtttqmdifiediHiiBiih^aigagtaiDulribiaeri. "Tbe 
belt nuleiiali in the chnrebM," *» lui l»en properly nid, ihotdd In 
•elected li>r ihb woiii. 

Vol. VI « Whou: No. 58. 



14 MONTHLY TRACT DrSTRIBUTIOlV. [Feb. 

12. That they do their werk«at oivce iitcreeUy and faithfuUyf with 
hearts burning with love to God and the souls of men ; never losing 
sight of the object to do whatever Providence affords the opportunity 
of doing for the eternal welfare of those they visit. 

3. That Distributers and all the friends of Christ wrestle with God 
in prayer for his blessing on this system of effort. Instances have al« 
ready occurred in which a Distributer, devoting the early part of the 
df|y to fasting and prayer, has gone out and found a surprising access 
to the hearts of the people, and evidences that souls had been con- 
verted to God by these labors. 

We add some encouraging items of intelligence from different 
parts of the country. 

Ulieaf N. F.-r" I have time only to say, that in the report of the 
Monthly Distribution ^or December, read yesterday, five eonvertions 
were reported to have occurred through the Tracts, as the direct 
means, since the last distribution.*' 

"It is worthy of notice,'' says the Rev. Warren- Day, Agent for 
the Tract cause in the Western District of New- York, ** that the pre- 
sent revivals of religion in Oneida County are chiefly in the places 
where the monthly Tract distribution has been in operation." 

Boston^ Mass.-^This work has now been prosecuted for some 
inonths in this city, with encouraging success. ** Am I asked," said 
one of the devoted clergymen of Boston to his people, "where the 
millennium will begin ; l answer, where the Gospel is broiLght home to 
etery bosoms and this is the system to do it. It fills up the vacancies 
left by other Christian efforts." " What a noble work," says the 
Agent ofthe American Tract Society at Boston, " has Providence de- 
vised in the Monthly Distribution ! It not only renders those already 
laboring in th^ Tract cause more active, but calls up a host to 
their aid." See Boston Tract Society, p. 21. 

Winchester, Va. — " We are still pursuing the Monthly Distribution, 
and not without some encouragements. November was our se- 
venth month. About 600 families «re supplied, and 8 decline re- 
ceiving the Tracts. Our distritmters, who are mostly ladies, are 
generally delighted with their work. In most cases they are received 
kindly and cheerfully — in some instances joyfully." 

Norwich f 1st See. Con. — The work has been in operation sixteen 
months, and with increasing encouragement, especially where the 
Distributers have been most faithful. One Distributer says, " on 
recalling my first month's visit, and comparing the state of feeling 
then manifested, and the general reception of the Tracts at that time 
with the preseitt,! see reason for mnch encouragement in this work. 
One woman, who at first received my Tracts and calls with repulsive 
looks, lately wept when urged to attend to the concerns ef her soul. 
The subject of religion has been brought to mind monthly in families 
where otherwise it would perhaps never be thought of. Opportunity 
has been afforded for administering to the temporal and spiritual 
wants of the sick. Neglecters of public worship on the Sabbath have 
been induced to a more regular attendance, and a number of families, 
before either indifferent to the subject or direct^ opposed to it, have 



1831.] UONTHLT TRACT mSTRIBUTIOK^. 15 

been persuaded to place their children under a course of Sabbath 
school instruction. 

Rochester f Ulnter County, N. Y. — *' We have the pleasure of commu- 
nicating the joyful intelligence, that the monthly distribution is still 
going on prosperously with us ; ^0 families have been supplied for 
ten successive months; 160 additional families are supplied by the 
Clove Society. In many instances the Tracts have taken a deep hold 
upon the heart and conscience, and produced religious impressions, 
when all other means had proved unavailing. The distributers, most 
of whom are females, feel greatly encouraged, though their labors are 
arduous, owing to the great extent of country over which they have 
to travel at all seasons of the year. One female is awakened by read- 
ing the Tract, The Sinner directed to the Savior y 

Cfovemeur, N. V. — " The Female Tract Society have persevered in 
the monthly distribution more than a year. Though it has cost them 
much labor, as our population beyond the village is quite sparse, 
they have performed their work with increasing cheerfulniess, and not 
without some tokens of the Divine approbation. If this system of 
effort commenced in the city, reason and Providence (for God has 
blessed it to souls) require it should be extended through our country 
and world.** 

Mrs. L., of C, in the same State, states, that in the monthly Tract 
distribution in that place, her heart was greatly encouraged by find- 
ing one young woman inquiring what she must do to be saved. The 
Tract she was distributing was Christ the only Refuge from the 
Wrath to Come. She gave it to the young lady, who afterward in- 
formed her that it led her to feel there was 'no other refuge but 
Christ ; and, as she hoped, to yield up her heart to Him. She> is now 
an active and devoted Christian. 

EriCi Penn. — ** The monthly dtstribution commenced the present 
year, wlH form an era in our Tract operations. Thei work is pro- 
secuted by members of the Female Tract Society, who in supplying 
every family, store and grocery, 220 in number, were always kindly 
received, and in a majority of cases the Tracts were received with 
cordial thankfulness: the results thus far have exceeded the hopes of 
the most sanguine." ''Three persons who were hostile to Tracts 
have joined our society. Some have been persuaded to attend church, 
and more to attend the Sabbath schools. My own district embraces 
about fifty families, and extends two or three miles. I can truly say 
these visits are among my highest pleasures." 

Springfield; N: /.—The Monthly Tract, being on Intemperances, 
came into the hands of a. Temperate Drinker, and brought him to the 
resolution of total abstinence. " Aged men, who never attend church, 
when the monthly Tract comes round, put on their spectacles and 
read it through.*' 

Peruy N. Y. — The monthly distribution was commenced one year 
since, by a few females, with many fears, " but hitherto," writes one of 
the Distributers,.'* hath the Lord helped us. An increasing interest 
is manifested hi the Tract cause ; and if no other good has been done, 
I can say my own soul has been refreshed in the performance of the 
duty." 

Jetoett City, Con. — ''The monthly distribution has been followed 



16 MONTHLY TRACT MSTRIBI/TION. [Feb. 

bf many happy results. One woman remarked of the monthly Tract, 
that it was the most valuable present she had ever received* The 
syame visit broug^ht to light the ikct that she was without a copy of the 
3ible ; thus testifying to the usefulness of this system of effort in the 
knowledge thereby derived of the temporal and spiritual wants of all 
classes of society.'* 

Princeton, N, J.— The distribution performed by the Female Tract 
Society, in co-operation with the Nassau Hall Tract Society ; 1893 
families supplied. The Distributers have found the work /ar more 
pleasant and interesting than they anticipated ; and earnestly hope it 
may be continued. 

Northampton, Ma$s. — " We have taken efficient measures for the 
Monthly Distribution of Tracts in this town. We have enlisted the 
first people in the town, both male and female, (36 in number,) as 
Distributers; and have funds raised to sustain the work, which we 
hope will be permanent. Our pastor has prepared Hints to a Distri- 
buter, which are excellent, and will be printed. Many of the towns ia 
this vicinity are adopting this system of effort." 

C , N, F. — " Our Tract Society, though not strong, have re- 
solved to attempt to supply, monthly for one year, every fcmnily in the 
town of C , in which it is estimated that more than 2,0(X) per- 
sons live without the stated means of grace ; and that of IdOO children 
between the ages of 5 and 15, only about 60 receive the benefit of 
Sabbath school instruction. . Many of the people are Universalists 
and Infidels, living without God, and without hope in the world.'' 

Salina, N. F.~>" The Monthly Tract Distribution has been the 
means of essentially, increasing the number of attendants on public 
worship, and some conversions are ascribed to the Divine blessing on 
the Tracts. 

Bloon^idd, N. J.— Between 600^ and 700 families supplied— six 
refusals. 

Florence, Mab,-^" Tbe Monthly Distribntioni which we commenced 
in June last, has been promptly executed. We design extending it 
as far as possible into the surrounding country, where there is but 
little ministerial instruction." 

OambUr, Ohio,-^" The Young Men of the Episcopal Seminary, lo- 
cated here, have supplied 7 or 8 townships, being not far from half of 
Knox County, with one or more Tracts to a family, in connexion with 
their efforts for the Bible cause. 

UuntsviUe, Alab.'^" The Distributers, are becoming ipore and more 
interested in the labor of love, and we discover a deeper interest to 
be felt in the Tract cause generally." 

Cindnnaii, Ohio. — " The Monthly Distribution is extending in this 
vicinity. Much good has already been done, as we have good reason 
to believe, in several^ places, and we have positive evidence in two 
cases, one in this city, and one a few miles distant." 

Danbwy, Con*-^** Our Monthly Distribution succeeds well ; nearly 
SCO families are regularly supplied. I am. convinced that a great 
moral ir^fluence. has, in this way, been brought to bear on this com- 
munity. The attention of hundreds has been directed to the great 
prominent truths of the Gospel, to whom it would have been Vf;ry 
difficult to bavo gaiped. a<;cessi by any other ipenns.'' 



1891.] MONTHLY TRACT DISTRIBUTION. f7 

Maiafidd, Con.^-** The Monthly Distribution has been in operation 
for some months. One woman said her husband used to spend a great 
part of his Sabbaths in fishing, until he received a Tract on the ob- 
servance of the Sabbath, which produced such an effect on his mind 
that he has since resisted all the solicitations ^f his former wicked 
companions/' 

PkUtidelpkiaf Pa. — At the last meeting of Distributers and friends, 
it appeared that the number of Distributers now employed is about 
400; that the cost of Tracts for the last ten months has been $1,692 
80; that 467 children have been brought into Sabbath Schools, and 
392 families found destitute of the Bible« Several interesting inci- 
dents are reported, one of them unusually striking, which will be in- 
serted in its details in our next. 

in NeW' York City the work is. prosecuted- with energy. More than 
35,000 families were reported in the month of December, and anumr 
ber of instances of hopeful conversion,. 



" GUIDE TO THE 

MONTHLY TRACT DISTmBUTION.»^ 

We earnestly invite the attention of all who engage in this work Xor 
the document of 12 pages with this title, copies of which will be fur* 
nished gratis^ by the Parent Institution, and the same is embraced in. 
the Tract Magazine for December. 



AUXILIARY OF NORWICH CITY, CONN. 

At the Annual Meeting of this Society, December 2, it appeared 
that about 426 families, including 70 in the parish of Long Society, 
had been supplied monthly since October, 1829. " The Monthly 
Distribution," says the Report, " was comm need during the most in- 
teresting season of the recent descent of the Holy Spirit on this re- 
gion ; and the first Tract selected was ** Quench not the SpirU.^* The 
distributers will never forget the impression they received while pass^ 
ing from one dwelling to another, and through the various apart- 
ments of buildings occupied by many families, where it: seemed that 
the Spirit's influences had extended themselves through- an entire 
street,. and prepared the way for thb work of love. 

Another Distributer states that she has reason to hope the Tract 
** Quench not the Spirit" was blessed to the conviction and conver- 
sion of a young man, and the deepening of religious impressions 
upon the mind ofhU wife, both of whom give good evidence of a 
change, and have united with the Baptist church. 
. Another Distritwter, during the first month of her labors, held a 
ghort but interesting eonversation with an. aged woman, and drew 
from her a promise that she would immediately endeavor to surrender 
herself to God. On repeating the visit after the lapse of some weeks, 
she found delightful evidence that the engagement had been Iblfilled. 
With streaming eyes she related the progress of her feelings during 
the important change. She said " The words, of- the Distributer 
w«re few, but went to ber heart ; she felt thai sfat> had come to warn 

a* 



18 ir6EFUfiN£98- OP TRACTSi [Feb* 

her to flee Arotm the wrath to come, and she bad no peace from that 
hour till she found it at the foot of the cross. She has smce united 
herself with the church of Christ. 

The receipta of this Society in three years since its formation have 
been, in donations $361 48— for Tracts sold, #170 16. William P. 
Gkisne, Esq. Pres.,r. A. Perkins, Esq. Trees., John A. Rockwell, 
Esq. Sec., Russell HvBBABD,.Depositary« 



Mto**M 



USBFUI.NESS OF TRACTS. 

We hare regreted that the pxessure of other matter has excluded 
from some of the late numbers of the Tract Magazine, the records 
of facts, showing that God is still giving efficacy to the publications 
of the American Tract Society in the conversion of souls to himself. 
Grreat as-the encouragement is firom other sources, to prosecute these 
arduous labors, we cannot but feel that this is the erawning blessing. 



THE TRACT ** QUENCH NOT THE SPIRIT*' BLESSED TO A 

UNIVERSALIST. 

It may not be improper, says the Secretary of an Auxiliary Tract 
Society in the state of New- York, for me to state that the Tract 
<2tfenca not the Spirit was an instrument in the hands of God of awa- 
kening me from a very stupid dangerous state in early life. I had made 
a public profession of religion, but afterward embraced the doctrine 
of universal sahoaHon.; and for twelve years was a firm believer in 
the final salvation of all men. Not far from three years since, I, for 
the first time, read the above named Tract. It filled my mind with 
serious thoughts of the present, past, and future. I was brought al- 
most immediately to resolve to spend the remnant of my days in the 
service of the Redeemer ; and L think I can sincerely say there has 
not been a day since that time in which it has not heen the sincere 
desire of my soul to spend and be spent in the service of the ever 
blessed Redeemer. I now honestly and sincerely believe the doctrine 
of universal salvation, to be a-delusion of the great adversary of souls. 

THE TRACT AND THE TOBACCO CHEWER. 
The following is an extract from an anonymous individual in Con- 
necticut, enclosing $6 18, one half for the American Tract Society, 
and the remainder for the American Bible Society. 

'* I forward you the enclosed as a. small donation of retrenchment 
money for two years. In Mav, 1828, on Sabbath morning, I took up 
the Tract 2%e W&rth.ofa DolUur I followed the good Deacon into 
the small house on the Green Mountains*— listened to his conversa- 
tion with the poor woman— *saw the agitation of his mind in taking 
from his pocket hia last dollar to enable her to procure a Bible— 
wkansed his composure and peace of conscience, and the blessing 
thai attended him on his way home ; and his joy in hearing, two years 
after, of a revival of religien and 30 hopeihl oenversioas as the fruits 
•f Inb btnevoleacoaaidbiaprayers-*^ thought what amnhitudo might 
ki'OaaMrmdf bjf means, of those 30, d*iMi tfaroog b the agee 



1891.] USBFU&NESS 09 TKJLCVS: 19« 

and what glory would thereby redound to God — and I cried out, who- 
can estimate *.* the Worth of a Dollar/ when given in faith, and fol- 
lowed by the prayers of the giver4 I thought of the example of the 
good Deacon, and a voice seemed to whisper, ' Go thou and do like- 
wise.' 

** t immediately inquired, In what way can I add a dollar to my 
annual contributions for religious purposes ? I could not save h by 
abstaining from Ardent Spirits, for the use of it I had already aban- 
doned. But there was another habit I had contracted, equally useless, 
whose power seemed almost resistless. This was the use of TobaeeOf 
which cost me about f 3 a year. This was a bondage from which I 
had. for a considerable time longed to be freed, without Having suffi- 
cient fortitude to assert my liberty. But as I now saw * the Worth 
of a Dollar,' I threw the quid from my mouth, cleared my pocket» 
of the foul stuff, and sent my thoughts above, beseeching the Lord 
now to assist me to conquer the power of thi» worse than useless 
habit, and resolving annually, to add the $3, which it had cost me, to 
ray charitable contributions. 

** By the good hand of God upon me 1 have thus far overcome. 
As I had no. convenient opportunity to send to you last year, I now 
send the sum for that year and the present, with the interest for the 
last ; and hope, by the Divine blessing, to continue the contribution 
from year to year." 

GRANT OF TRACTS BLESSED TO A CLERGYMAN'S YOUNGEST 

DAUGHTER. 

The Rev. Mr. M— , of S -, Ohio, says, " some months since 

I received the Tracts which your Committee were pleased to grant, 
through the Rev. Herbert C. Thompson, for which I- desire to be 
thankful to God, to him and to the Committee. We hope that the 
Tract, Qjuench not the Spirit, has proved a blessing to my youngest 
daughter, who has since made a profession of religion. Other Tracts, 
we trust, are preaching to the consciences of many. I cannot but 
repeat the obligation 1 feel for your sending me such a parcel of ex- 
cellent Tracts, abounding, as they do, in that close heart- religion 
which alone is sufficient for the salvation of depraved apostate man.'' 



PROVIDENTIAL. ADAPTATION OP A TRACT. 

The Rev. Dr. C, of T— — in Tennessee, states, that after preach- 
ing in a place wliere the people were all strangers to him, he distribu- 
ted a number of Tracts^ A few months afterward he was called 
to. preach at the same place again,. when a man took him by the hand, 
and said, "The Tract you gave to me when you preached to us be- 
fore was one exactly adapted to my case t I had been for some time 
a member of the church, but had lived in the indulgence of one be- 
setting sin, and the Tract you gave me was on the subject of that 
very sin. I had supposed no one knew me to be guilty of it, and 
how you knew it I cannot imagine." The Dn.told him he had no- 
knowledge of his character when he presented the Tract; and the 
man at the same time assuring him> that the Tract so timdy given 
had been the meant. «if kia^ neformation. 



ta PREMIUMS OTF^RBD* [Feb. 

PREBOUM OFFERED 

For the best Autkentit Narrative Tract. . 

A friend of the American Tract Society, believing that truth in no form i« more 
likely to arrest die attention, or gain access to the heart, than in the faithfiil recortf 
of the operations of Divine grace ; and that, in this day of the outpouring of the 
Holy Spirit, many such examples have ocounred, which ought to be recwded'to the 
praise of God and for the spiritual benefit of thousands who are perishing in sin- 
hereby offers a premium of fifty dollars for the best EvatigelictU AuUtentie Nar- 
rative Traetf that shall, in the most striking and impressive manner, illustrate tfU 
9teratum» of the Holy ^irit in the eonvicHon^ eonveroion or oanct^fication of men* 
he premium to he awarded by the Rev. James Milnor, D. D., Rpv. John SLnox, D. D., 
Rev. John Wopdbridge, D. D., of New-York ; and each manuscript to be at the dia- 
posal of the C<Hnmittee of the American Tract Society, io case they shall desire to 

Sublish the same. The manuscripts should each be accompanied by a sealed enve- 
>pe containing the name of the writer, and will be received until April 1, 1831. 
They may be addressed to the undersigned, or committed to the care of Mr. A. 
Russell, No. 25 Cornhill, Boston ; or Rev. Joel T* Benedict,, comer of Fourth and 
Arch-streets, Philadelphia. 

Those Clergymen or others, whom God has made acquainted with examples of his 
distinguishing mercy and grace, are earnestly requested to communicate them, 
whether with reference to obtaining the premium or otherwise. 

WILLIAM A. HALLOCK, 

No. 144 Nassau-btreet, New- York. 



PREMIUM OFFERED. 

The individual who offers this premium believes, that the obUgatioUj tohieh ia 
involved in a profesHon of the Religion of Ohriat^ to live svprenulg for the ad- 
vasucement of his kingdom in the worlds is not properly understood and felt : that 
(hose Divine declarations, *'^Ye are not your own, for ye are bought with a price ; 
therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are God's." — ^" If any i 

man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His," (1 Cor. 6 : 17, 19. 20. Rom. ' 

8 : 9. Gal. 4 : 6.) are not made, as they should be, the rule of Christian conduct, and j 

the test of Christian character. He deems it therefore of great importance that j 

something should be written, that will show every professor of religion in what re- 
lation he stands to the Lord Jesus Christ and the World for which he died. With 
this view, he offers a premium of fifty dollars for the best Tract, showing in a. 
clear and persuasive manner, the obligations devolving on all professors of reli- 
gion to make efforts and sacrifices for the salvation qjfmen, and in what manner 
theif must be discharged to evince a real union with Christ. The premium to be 
awarded by Rev. Thomas H. Skinner, D. D., of Philadelphia ; Rev. Charles P. 
AFIlvaine, of Brooklyn ; and Rev. William Patton, and Arthur Tappan, Esq., of 
New-York. The manuscripts should each be accompanied by a sealed envelope 
eontaining the name of the writer, and will be received until April 1, 1831. They 
may be addressed to the undersigned, or committed to the care of Rev. Joel T. 
Benedict, corner of Fourth and Arch-streets, Philadelphia; or of Mr. A. Russell, 
No. 25 Cornhill, Boston. WILLIAM A. HALLOCK, 

L44 Nassau-street, New-York. 



The premium of $50, for the best Tract on " the Importance of the Ootpe^, its, 
MinUtry, iU Sabbath, and its Ordinances," is (iwarded to REV. WILLIAM C. 
BROWNLEE, D. D., of the city of New-York. 



The time of presentation for the premium of |50, for " the best Tract Addressed s. 
to Tomtk at College,^ is prolonged until April 1, 1831. Committee of examination^ 
Rev. Drs. Mathews and Cox, and Rev. Mr. M'llvaine. 



RECENT PUBLICATIONS. 

No. 1^. Address to the Touno Men of the United States,. 
ON Temperance. Written by Rev, Cfutrka P. JkPJlvainef in behalf 
of thdNew^Tork Young Men's. XempexancA Society — ^pp. 20. For.- 



1831.] ItDSTOJ? GITT TRACT SOCIETY. £1 

truy'mgf with viva^^ity and force> the horrors of the scourge of Intem- 
perance — the necessity of a great, anited and universal effort for its 
expulsion ; and showing that Total Ahattnence is the only remedy. 
That this is necessary for personal safe!)', the safety of the young, 
and of society at large, and is a remedy at once very simple, and in- 
volving no coercion, no pain, no expense. 

IXiART FOR 1831, 64mo, intended as a pocket companion ; contain- 
ing a text and a verse of a hymn, for each day in the j^ear, with a 
blank opposite for noting the memoranda of each day. Price 25 
cents in cloth binding ; 30 cents in silk. 

RELIGIOUS CARDS — (2.) " Hear ye the Word of the Lord," 
being the Third Commandment. — (3.). ** A Command of God,'' be- 
ing the Fourth Conunandment. Price, one cent for ten. 

WELSH TRACTS. 3. Eternity. 

No. Pages. 4. TbeContratt. 

1. Cross of Christ, 20 5. Eight Reasons for not goinff to 

2. Without Holiness no Maa shall Plays, &c. 

see the Lord, 4 6. Scripture Admonitions. 

3. Rewards of Drunkenness, 4 7. Remember the Sabbath-day. 

4. The Swearer's Prayer, 4 d. The Soul a precious Jewel. 

5. Commoa Errors, 16 9. Christian, Remember, Sec. 

HANDBILLS IN WELSH. 10. Arttbou prepared to die ? 

1. The Sabbath-day. tl. Yet lackest thou one thing. 

2. A Secret to a Sabbath Stroller. 12. Facts on Intemperance. 

Several New and Interesting Tracts, some of them Narratives, will 
be annoanced in our next Number. 



BOSTON CITY TRACT SOCIETY. 

The Annual Meeting of this Society was held December 29. The 
iroom was crowded at an early hour. After prayer by Rev. Mr.. 
Rand, the Report was read, from which it appeared, that, during the 
year 37,600 pages have been distributed in the Sabbath Schools of 
the city ; 37,500 to Seamen ; and 16,000 to Humane and Criminal 
Institutions. But the item in the Society's operations, during the 
year, on which the Report cheerfully dwells, is the 

Monthly DistrUnUion. in Boston. 

The whole number of families reported is 8516, of whom 779 de- 
cline receiving the Tracts. Numerous interesting and encouraging 
incidents are related; showing the importance of fideli^, discretion, 
and a spirit of prayer iathe Distributers ; the useiulness of the Tracts 
in several instances; children brought into Infant and Sabbath 
schools ; families supplied witb the Bible ; prejudices subdued, &«. 
which want of room compels us reluctantly to omit 

After the reading of the Report, the Rev. Dr. Beecher rose, adverted 
to the circumstances attending the fixst preaching of the Gospel by 
the Apostles in Jerusalem^ and read from the Acts several select por- 
tions of the Narrative of these events. He then, in a most interest- 
ing manner, drew a parallel between the circumstances of those who 
are now laboring for the conversion of their fellow-men, and the early 
apostles, in the various obstacles, the oppositions and persecntioa 
^countered by the. latter ;■ their steadfastness, fidelity, glowing «eal, 
prayerfulness, confidence in God, apd glorious success. Such was 
the spirit of primitive Christianity, and such the spirit that should, 



SS FlTTSBUROa BRANCH. [Ftb? 

animate us in all our well-directed efforts for the salvation of the soul. 
The Rev. Mr. Green followed with some very appropriate remarks, 
and then closed the meeting with prayer. 



PITTSBURGH BRANCH. 
This Society, of whose anniversary a brief notice was inserted in 
the Tract Magazine for September, had circulated in about one year 
and a half, since its preceding anniversary, 3,497,150 pages of 
Tracts ; of which were circulated gratuitously 251,820 pages, includ- 
ing 192,140 pages circulated in the Monthly Distribution. The Re- 
port expresses great gratitude to God, that, through the aid of 
Agents of the American Tract Society, the seventeen Counties of West 
Pennsylvania have been thoroughly explored, and an Auxiliary form- 
ed in every inhabited township where it was found practicable ; mak- 
ing in all not far from 150 Auxiliarieft bow connected with the FittS" 
burgh Society. _ 

AUXIUARY OP AUBURN, N. Y. 
Annual Meeting, Nov. 24. Receipts during the last two years, 
$530 88. The Monthly Distribution is in operation in several (owns 
in the County. James S. Seymour, £sq.. President. Rev. John. 
Blain, Secretary. C. B. Hotchkiss. Treasurer. 



MONTREAL RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY.- 
The Sixth Annual Report of this Society, which is Auxiliary totha 
Religious Tract Society in London, was presented Septembers, 1830. 
Circulated, during the year, 22,722 Tracts and small books. Receipts 
$183. William Lunn, Esq. Treas , John Rain, Dep. and Sec. 



07 The Report of the Baltimore Branch, which came to hand after the above 
Was in type, will be noticed in our next. 

RECiEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY 

During th9 month ending January 15, 1631. 

FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 
VER. — Sheldon, Franklin County, Ahrin Faseet, Sec. 
MASS.— Boston, American Tract Society, John Tappan« Esq. Tr. 
Springfield, Solomon Warriner, Jun. Tr .... 

D^. by their Auxiliary, Feeding Hills, Mrs. A. S. Smith, Sec. 

Tyringham, Fem. Miss Theodosia Brewer, Ag 

Westfield, Fem. Mrs. Sally G. Post, IV 

R. ISL.— Bristol, Fem. Mrs. Susan Chiekering, Tr. . 
Providence, Israel H. Day, Sec. . . ^ , , , 

CONN. — Brooklyn, (Windham Co. Aux.) Edwin Newbury, Ag. 
Do. by their Aux. Mansfield, .*.... 

D«rien, Charles E. Whitney, Tr. ..... . 

Guilford, Henry E. Hodges, Ag. ...,.» . 

Huntington, William Mills, Sec 

Mansfield, Fem. Miss Mary Salter, Sec, for Vail. Miss. 

Middle Haddam, Joseph Dart, Esq. Sec 

New-Canaan, G^rge W. Ayres, Tr 

New-Fairfield, Seelye Bamum, Tr. ..... 

New-Haven, J. L. Cross, Ag 

Do. Fem. Mrs. Henrietta F. Whitney, Tr. 
Nbrthfield, Litchfield Co. Ljrman Warner, Jun. Sec. . . 
S&li8bi]r3rKF*m.EioelineH. Norton, Tr. .... 



ForTr, 


Don. 




200 


1500 00 




640 






1 73 


233 


1 17 




400 


33 33 




135 00 




18 72 






128 


262 


- 


1 66 


700 




10 4Q 




40 00 


50 


833 


7 74 


2 57 


250 


200 


500 




47 50 


47 50 




600 


28« 


IB 



1^51.] 



&eceirT&. 



Sd 



dharon, David Gould, Tr 

Stonington* Rev. JoMph Whittlesey, See 

Warren, Sherman Hartwell, Sec. 

N. YORK.— Albany, Central Branch, James Brown, Tr. 

AshviUe, R. Johnson, Sec 

Auburn, Clark B. Hotchkiss, Ag 

Bethlehem, Robert D^nison, Ag. 

Brooklyn, L. I. Joseph Howard, Tr. . . . . 
Carmel, (Red Mills,) Fem. Phebe Smith, Sec. 

Columbiaville, Fem. Miss Sarah Butler, Sec 

Dunkirk, R. Farnham, Sec. 

Fresh Ponds, in Huntington, L. I., S. Woodhull, Tr. 
Harpersville, Broome County, Azor Smith, Sec. 
Hudson, Fem. Mrs P. Fanning, Tr. ....,* 
Jamestown, Fem. Mrs. Harvey, Sec 

Do. by their Fem. Aux. Carrol, Mrs. E. Winn, Sec. . 

Fafayette, Fem. Harriet Hojrt, Sec 

Lexington, Ctreene County, Timothy Edwards, Tr. 

Mayville, Rev. Isaac Jones, Sec. 

New Windsor, Silas Carwin, Tr . 

New-York City Tract Society, Alfred Edwards, Tr. . 

Do. Chrystie^st. Methodist Ch. Mrs. Sarah B. Stillwell, Tr. 

Do. Mulberry-st. Ch. Fem. Harriet Wiley, Sec. 

Peru, Fem. Harriet'Wells, Tr. , 

Pleasant Valley, J. Gabaudan, Tr. 

Rye, Fem. Ann H. Buckley, Sec. 

Scotchtown, John M'Williains, Tr 

Sheridan, Mrs. B. B. Gray, Pres. 

Troy, Charles Lyman, Tr. 

Utica, Edward Vernon, Sec 

Villenova, Dr. A. Pierce, Sec 

West Farms, Juv. George St. John, Tr 

Westfield, Fem. Rev. Mr. Oakes, Ag 

N. JER. — ^Baskingridge, Horace Shelden, Sec. 

Bloomfield, Robert R. Kellogg, Sec 

CflJdwell, C. S. Crane, Sec 

Chatham Village, Fem. Mrs. Amelia Spencer, Sec. 

EMzabethtown, 2d Church, 

Harkwick Cong. Gratitude, P. O, Fern. Miss Sarah M. Roy, Tr. 

Harlingen, Fem. Miss Mary Skillman, Tr 

Kingston, Fem. Miss Jane K. Comfort, Tr. .... 

Lawrenceville, Fem. Maria L. Phillips, Sec 

Liberty Corner, Somerset -County, William Aanin, Tr. . 

Littleton, Eliphtilet Osbom, Pres 

Mansfield, Warnsn Co. Fem. Miss Hetty H. Sherrerd, Tr. 
Marksboro' Cong, in Hardwick, Fem. Miss E. Harkinshn, Sec. 

NBw-Shannack, Nicholas Williamson, Tr 

Oxford, Fem. Mrs. S. Sherrerd, Tr. 

Princeton, Fem. F. W. Morford, Tr 

Springfield, Abijah L. Dunnell, Tr. 

Westfield Fem. Mies Mary Pierson, Sec. ..... 

West Milferd, Bergen County, Jacob Tuttle, Ag. 

PENN.>-Honesdale, Joseph L. Kellogg, Tr 

Philadelphia Branch, Frederick Erringer, Tr. 

Dp. by their Aux. Gettysburg, 

Wattsburg, Erie County, James Nelson, Sec. . . . " 

BEL. — Wilmington, Bishop Davenport, Sec. . . * » 
VIR. — Clarksburg, Richard Despard, Tr. , . . . 

Winchester, Daniel Gold, Tr 

N. CAR.— Hillsboro', Fem. Mrs. Mary G. Nash, Ag. 
IKilton, M. P. Huntington, Sec. . . '. 

TENN.-^Knoxville, James Park, Esq. Tr 

Rock Creek, Bedford Co. Fem. Rev. Thomas J. Hall, Ag. . 

KEN.— Lexington, Luther Stevens* Ag 

Louisville, William Mix, Tr. . . , 



ForTr. 


Don. 


134 




15(0 




5 00 


19 00 


178 81 




3 05 




52 22 




10 00 




100 00 




250 




5 00 




5 50 




7 04 


1 76 


1 53 


12 


44 88 




5 60 




4 00 






10 00 


8 00 




750 




6 98 


4 0O 


667 10 






12 00 


500 


. 5 00 




3 00 


6 40 




5 00 


4 00 




6 00 


4 77 




8 00 




200 00 




6 00 




1 00 




10 00 


4 00 


3 00 


1 00 


5 20 




7 24 




1 60 


5 00 


5 00 




4 00 


6 00 


6 12 






3 50 


11 08 


923 


8 25 


2 75 


5 49 


1 82 


15 00 


5 00 


3 00 


2 00 


8 31 


8 81 


8 94 




5 00 




10 00 




5 00 




1 00 




600 




500 00 




8 3? 






5 00 




25 00 


34 00 




14 52 




17 00 


8 00 




10 00 


50 00 






2 19 


142 00 




220 63 





£4 



BECSlftS. 



OHIO.— Chillicothe, R«v. John P. Bainman, Tr. 
Ciacinnati, Henry B. Furik, Tr. . • • . * ' 
iCia, (Linun d. Aux.) by their Aux. Browjelm. . 
iTP r AV — BrockviUe Fem. Mrs. Fhilcna Smart, Sec. 
UF. CAA.-Br<^kvu^^j^g j^Q^ AUXILIARY. 

CONN-— North Greenwich, . • , * / u^„ «' 
N YORK.— Daahville Falls, Fem. Mrs. Jane A- Birtler, Bee. 
Ithaca, Temperance Society, Benjamin G. Ferns, Ag. . 
Tracte sold at the Depository to individuals, includmg $189 03 

from Agents, 

(Do. a Friend, . . . . 
CONN^Ldtchfield, Dr, 



ForTr. 

r 

234 00 



W 00 
506 

10 oo 



1 90 

2 00{ 
15 331 

t 
513 48 



Directors for Ltfe. 
MASS.— Westfield,. Rev. Isaac 
Knapp, by Fem. A.T. S. (in full, 

of $50,) .... '''^' ^^^^ 
CON.— West-Chester, D. L. Par- 

melee, (in part of $50,) . . . 10 00 
NEW-YORK.-Jainaica, EUphalet 

Wickes,jun.by E. Wickes, Esq. 50 OO 
N. JBR.— Harlingen, Rev. Peter 

— . — - . 64 Du 



50 00 
50 00 



25 00 

20 00 

500 



25 



Labagh, by Fem. A.T. S 

ALA.— Florence, Rev. James L. 
Sloss, by Aux. Tr. Soc. . . • 

MISS.— Rodney, Dr. Rush Nutt, 
Members far Life, 

CONN.— New-Haven, Mrs. Hen- 
rietta F. Whitaey, .... 

North Orange, Rev. Horatio Par- 
sons, by his Ch. and Cong. 
'Norwalk, Miss Polly Benedict, (in 
ftllof$20,) . •. ... • • 

Orange, Rev. Stephen W. Sieb- 
bini, by Mrs. Eliza A. Ward, 25 00 

Warren, Miss Sophia Reynolds, 
by her father, Dea. J. Reynolds, 
(in part of $20,) ..... 10 00 

N. YORK.-New-Hacken8ack,Rev. 
M. W. Dwight, by Ladies, . 90 00 

New-York City, Robert JaflFray, 20 00 
Do. Mrs. Rebecca Jaffray 20 00 

Oxford, Chenango Co. Rev. Joseph 
Aben,byAT.S. 2100 

Troy, Micah Jones Ljrman, . . .^ UO 

N. JER.— Lawrericeville, Rev. H. 
Axtell, by an unknown Indivi- 
dual, ^ ^ 

Plainfield, Rev. Lewis Bond, by 
Ladies, (in part of $20,) • • 10 «0 

Ramapo Works, Jer. H. Pierson, 20 OO 

PENN.— Wattsburg, Rev. Absa- 
lom, M'Cready, by Fem. Ben. 
Soc. (in part of $20.) • • • 10 00 

KEN.— Bardstown, ReV. William 
Scott, by Fem. Tr. Soc. . . 20 00 

OHIO.— Marietta, Mrs. Sarah S. 
Bingham, by a Friend,, (in part 

of $20,) ^^^ 

Annual MenAer. 
N. JER— Morristown, Mrs. Let- 
ty Hawkins, ....... 2 00 

Other Donations, 
MASS.— FrankUn,WiUard Fisher, 2 00 
TjnringhamjDea. Jos. ChBpin.$l; 
Mrs. Dow, 50 cts. ..... 1 50 



Daniel 
Sheldon, ........ 90 00 

N^ YORK.— Cambria, J. Taylor, 1 00 

Canaan Four Cofraws, fem. Aiend, 1 00 

Genoa, Reuben Holmes, ... 1 00 

Kingsborough, Montgomery Co. 
Mrs. Sabra Steele, 5 00 

Lansiugbargh> a Friend, by Dr. J. 
C.Bliss, 5 00 

Middletown, Orange Co. Dr. David 
Hanford, 5 00 

New-York City, a Lady, 16 eis. -, J^ 
. D. Holbrook, for Tracts in Cey- 
lon, $5,., •• 

Somerset, Joseph BuOen, .... 

Springfield, Otsego Co. Col. Leb- 
beusLoomis, 

Youngstown, individuals, . • . 

N. JER.— Caldwell, collection at 
Monthly Concert, . ^ . . . 

Westfield, sundry individuals, . . 

PENN.-Gibson, Wm. 'Abel $1; 
A. Tiffany, $1, 

N CAR.-BuUocks, sundry indiv. 

TENN.—Farmington, Bedford Co. ^ 
sundry individuals 18 8! 

N. W. TER — Pfairie du Chien, 
A Cochrau,$5; S. Gilbert, $ 2 ; 
Mrs. G. Loomia, 50 cts. ; Miss 
E. Loomis, 50 cts. ; G. Loomis, 
$5; E. Tainter, $2; Gen. Jos. 
M Street, $ 2 ; T. P. Street, $ 1 ; 
Mrs. J. M. Street, $ 1 ; Miss M. 
Street, 50 cts. ; Miss L. F. Screet> 

50 cU 2000 

- — "A well wisher," for Val!. 
Miss., by N.York Observer, . 2 00 

SCOTLAND.— Cavers, Jaa. Doug- 
lass, Esq., solicited by the Rev. 
John Wheeler, Windsor, Ver. 24 00 



5 1« 

200 

200 
700 

700 
900 

200 
10 00 



The above list contains donations— 
For Tracts for Vail, of Miss. . • ** £J 
For Tracts for Ceylon, . . . . 5 OO 



Whole amount of Donations, $ 1 >055 24 



Received for Tracts sold, 



5,005 10 



Total, ffKOOO 34 



THE AMEBICAN 



KAKOH, isai. 



Sag Tnci Kg. 9M. " Til Scaft-OlM." 

USEFUUTESS OF TBACT8. 

TH.ACT BLESSED TO A SWEAKEE AND 8ABBATB-BKEAKER. 



profiiae iirearins niul Sabbath-break ing — hut icnn« monlbi lince, 
wu induwd b; earkiiiir to iiad the Tnct called the Stctartr'a 
Prayer. He wai immedialelj pricked in hii heart, and made to 
tremble in tiew oftke doom of him who lukea hi* Maker's name Id 
Tftin. Theso impreamoni, howerer, iood began to wear awaj ; when 
a Tract on S/^balh-bniAing wat put inio his handa, which he read 
with loroe degree ofintereit. The next Sabbath fas undertook to re- 
pair Ibe door of liis atilUboiue. But whan he took the hammer lo 
drire a nail, hia arm *ai paralyaed b? the loleniD reflectiona occa- 
sioned b; the tnitha presented io that Tract. Ha, neTertheleai, re- 
■olred to proceed ; but kwd felt that If he peraiiled, immediate per- 
dition would be liis portion. In this slate of coaflicling fisetinp he 
reniained for levnal niautes : but then Tcsohed to abandon hia un- 
V01..VI. 9 Wbolb No. 60. 



26 USEFULNESS OF T&ACT8. [Marcb« 

d«rtakiag ; went home, commenced reading hig Testament for the 
firit time with the desire of knowing the way of salration. Some 
months since, he came out publicly on the Lord's side, and is now en- 
deavoring to walk blameless in all the ordinances of the Lord. 

USEFULNESS OF THE CHRISTUN ALMANAC 

A gentleman in North*Carolina says, a Lady to whom f presented 
a copy of the Christian Almanac, carried it home, where it was per- 
used by her hushand, who was so impressed with the statement 
of the amount of ardent spirits <SOnsumed in tbe United States, And 
the amount of money expended for it, and of the extent of wretched- 
ness thus produced, that he r«solf ed (as he sometimes made an im- 
prudent use of it) to drinkrno more, nqr have it in his home. This re- 
solution he has faithfully and strictly adhei^ed to, and is now a Soft- 
hath^vhool Tedeher, He appears to be very much interested in the 
school, and seldom*absent from it. Let.Christian Almanacs be widely 
circulated through our country, let particular attention be paid to 
the oAitter they contain, and let the prayers of Christians follow them 
to the cottage and the drawing-room, and they will, under the smiles 
and blessing of Almighty God, be a source of incalculaUe good. 



lONORANCE AND SUPERSTITION ENCOUNTERED BY A TRACT. 

A Clergyman of Albany, N. Y., says that a Tract given by him to 
a Lady of that city, fell into the hands of a Roman Catholic woman 
who had been the victim of gross ignorance and superstition. It 
awakened in her a spirit of inquiry. 3%6 BibU, which hitherto she 
had not read, was resorted to, to solve her doubts ; her mind became 
enlightened by a saving knowledge of its truths ; she h'as renounced 
her superstitions, and is now an active member of an Evangelical 
Protestant church. 



TESTIMONY OF A CLERGYMAN IN NEW-YORK TO THE EFFECTS 
OF TRACTS IN BIS CONGREGATION. 

' I was called, says a devoted pastor in the state of New-Tork, to 
visit a poor man within the limits of my congregation, who was re- 
duced to the last stages of a consumption by intemperate drinking. 
He seemed very anxious with regard to his eternal interests ; but 
notwithstanding the earnest conversation and prayers of his pastor, 
found no abiding peace. He did not appear to apprehend the true 
nature of the Gospel. I at last sent him some Tracts, among which 
was that entitled Poor Joteph, which he requested his wife to read to 
him; and when I next called upon him, the poor sick man was enabled 
to say, *' I trust I have gwen myulfto God through Christ, believing 
that he will receive me for his sake.'' Poor. Joseph taught him the 
path of life, which his pastor was not permitted to do. He died soon 
after, in the hope of heaven. 

Another individual in my congregation was hopefully brought to 
the knowledge of God by the Tract entitled, " The Day of Jkidg- 
mettt" His wife was brought to reflection by the change in her huB- 



1831.] USEFULNESS OF TRACTS. 27 

band*€ character, and her religious views were fixed by th« " Oreat 
Qfieaiion Answered.*' They sre now both members of the church, 
exemplary and xealous, and the family altar is erected in their 
household. 

Doddridge's admirable tract on <* FamUy WorsHpi^ has been, to 
my knowledge, the means of exciting thrju families at least in. my 
congregation to the performance of that duty. It is given by me to 
every family I visit, 

AN ABANDONED FEMALE CONVERTED BY A TRACT. 

The following facts, says a most deserving young gentleman, are 
of undoubted authenticity : A woman in S , Va. notorious for 

her indulgence in almost every species of vice, began one day to 
tremble while she listened (for she could not read) to the truth of 
Crod, contained in the pages of a Tract. Her mind became bur- 
dened with a weight which she had never felt before. She com- 
plained of her wicked heart; and her distress was the occasion of ri- 
dicule among her sinful associates, who had never experienced the 
bitterness of godly sorrow for sin. Once they had been accustomed 
to say, " When that woman is converted, there will be some hope for 
us.'' But, alas ! Ihey were ripening for destruction, while she was be- 
coming " meet for an inheritance with the saints in light." The 
Angel of mercy flew down pa wings of love, to tell her that her 
worthless name was written in '' the Lamb's book of life." She sisw 
rejoices in hope that ** when he, who is her life, shall appear she 
also shall appear with him in glory." Though her poverty is so dis- 
tressing, that, like her master, she scarcely hath where to lay her 
head, yet when asked how she gets along, her uniform reply, is, " O, 
xery well as to my poor body, but my sovl has many wants,'* She 
now visits persons as abandoned as she herself once was, and col- 
lects them in little meetings, when she engages some friend to read 
religious Tracts, and especially that Tract which has been the mes- 
senger of salvation to her own soul. This is, literally, going out into 
the highways and hedges, and compelling them to come in. 



MONTHLY TRACT BLESSED TO A YOUNG GENTLEMAN IN 

PHILADELPHLk. 

" A young gentleman," says the Magazine of the Branch Tract 
Society, Philadelphia, ** having ruptured a blood vessel, came to this 
city for the benefit of his health. He had been blessed with a pious 
«ducation, yet he was remarkably insensible to his perilous situation 
as a lost sinner. The family where he resided were professors of the 
religion of Jesus Christ, and felt anxious to enter into conversation 
with him respecting his insensibility to divine things; but his remark- 
able indifference to all religious subjects led them to put it off from 
day to day, in hopes that some more favorable opportunity would 
occur. He had been in this family but five or six days before a Dis- 
tributor left at the house the Tract called " To-Daiyi** which was 
immediately handed to him. The next day he asked for a Bible, and 
inquired if a f inner could repent and believe before he was called. 
He was informed that he had been called repeatedly ; that the death 



2B FOREIGN 0PEEATI0R8. [Marcll, 

of his pMUi mother was a loud call, the affliction under which he 
now labored was another call, and now God in his providence had 
ftent a Tract to call him, and that Tb-Hciy was the best time for hin 
to listen to these calls and accept offered mercy. He was soon heard 
confessing his sins and offering the most earnest supplications for 
pardon. The happy result was, that in a few days be was led to 
hope in the pardoning mercy of the Lord Jesus ; and on leaving this 
family a short time after, he knelt before the throne of Grace and 
offered a most fervent prayer for those from whom he had received 
the Tract. 



TRACT OPERATIONS IN FOREIGN COUNTRIES. 

SANDWICH ISLANDS. 

Information is meently received, that the 60,000 Tracts, embrac- 
ing 640,000 pages, printed by the American Tract Society in the 
Hawaiian language, and granted for the use of the American mis- 
sionaries at the Sandwich islands, were greedily received and veiy 
acceptable and usefiil. The demand for books in these Islands is 

Seat, and perhaps no where are religious publications now more 
ely to be read with interest and profit. 

UAhTA, 

•Editions of thirty-three different works were issued at the Mission 
Btailion in 1829, containing 2,943,200 pages, of which 2,161,200 are 
in the 12mo. sise. Circulated, daring the year, 62,026 publications, 
containing 1,963,342 pages, which have been sent to Tunis and Tri- 
poli, Italy and Trieste, the Ionian Islands, Greece, Asia Minor, Cy- 
prus, Syria, Egypt, Shusha, and Calcutta. Total printed from July, 
1822, to January I, 1830, 10,646,400 pages. Issued in the same pe- 
riod 6,706,126. In Greece very ikvorable openings are represented 
as existing for the circulation of Tracts, and especially school books. 

The ** Way to be Saoed,** in Modem Greek and Jhmem^Tarkiih. 

The Rev. W. Goodell, missionary on the Mediterranean, in a letter 
dated at Malta, says : " I now forward a copy of the Tract ** Wbj to 
be Saved," both in Modern Greek and Armeno-Turkish. Many co- 
pies of it in Modern Greek have already been sent forth, to show the 
way of salvation to perishing men ; and many others will soon foUow 
in both of the above mentioned languages, and will probably go 
" throughout all Judea and Galilee, and Samaria;'' will ** travel as far 
as Phenice and Cyprus, and Antioch ;" will '* come to Perga in Pam« 
j^hylia,'* and " to Antioch in Pisidia," and " to Lystra and Deibe, 
cities of Lycaonia," and " to Philippic the chief city of Macedonia;*' 
and " to the seven churches that are in Asia;" and will be read ** in 
the midst uf Mars Hill," and ** in the Isle of Patmos," and at Corinth 
and Colotse, and Thessalonica, at Scio and Samoa, and Rhodes and 
Mylettts, and by ^* the strangers scattered throughout Pontus, Galatis, 
Cappadoci% Asia and Bithynia«" May it, like " the grace of God, 
which bringeth salvation, appear to all" these and many others, 
" teaching them that, denying uogodliaess and worldly lusts, they 



t8dl.] FOEBION 0PERAT10H8. 29 

shoold live soberly, righteouslj, and godly in this present world.*' 
And may many " publications you shall hereafter issue be, not only 
tike a lamp giving light to a drcumscribed spt^t, but like the sun emit- 
ting its rays to the poles, and enlightening new this, now thai entire 
halfof the globe!" 

CEYLON. 

IVaet Uessed to a young Natvee^ 

A young native of Ceylon, whose attention to divine truth was first 
arrested by a Tract received from a missionary preaching in the 
market, thus describes its influence on his own mind, ** On reading 
it, I found it to contain the history of a Brahmn in Bengal, who left 
the Heathen and came to the Christian religion. When I reflected 
upon the feelings and subsequent walk of this Brahmin, I thought 
within myself, I am a sinner, what shall I do in the day of judgment ? 
How shall I give up my account to God ? How great are my sins ! 
1 further thought that I must believe in Christ, and confess my sins 
to him." 

He adds a narrative of subsequent conversations with the mis- 
sionaries, by whom, after about fifteen months, he was admitted to 
a public profession of religion, and adds, *' As far as I am able, I now 
go among the people and instruct them concernuag Christ." 

BOMBAY. 

Appeal to the Ameriean Tract Society. 

Tracts, says a joint communication from the Missionaries, are a 
useful auxiliary to all the missions in this part of India. They are 
permitted to wing their way o^er the Ghauts to those parts of India 
which are inaccessible to missionaries, and are destined to be heralds 
of mercy to thousands, who will never hear the accents of redeem- 
ing love from the voice of a living preacher. They will be read and 
heard. Besides, through the medium of Tracts, we can preach the 
Gospel to a certain class of natives in this place, to whom otherwise 
divine truth appears for the present almost inaccessible. We have 
said that the Bombay Tract Society is receiving liberal support from 
this Christian community, yet by no means commensurate with the 
demand for Tracts. We must, in this as well as in other departments 
of missionary labor, look to the churches in Christian land, for the 
means of keeping them in operation. We would, therefore, beg to 
represent our case to the Committee of the American Tract Society, 
and inquire if they could serve the interest of Christ's kingdom better 
than by mAking an appropriation to this specific object. The spirit 
of inquiiy which has been excited bf religious Tracts In various and 
distant parts of India, and which has in some instances already issued 
in hopeful conversion, demonstrates the utility of this branch of our 
operations. 

In our daily excursions for giving instruction to the people, we dis- 
tribute hundreds of Tracts weekly to those who ask for them and 
promise to read them. Many of these fall into the hands of natives 
from difierent parts of India, who are here on traffic, or for religious, 
or more properly superstitious observances, and which will accom- 
pany them to their distant homes, and there preach to them that 
.TesuB en whom alone their salvation is saspendcd. Tidmgs wiU 

3* 



80 NSW 8STTUQIS9T8. [Marcdf 

•pftad frMB boat e to houte, mnltitndet will aiMnble to hew wlMtt 
strmfo doetrinefl thaio little meiscngen have to preach, «ii4 freai 
them will hear, for the glrjf time, that their godi are no godi| and of 
the Savior who died to redeem them. 



A VOIGB VBOM THE N£W SETTLEMENTS AT 

THE WEST. 

An officer of a nnall Auxiliary in one of our Western Settlements 
thus writes : At the last meeting of our Committee I was instructed 
to give jou a particular statement of this portion of countiy, and 
maJEO known our wants and resolutions. The situation of the popu- 
lation around us is indy deplorable; we are destitute of the means of 
grace to a very great extent. There is, to my knowledge, but one 
ordained minister in a section of country more than a hundred miles 
eOuare. The church here, which, as 1 am informed, once consisted 
of about thirty members, is now aimost extinct. I have resided here 
almost seven years, during which the Lord's supper has been admi- 
nistered but twice. Some of the members have removed to other 
parts of the vineyard, and some, as we have good reason to believe, 
have been transplanted to the church triumphant above ; while those 
who remain are so amalcamated with the world as to give too much 
reason for the interrogation. What do ye more than others 7 Vice and 
immorality in their various forms stalk forth with a braaen front. 
The Sabbath is profaned with impunity, the stores are kept open 
during its saered hours, and not a few resort thither, as on other days, 
to do their ordinary business ; while ardent spirits, like a stream of 
lit|nid fire, threatens to overwhelm and devour us. 

There is no PhiuMa to execute judgment, that the plague may be 
stayed. Our Committee is composed of four different denominations, 
and we find a pleasure in uniting our feeble endeavors in the same 
cause. We have resolved to attempt to supply the population month* 
ly with Tracts, provided they can be obuined from the Parent 
Society. 

ADDITIONAL CLAIMS AND ENCOUaAGEHENT F0& LABORS IN 

NEW SETTLEMENTS. 

fnstead of the rich religious privileges I once enjoyed, says another 
individual, I am now here in these New Settlements>«-no regular 
preached word— no regular Sabbath school— few willing^ tp come 
forward as Teachers— and parents on the Sabbath directing their 
children to the streams and forests for game. Thus are the precious 
moments of the rising generation hastening them forward, unless a 
speedy remedy be found, into the shades of heathenish darkness, even 
i Q the heart of a Christian country. Multitudes boast that the shackles 
of ceremonies are past — ^fhe seasons of lasting and prayer done 
awayand if they will but be honest and just, they think they shall 
be happv^^Ul religion of the heart out of the question. 

Yet I am bound to bless God that my feeble efforts, aided l»y the 
l^rajit of Tnm and Children*8 Books from the American Tract Se- 



Udl.} BALTIMOAE B&AirCS* 81 

t 

ci«ty, hftv« not been in vain. I preTaileil on some Methodist brethren 
to eoBuaence a Sabbath school, and gave them a part of the bo<^. 
Another school I opened and superintended myself. I also indnced 
the formation of another Sabbath school in a neighboring town; and 
some of the books which I sent (o still another settlement were the 
means of the formation of a school there. In the ^ace where oAe 
Sabbath school into which a part of the boots went is iDgated, God 
has poared out his Spirit*-the thoughtless havo been arrested, and 
many led to embrace Jesus Christ I saw twenty-foilr persons at one 
time unite with the church. These are delightful tokens for good, 
and I cannot but feel that the Lord has begun a work of mercy for 
this wilderness. 



TRACTS FOR NORTH AMERICAN INDIANS. 

The American Tract Society have recently printed an edition of 
500 copies of a Tract of 16 pages, in the language and fbr the benefit 
of the Ghippeway Indians; consisting of extracts from the New Tes- 
tament and a translation of several Evangelical Hymns. The manu- 
script has been prepsred by Dr. Edwin James, Surgeon in the Uni- 
ted States' Army, at the Sanlt de St. Marie; near the east end of Lake 
Superior, who has also translated large portions of the Bible Into 
Chippeway. ** 

This language, we are informed by Dr. James, is probably the 
most widely extended Indian dialect in the country, and is often the 
medium of communication between different tribes, speaking, as mo- 
ther tongues, languages radically different. Among its kindred dia- 
lects are the Pottiwattomie and Ottawwaw, nearly allied to each 
other — the Cree, or Knisteneauz — the Menomonie, spoken about 
Oreen Bay and the Wisconsin River — the Sawk and Fox, about Rock 
River ; and many others. The Chippeway is spoken, in a greater 
or less degree or purity, by at least half of the Indians remaining 
within the limits of the United States' territories northward of De- 
troit, Chicago, and the Upper Settlements on the Mississippi, and 
eastward of the Rocky Mountains. All the necessary sounds in this 
language are represented by the English Alphabet ; but as the lan- 
guage is one which, until recently, has never been written, very few 
of the Cbippeways can now read It. It is confidently hoped that the 
preparation of this Tract will be an inducement to some, with such 
helps as may be provided, to learn the language, and that to some It 
may be the means of conveying a saving knowledge of the truth as It 
is in Jesus. 



BALTIMORE BRANCH TRACT SOCIETY. 

The Fourth Anniversary of this Branch, being the Fifleenth of the 
Religious Tract Society of Baltimore, was held November 26, 1830, 
Rev. J. Breckinridge, President of the Society, in the Chair. After 
the reading of the Report, addresses were made by Rev. J. Edwards, 
D. D., Re^* O. Eastman, and Rev. W. Nevins. The receipts dur- 
ing the year were $ 1,362. The circulation was 4l§,186 pages greater 
thap in the prteediog year, amounting in all to 9364SQ pagea ; 



32 msTANCS OF C0RVEE9I01C. [Marcb* 

af which there hare been gratmUnulif distributed, by members of the 
IkMrd, 102402 pages ; by the monthly system, fMO,800 ; by Itinerating 
Committee, 9,092 ; Committee for Steam-Boats, Shipping, &c. 17,626 ; 
Committee for the Country, 9,068 ; Committee for Sabbath Schools, 
1,196. Sold 604^168, of which 902,628 were famished to Auxiliaries. 
3,000 Christian 'Almanacs fo|p 1831 had also been procured of Uie 
Parent SoAteta. The Report is chiefly occupied with two leading 
objects of the DoariMuriDg the year; the first of which is the effort 
commenced in accordance with a resolution of the Branch at the pre- 
ceding anniyersaiy , to form Tract Societies throughout the state, with 
reference to supplying with Tracts every family willing to receiTe 
them. The Bev. Mr. Reed, in laboring for the Society 178 daya, 
chiefly on the Eastern Shore^ established and reviTcd 35 Auxiliaries^ 
of which 19 have since contributed f 191. Five Counties of the state 
having been undertaken and explored by the Washington City Tract 
Society ; the number of Counties explored is 13, in which 60 Auxi- 
liaries have been formed ; and 6 Counties yet remain to be visited, 
Into which Mr. James MacG. Dale entered as Agent for the Branch, 
November 12. 

In regard to the MoniMy Distribution in Saltimare, the Board ex- 
press their unfeigned regret, that for some months it has been inter* 
rnpted, chiefly for. want of pecuniary means. A resolution, however, 
"was recently adopted unanimously by the Board, that this work be 
again undertaken, and the fond hope is entertained that it may yet 
prove useful to multitudes in that city. 

Striking Initance of Convernon. 

In October, ldSS9, says the Report, Miss £ H— , one of our 

Distributers, in her visits through her District near Federal Hill, 

called at the house of Mrs. £ W , for the purpose of leaving 

the Tract styled The Lord's Day. On entering, she beheld her ex.- 
tended upon the bed of affliction, pale and wasting away under a 
disease which had long been raging upon her frail and delicate form. 
Advancing to her bedside and presenting the Tract above named, she 
accepted it with much thankfulness, and acknowledging herself to 
have been repeatedly the subject of religious impressions, she re- 
quested our Distributer to pray for her. Having done this, she left 
her, but continued to visit her at intervals^poarinf upon her mind 
fhe light of divine truth, and cheering her sinking neart by the pro- 
mises of the Gospel. She lingered with varying changes until the 
following June, when, in the fulness of the Christian's joy and the 
Christian's confidence, her redeemed spirit fled away to its bright 
and eternal home in the skies. Amidst the thronged multitude who 
were privileged to behold her triumphant end, she was heard to 
ascribe her joy and hope, in the awful crisis of death, to the blessing 
of God upon the humble Tract given her in October. 

> — — 

TRACT MEETING IN CHARLESTON, S. C. 

A public Meeting in behalf of the South-Carolina Branch Tract 
Society, was held in Charleston, January 12; S. V. S. Wildxr, Esq. 
President of the American Tract Society, and the Hmr. Stbphxn 



1931.] MSSTIHd IN CHAaLCSTOR. 85 

Van IUN88XX.AXit, one of its Vioe-PretMleiits, being prasent on Che 
oocaiion. Hon. Mr. Van Rent selaer presided. Mr. Jasper Curidng 
aeted as Secretary of the Meetings, which was opened with prayer 1^ 
Rev. Dr. Leland. 

Mr. Wilder presented a succinct account of the rise and progress 
of the American Tract Society, and dwelt upon the great success that 
has already attended its efforts, and the triumphs that must result in 
all time to come, by the blessing of God, from the distribution of mo> 
ral and religions tmth. 

Th^ ReT. Mr. Bailey then moved a resolution in behalf of the 
monthly dittrihultion, and expressing ** the conviction that persons of 
the highest qualifications and of the most devoted piety would be 
well employed in the immediate work of distribution," which was 
seconded and supported by Rev. Dr. Leland. 

Mr. Grimkb next addressed the Meeting, with his usual force and 
eloquence, remarking, that the argument sometimes used acainst the 
Tract, was a strong one to be urged in its favor-^vis. its dtminiuiiw'' 
neu. He adverted to the mischief created by small Atheistieal pan> 
phlets in France, the very smallness of which insured them a readinr. 
Much good and much evil, he contended, could be ejected in this 
way, and consequently it became every one interested in the tempo* 
ral and eternal welfare of the human family to be up and doing, to 
promote the valuable objects for which the Tract Society was insti- 
tuted. He concluded by movine the appointment of a Committee to 
obtain subscriptions in the city in aid of the Branch. The resotulloa 
was seconded and advocated by Mr. C. M'Intyre. 

The Rev. Dr. M*Dowall then moved an expression of thanks to Crod 
for what the American Tract Society, by his blessing, has done and 
is doing, accompanied by an expression of tbe determination of the 
Meeting ** to coK>perate with that Society, to the extent of their 
ability, in carrying the means of salvation to eveiy family^in our land, 
and throughout the world." 

BAPTIST GENERAL TRACT SOCDETT. 

The Seventh Anniversary was held in Philadelphia, January 5* 
Receipts, during the year, from Auxiliaries, $1,294 79; sales at De- 
positories, $986 64; total $8,094 09. Printed, during tbe year, 
2,427,000 pages; issued from the Depository, 2,688,364 ; remaining 
on hand, 1,601,800. The number of publications is now increased to 
104. The Report dwells on the great loss sustained in the death of the 
Rev. No4H Davis, the late inde£stigable and successful General 
Agent of the Society. The Rev. Ira M. Allen has been elected to 
•upply the vacancy thus occasioned, and entered upon the duties of 
his office with the commencement of the present year. 

PREmUMS OFFERED. 

We widi to invite tte tpeeial attaatimi «f th^ firmads of Thwti to the two pre- 
niimns advertiNd ia our iMt Noaiber ; one far the beet SHMnuftUeetl tmtkMUie Nmr- 
rmti9« Tract; tbe other fyr the beet Traet Acnrimg the Om/rmtimu devMag am 
dU Profuwr^ of RMgitm te eMJke t§atU and tacr^icM far the aaiaatiam efmtm 
and in whet mmaaor they BMit be dleeherged to evmoe a reel onion with Christ' 
The maanaeripte fbr Meh to he eddreeeed to William A, Halloek,New*York : or to' 
the care of the Rer. Joel T. Bensdiett Philadelphia ; or Mr. Aarta RaaseB, Boelon, 
preriotit to AprU 1, 1831. 



34 



RECSITT PUBXiICATIOnS. 



[Marcb, 



PROMPT PATH£irT FOR TRACTS. 

It is of the utmost importance in sastaining the Tract operatiotns 
of the country, that all Tracts, if possible, should be paid tor when 
ordered. 



RECENT PUBLICATIONS. 

No. 246. The Childrkh of the Forest— pp. 16. This is an 
Authentic NarratiTe of the conversion of two only children, together 
with the father and mother, of a family in one of our New Settlements; 
illustrating, in an interesting manner, the prominent doctrines of the 
Gospel, and the operations of the Holy Spirit* The narrative was 
originally written by the late Mr. Solomon Carpenter, of New-Jersey, 
and was rewritten in its present form by Rev. Jacob T. Field, of 
Faterson, N. J. 

No. 246. Joseph Archer, the converted Sailor— pp. 12. Ar- 
cher was brought up in Salem, Mass. At the age of sixteen he fell 
into vicious company ; became an abandoned sailor ; had his atten- 
tion at length excited through the reading of a Tract at sea; submit- 
ted his heart to Christ ; and became as eminent for piety as he had 
been for wickedness. 

No. 247. Who Slew all These 7 An authentic Narrative— pp. 
4. — Showing the miserable end of the respective members of a large 
and once respectable family, through the ravages of intemperance. 

No. 248. ZuufGLius, the Swiss Reformer— -pp. 32. This Me- 
moir, which was announced in the Tract Magaaine for December as 
an occasional Tract* is now adopted into the General Series. 

No. 249. Address on the Effects of Intemperance on the 
Intellectual, Physical, and Moral Powers. Originally deli- 
vered before the Washington City Tempera, ce Society. By Thomas 
Sewall, M. D. Professor of Anatomy and Physiology in Columbian 
College — pp. 20. The Tract is chiefly occupied with the effects on 
the pnyneal powers:— the breath— skin— stomach— liver — brain— > 
heart— lungs — ^the system generally— the predisposition to disease 
created, &c. ; all discussed in the light of medical science, and urged 
practically and powerfully on the consideration of all classes of men. 

No. 260 The Scape-Goat — ^pp. 8 Illustrating the import of the 
transaction recorded in Leviticus 16 : 21, 22 ; its typical reference te 
Christ ; and the practical instruction concerning the way of salvation, 
which it impressively conveys. 



37. The Theatre, the Circus, and 
the Horse-Race. 

38. A good Barmin. 

38. All is well that ends well. 

40. Six consideratioBs to Smiday 
School Teachers. 

41. Six reasons for goUkg to Sunday 
SohooL 

49. Ten reasons why I love to go to 

my Sunday Sehm^ 
43. Tlie eharaeler of a good Sunday 

Scholar. 



44. Warning to Blasphemers. 

45. To Buyers and Sellers on the 
Sabbath day. 

46. O, Reader ! 

47. Portrait of a modem Infidel. 

48. Why should I not be saved? 

49. To-morrow. 

50. One Glass more. 

51. A word to the Active-4o the 
Aged— to the Young. 

58. A word to the Slo^fiil. 
53. The Ten.Coni]naadment»« 



PIKE'S FEBSDA3IVES TO EARLT PIETT. 
Tbii little voldme will be iiiaeil emrl; io Harcb, emhradus 360 
pegea, ISmo. Wekaow of nathing TecenUj publittied. wbich, In tfae 
■eriounaai &od ^n^eaey of iti appeali, » aemrlj eqiuli the ulect 
mill iainiitKble wrilingi of Boxler^ and loine oThfln of the old Enc- 
liih diTinei. It CHmol fail lo take a deep bold on tbe beart of all 
who raid il with a proper >pirit. Thia edilioa *aa tiereoljped ia 
Eafland, onder the cateful Tmiaion of the author; and the platei 
were preiented to the Americaa Tract Sodetr by " an £Dg:liib 
Bapdit." 

BECEIPTS 

INTO THE TKEAStRT bp THE AMERICAN TRACT 80CIETV 
Dttinf tU ma*a taJtf FOnary IS, IS3I. 
FROM ADXlLtART TRACT SOCIETIES. FarTr. Dm. 



(XWII,.«ainh, Eru UitJHil, S«. .... 
Si«Um(WlBdkuiCo.4iuJEd>liiN«»bWT.A(. . 
Sanaa, Oariai E. Wkilon, Tr. .... 

SrHBwisfelnSluwii:h,WiUi>B Bnilti,TT. . 
]itotlird, CaDBteUcit Bfuck, Ckariti Boam, Sec. 
XilUiunnRfe.OI'- — ■■ ■■ ~ 



M Onmwii^ BnAu Bebool Aiu. W. B. Slwrwood, a 
¥OB^_BMAll^li^«t Clui«« Coonly Fboi. Hit. E 

i 

Jjnm'.Ermai.i 



fin-Plaea, l> I. Zophir B. PsUy, Tr. 
rii^ai hoMif^im. MlB M. W. TsUcr.Si 



1. Lnte Rich, Tr. 



](aricli«. La. KT.JBIa K. « 



Thmagiul Bealauji AriMldeiB. 



w TOWt_D«>hini« P^U^Fim. Mn. J«» A^mOm, See. . 
M. JML-WMteir™, F™.. Mn. Ftata 8. llm«r, T.- . 

L. CANADA^MoMrt.1. waiiua LiiAi. Tr. - . ■ ,-,^' 

E^I'AuKdlKiiUlw' nftidei' dn 'sociMr, u adyw^ si Ui 



Dinttort /or Li/i. 

CMm^Konrich, WiUUm 1 

^fftSL, "h;w.;™i.cl M"¥ORK.:^;wklFi,L.I..Miii 

*Rj'WB.B.a^,by^A. I E-MiKU* . . .'. .". . 10 

iCa (BptftoriW,) . ■ ' 13 SOCtaemiifaudBroinMeoulrBa- 

"Si'TT'.' "" ' '■ '"■ » M oSSrsssi.', ii j. i. " 

JfeniAnv /or Lift. MuStuwii. i 

Uuna-SmJu. . . 
, 5 IN Ndw-Yw* diy. A ^"J^>^ 

! 5 00 ibree^to'^liiMrX' ■ -„■ ■»« 
, j »FriBHl(lirV.U,IO-.»3«t ^^ 

^ sB 00 ^rry Cttltra, cj 




THE AMERICAN 



JLWmiX., IMl. 



GhiBf «r lb* L"* fnm UoaiM fliui. 

VEHEPV FOR THE ALLEGED pEFECTS 

IN THE SYSTEM OF TRAVELING AGENCIES. 

Wl believe the tmpreiitoD {■ iDmewbit eileniiTS in (be mlndi sf . 
Inlsiligent Chriitlani, Ihat there arc defacli in Ihi preient i^iiem 
rf Tr«»eting Ageaciei for onr BeneTotenI Inilitulioni, which denand 
■ remedjr. Wilhont attempting a full diicuiiian of the inbject, ire 



W« premite, however, that we dv mil imw i^/cr eloBU lt< nieral 
m*tV9f*w fetmlrji when little >< knowQ coacerning the Bene- 
iKfUol Dparaiieu of ibf 4»j, Bad Ibcre arc neither miaiiien nor in- 

Vol. VI. 4 • ' WHOM! No: ei. 



38 TRAVELING AGEIIT8. [April, 

L ■ ■ 1 

telligent ChristianB to carry them forward, and where, for the pre- 
sent at least, they can be prosecuted only by the aid of laborers from 
abroad. 

In other ports of the country, where the privileges of the Gospel 
are enjoyed, we believe the general fact to be, that the labors of 
qualified Traveling Agents have been a fmitful source of the soc« 
cess and usefulness of onr Benevolent Institutions. But these Insti- 
tutions, in prosecuting their objects by thif means, have encountered, 
among others, the following difficulties. 

1. To find .qualified men, who can he released from other engage- 
ments. This difficulty is one which, at pjresent, is altogether insur- 
mountable ; and must continue to be so, until a great number of la- 
borers are raised up, or qualified men shall more diflinctly recog- 
nise the paramount obligations of the church to sustain her operations 
for spreading the Gospel. 

2. The reluctance of qualified men to engage in Agencies. The ser- 
vice involves the separation from home, and friends, and books ; the 
encountering of the lukewarmness of inany Christians, and the 
open opposition of enemies ; and is in all respects irksome, except 
as the heart is fired with a love of the Apostolic work of spreading 
the Gospel, and moved by a perpetual sense of obligation and duty. 

3. The unavoidaUe expense involved. So fhr as we know, the gene- 
ral rule adopted by our Benevolent Societies has been to give Agents 
the smallest compensation consistent with moral right : the same es- 
sentially as is allowed to Missionaries ; or which may be nearly 
equivalent to the support received by stationed preachers of the 
Gospel generally, exclusire of those in our larger towns and villages. 
Yet the total expense 'incurred each year for agencies, as appears by 
the Annual Reports of our Benevolent Societies, is very considerable. 

4. A prejudice in the minds qf many against the system of traveling 
agencies. To some, the expense just alluded to is an objection. To 
others, the fact that public appeals are so often made in their own 
hearing. To others, a surmise, that the Agent has obtained a lucra- 
tive employment, and is rather an incumbrance than a help, to the 
Institution he professes to serve. And strange to say, complaints of 
this kind, so far as made by professed Christians, most frequently 
proceed from those who allow themselves habitually to rest in inac- 
tion until they shall be aroused by the presence of an Agent. But 
let us for a moment consider 

The Remedy. 
Let Christians and Christian mmisters faithfully sustain the va- 
rious depkrtments of Christian Benevolence among themselves, with- 
out the presence of Agents and the occasion for employing them, and 



t^Si.} TKAVELIirO AGENTS. 99 

with it all the ttdU alleged wUl^ io a great deg»e, cease, at once, and 
for ever. This should be remembered by all who feel that agencies 
are becoming too numerous. But in order to remedy the evil, they 
teatt not merely rttolvt to carry forward these operations, and then 
procrastinate the performance, which is just what renders agencies 
necessary; but must search out their duty, and as Cecil emphatically 
said, ** do iL'* Especially should ministers of the Gospel see that 
their congregations are' enlightened in respect to the duty of evan- 
gelizing the world — ^the great object for which the Redeemer died, 
and for which his church on earth exists. The subject should be 
treated as a practiedl one, and the duty be enforced as one of the 
evidences of piety ; for " if a man hare not tk^ tpirit of Chrut he, is 
none of His/' 

The bearing cf ihit nUyeet on ike presuU state of the Amtrican 

Tract Society. 

Throughout a great portion of the United States, this Society has 
now no traveling Agent. In the four states of Missouri, Illinois, In- 
diana, and Ohio, it has an equal number of Agents, two of whom are 
laymen, and all of whom are laboring chiefly in comparative New 
Settlements; it has one in the Western District of New-Tork; but 
has no other, if we except the much interrupted labors of an esteemed 
brother in the interior of Georgia. 

Here, then, is a Society, having for its object to supply our whole 
land, aod as far as Providence opens the way, the world, with Tracts, 
to be sold at cost to such as can purchase, and Aimisbed graloitously 
to such as cannot ; with no pecuniary resources except the proceeds 
of publications thus sold, and the free donations of the benevolent; 
and with no Agent employed except those in the comparatively limit- 
ed fields now mentioned, the sustaining of whom and furnishing them 
Tracts for gratuitous distribution, involves, beyond their entire re- 
ceipts, a continual expenditure ! 

In these circumstances, the fact is so evident that it must be pal? 
pable to all, that the work will proceed just so f^r as Christians come 
forward and act in their own spheres of labor, in supplying the po- 
pulation with Tracts, and in raising pecuniary means ; and that it will, 
andean, proceed no farther. We lay these facts before all who desire 
the enlargement of the Redeemer's kingdom, and who rejoice in the 
rich efliisions of the Holy Spirit which have attended these unassum- 
ing publications ; beseeching God to make each individual foithful 
In discharging the duties and obligations devolving on himself, that 
this precious cause may not be hindered. 



40 TRAcr CAxnz m A&KAirsAt. [April, 

INFLUENCE OF TH£ MONTHLY TRACT mSTftlfiUTiON 

ON REVIVALS OF RELIGION. 

If no other good were effected by this lyitein of effort than the 
WMte bringing to light of the moral eondilion of the neglected portions 
of our population, and rendering them the otjects of prayer and of 
Christian solicitude, the end attained would warrant all the cfibrtf 
made. But God is Messing the Tracts, and the personal labors of 
the Distributers, wherever the system is faithfully, perseveringly, 
and prayerfuHy prosecuted. In all thoge places especially where he 
is graciously pouring out of his Spirit, there are most animating en- 
coumgements. In multitudes of instances^ the Spirit** influences 
are found to have preceded the Distributer, and caused a preparation 
of heart to receive the truth. The presence of God in the bhurches 
iiimishes a new motive to those who have absented themselves now 
to attend ; the glowing heart of the Distributer will add persuasion 
to his lips ; and his access to the throne of grace wilt enable him, by 
£sith, to bring down spiritoel blessings* Indeed, this system of effort, 
fhithfuUy performed, is so important a ranans of protaoting and fnr^ 
thering the revival of retigioii in the churches, and extetiding its in- 
fluence to tliose who have been living far from Crod, that it would 
•eem no Christian, who is conscious of his duties and his privileges, 
can fail of giving it his decided support ; his prayers ; and as the op* 
portanity is afforded^ his own energetic personal endeavors. 



TRACT CAVniR IN ARKANSAS TERRITORY. 

[From an intelligent Phjrsician in the interior of the Territory.] 

AceeptabUnets atid use/ulnetsof Tracts granted, 

I have to express to the Committee of the American Tract So. 
oiety my stneerest gratitnde for the renewed expression of their libe- 
rality in the grant of Tracts which arrived about three weeks since. 
lYe have distributed all the Tracts in the former grant, and have the 
best reasons to believe they have been useful. My professional duty 
freqcientfy calls me4o distant settlements, to witness scenes of sick* 
Hess, poverty, distress, and death. Here I am greatly assisted by 
Tracts, in exciting the afflicted to raise their prayers to a Greater 
Physician than I am, who is able to save both soul and body. Amidst 
the prevalence of the fever which visits us annually in autumn, minds, 
at 6lher times carelesii, are easily excited by religious subjects ; and 
Tracts, on such occasions, have always arrested the most fixed at* 
lention, and led to a conversation from which, I trast, many have 
profiled. Indeed, a very considerable and general reformation in 
morals, is apparent throughout the whole district In which these 
Tracts were distributed. 



1881.] TRACT CAUSE IN AESA58A8. 41 

Ckaraeter and habits of the people. 

There are some peculiarities of the people of this country wLicU, 
if I'lgbtly improved, are favorable to the propagation of pure religion, 
and particularly by means of Tracts. 

1. The habits and occupations of a great portion of the people. 
For the benefit of the natural pasturage, the new settler generally 
locates himself at a distance from any other, and devotes his time 
to the raising of domestic animals, and cultivating a small field, re- 
cently cleared from the forest, for bread. This mode of life, so much 
resembling that of the ancient patriarchs, favors meditation, though 
it must be admitted that the hunter's life is somewhat mingled with 
the pastoral. 

2. The partial refinement. Expensive fashionable amusements, 
and refined vices, have not as yet found their way among us ; and 
as the vices that exist are of the coarser and more unplausible kind, 
so the virtues are those which spring from native simplicity, hospi- 
tality, curiosity, and credulity. A vacuum is left in the mind, which 
seems fitted to afibrd an easy introduction to religion. Rough vices 
are more easily overturned by its power than refined ones. 

3. The chivalric hospitality of the South. Solitary travellers, and 
preachers especially, seldom pay any fare at private houses, but are 
received with a cheerful welcome. Preachers seldom pay even fer^ 
riages; and all pious strangers, who are ready with a word of ezhor* 
tation or prayer, are generally received at our log cabins with all 
the demonstrations of joy and hospitality due to a benefactor. It 
would be deemed infamous, even in one who showed no regard to 
religion at other times, to take pay from a traveling preacher for 
any thing he might need. 

4. The scarcitv of books. Although I am not acquaifUed wilh one 
family entirely destitute qf readers, (and my acqoaintaoce is pretty 
general through a circle of fifty miles around me,) yet it may be said 
that one half of the families are destitute of Bibles, and very few 
other books are to be seen. But I feel thankful to God, that the de- 
luge of trash, which for some years past has inundated the older part 
of the world, has not yet reached us. The public mind is not pre* 
occupied with any thing adverse to religion, to the exclusion of books 
of piety and useful instruction. Consequently, Tracts are received 
with avidity, and read with attention. 

6. The state of religion. There are but two societies organised 
among us— 4he Methodist, and the Cumberland Presbyterian. In 
this district they have each one itinerant preacher, who performs a 
circuit of nearly four hundred miles in three weeks, preaching nearly 
every day. Their number of members is very small; and as this 
preaching is mostly on week days^ it is but thinly attended. My own 
neighborhood is the only one where any thing like regular Sabbath 
preaching is performed, and that by local preachers. Both societies 
have their regular camp meetings, which last four days, two or three 
times a year, when all the people for many miles around attend ; and 
it is deemed disreputable to be absent. Here would be the rampart 
from which the enlightened missionary might discharge with efitect 
the arrows of the Gospel. Here our devoted preachers exert them- 
selves with becoming seal, to produce an effect, which is toaoOcA^as 

4* 



4t ISAIAH TftiLCTf. [Aflrilt 

transient at the duration oi tlie meetiof » and wliieh the Ion; inter- 
Tat that followrs nearly effaces. Tracts would be admirably adapted 
to keep alive the iinprKSnions made on these occasions, 
t I have tieen thus full and explicit in describings the sitiMtion of this 
part of the country, ss the inforfnation may aid your Committee in 
their zealous end benevolent operations for the benefit of our fron- 
tier settlenrents. I believe the description 1 have given will answer 
Ibr most of the country west of the Mississippi and situated thus ha- 
conveniently for commerce. The field for benevolent exertion it 
almost boundless, and promises eventually an ample harvest. 

TVocto mutl be furnished gratvMoudy, 

I have thus endeavored to present to your view the field around 
me for the distribution of Tracts. But they must be, at present, in a 
Ifreat measure graiuilous. The bitustion of the country is not favor- 
able to the raisings oC funds. Money is nearly withdrawn from cir- 
culation. Our internal commerce is conducted by barter and ez- 
changfes, and payments to merchants in produce. We have a most 
delightful climate, ami a s<iil exut>ersntly fertile ; but having from 
this place sixty miles land carriage to the Washits, and a bad road, 
and thence one thousand miles by the Washita, the Red River and 
the Mississippi, to NewOrleins, none of our produce except cotton 
will bear the expense of transporlatioli, and but little more of this is 
raised than is sufficient to pay the merchant for those supplies which 
we cannot dispense with. We have flocks and herds; but the great 
source of regret is, that they cannot be converted into money with 
which to procure Bibleti/ Tracts, and missionaries. 

I should do violence to my feelings were I not to express my grati- 
tude to the youni; women employed in the folding depsrtment of the 
Ameriran Tmct Society House, for their generous donation of Tracts. 
May the Lord €k»d bless them, and make their charif y-box like the 
widow of Zarephath*s barrel of meal and cruse of oil, that it may 
neither waste nor fail. 



UaEFULNEfiS OP THE INDIAN TRANSLATION OF THE SEEIfON 
ON THE MOUNT, AND HTHNS, AWONQ THE fiENECAS. 

The Rev. Mr. Harris, under whose supervision tlie above littl# 
ToUime was published by the American Trsct Society, fi»r the benefit 
of the Seneca Indians, thus writes, in a letter dated some montha 
since at the Mission. 

" Immediately upon the arrival of the books, convenient opportt^ 
nities were emiiraced for presenting a copy to every Seneca who m«» 
nifested a desire to know their contents. They appeared to be 
thankfully received by most; and the Hymns especially aflbrd great 
delight to the members of our three little Churches of Seneca, Cata- 
raugus, and Alleghany, whenever they meet for religious worship. 
You would be greatly interested, | think, to see with what correct- 
ness of melody and apparent fervor of devotion, these songs of Zion 
are sung by these natives, in their liitle chapels, upon the Sabbath. 
These woods, which till lately run^^ with the yell of the %9J9igtf9M 



1951 .J: irtenr&ircss or tkacts. 45 

now vocal with fhc praiMs of " Hmma n u eV* On the spot dhtiti- 
guithed for tti traces of savage war, standt a Chnstiati Temple, boilt 
by lodiana, and dedicated to God, and in it worships statedly a 
Christian congregation of native men and women, to the number of 
between two and tltree hundred. The little book of Hymns appears 
to be the constant companion of many ; they peruse it in the house 
of worship, they peruse it in their cabins, and it is their " song in the 
house of their pilgrimage." The Sermon on the Mount is also read 
by many who have been trained in the Mission schools : and it is to 
be hoped that this highly interesting portion ^f Divine truth may be 
treasured up in their memories, and, ** like good seed sown in good 
ground," " bring fonh fVuit unto God.*' 



TRACTS NEAR THE HBAD OP THE MISSISSIPPI. 

In the name of Zion's friends, (says a devoted Clergyman mi Ga« 
lena, Illinois,) who are scattered abroad and dispersed through thia 
wild country, and in behalf of perishing sinners who ought to thank 
you, 1 lender to you and your Committee a tribute of gratitude for 
the liberality manifested in supplying us so bountifully with these 
seasonable and welcome monitors. And in ny own name I thank* 
fully acknowledge my great obligations for the honor and privilege 
of being the almoner of your charities ; and for being furnished with 
such valuable helps in my labors to break down the strong holds of 
sin, and enlarge the kingdom of our Redeemer. 

The Tracts have been liberally, and I hope Judicioasly distributed 
to individuals— to Sabbath and conunoa schools— ^nd to congrega* 
tJons after preaching ; and they have been often received with aa 
avidity which warranted the assurance that they would be carefully 
read. One afiUcted old disciple was greatly refreahed by the Tract 
entitled, The New Birlh, and was greatly animated when I assvied 
her 1 had others, and could give her that to send to her children £ve 
hundred miles distant. Another was equally interested in the Tract, 
True and Falte Conveniont, There is a great dearth of books in this 
country ; and the Tracts have consequently a very fair opportunity 
of being noticed^ read, and considered* 



ITSCFUI.NESS OF TRACTS. 

TRAVELS AND CO^aUESTS OF "THE SWEARER'S PRAYER." 

The following facts, says an Agent of the American Tract Society 
in Missouri, wer^ related to me 1^ the individual who presented the 
Tract, and in their correctness Lhave reason to place entire confi- 
dence. The Swearer^t Prayer was given to a man, who had awfully 
abandoned himself to blaspheme the name of God, but whose regara 
for the individual by whom it was presented induced him to renriHt. 
It wounded, but to heal. He is now restored from a debased, despi* 
cable standing in society, to an honorable and useful standing in the 
church. The identical Tract traveled nearly an hundred miles. It 
fell into the bands of three other iadividoals of a similar characters 



44 CORlfSCTlCUT B&ANCH. [April* 

and aU the four have, in th« jodgmeBt of enlightened charity, hw 
means of this Tractj obtained a gracious claim to a standing at God a 
right hand. 

[ONE WHO WAS A NUISANCE TO THE NEIGHBORHOOD CON- 

VERTED BY A TRACT. 

The Agent of the American Tract Society for Missouri and IHinois 
relates the following facts. A lady presented two of your Tracts : one 
on Intemperance ; the other on the duties of Parents, to a man who 
was, by his vices, reduced to as miserable and pitiable a condition at 
you can well imagine. He neglected public worship, roame^ in the 
field in quest of prey or pleasure on the Sabbath, outrageously bid 
defiance to the threatenings of God against those who take his name 
in vain, provoked the execution of these denunciations which ex- 
clude drunkards from the kingdom of heaven, neglected his family, 
and was a common nuisance to the neighborhood in which he lired. 
But the gntce of God, accompanying the apparently feeble means 
employed, was manifested in changing him into a man, and there is 
good reason to believe into a Christian. I am now acquainted with 
him. He has become a professed follower of the Lamb, and I believe 
witnesses a good profession. 



THE TRACT "PARLEY THE PORTER." 

The Secretary of the Auxiliary Tract Society of French Creek, 
V«., says, ** A Distributor in one of the Districts into which this and 
the adjacent settlements have been divided for Tract circulation, re- 
ports that a person who was once a member of the church, but had 
long since been excluded, on reading the Tract Parley the Porter, 
went to a pious neighbor and told him, with deep solemnity, that 
Parley's case was his own case ; and that he was now resolved to re- 
turn unto Him from whom he had so grievously departed ; for perad- 
venture there might be hope. 

TRACT BLESSED TO ONE NOW A CANDIDATE FOR THE 

MINISTRY. 

Mrs. M , of , Kentucky, says an Agent of the American 

Tract Society, informed me of a young man in that vicinity, who 
was first awakened by reading a Tract, and who is now a member 
of the Methodist Church, and a dandidate fir (he Gotpel JkRwttry. 



GONNECTICVT BRANCH. 

The Fifteenth Anniversary of the Connecticut Branch of the Ame* 
rtcan Tract Society was held at Hartford, January 6, when the Meet- 
ing was addressed by Rev. Francis H. Case, late Agent for the Parent 
Society in Alabama and Tennessee, and by the Rev. Messrs. Hawes, 
Linsley, Gallaudet» and Brinsmade. Receipts, during the year^ 
f 1089 11, including a legacy of $ 100, from the late Mr. John Hall, 
of Hartford« Circulated during the year, 120,134 Tracts and books, 



18^.] COnNtCTlCUf BRANCH. 45 

•f #hfeii 6,600 wre gMfuitouitjr distributed in lb*' ihilet «f Neir«> 
^orky Georgia, Md Illinoii, mid in the Sttndwicli Ittandt. 

TIte Report is ably writteiii and is inily a rich Tract docvnent. In 
apeakm|r of tbe o|>entiig for Tract eircalation abroad, the Report 
thas speaiis of Buraiab, China, and France :— '' BurtMh, with her 
17,000,000 of inhabitants, most of whom can read, is now open to the 
influence of Tracts ; and Chtno, too, who, to make her millions of 
Idols, has furnished a market for the surplus silver of the Christian 
world, is now laid open to ihe light of truth. Tes, China, which for 
ages has been guarded against the Gospel, by prejudice and the arm 
of imperial power, with a vigilance like that of the Cherubim who 
defended the Tree of Life, is now a wide field for effort. Tracts are 
as yet almost the only possible means of acting on the millions of her 
population. They are sent by the vessels whtch trade in her ports* 
They are distiibuted in the vrry temples of the gods, to the throngs 
who assemble there to worship; and the people avail themselves of 
the lights used in the temples for their idol worship, to read these 
Tracts, which teach them the nature of the true God. The system 
of religious despotism under which France has so long groaned, is 
now shaken to its Imse— ihe spell is broken — ^the spirit of enquhry is 
abroad in the land, and the Word of God is no longer a sealed 
Tolume." 

As one among many arguments for vigorous Tract operations in 
tmr own country, the Report says : — " Union in benevolent effort 
creates a stronger tie between communities, and forms a surer pledge 
of continued harmony, than commerce or self>interest— than rail- 
roads or canals. 11 is by benevolent effort alone that the East and 
the mighty West— the mother and the daughter can continue united— 
the fire-brands of contention and party strife be quenched — and this 
nnion, made sacred by the tears, and prayers, and blood of our fa* 
thers, be preserved." 

The system of distributing Tracts once in two nontht to CTery 
family in the city willing to receive them, has been pursued with seal 
and perseverance for two years, by aboat forty X<adiet of the Hart- 
Ibnl Ladies' Tract Society. During the past year, one case of hope- 
ful rooversM>n has oecnrred from reading the Tract entitled, QHenek 
not the SpirU. 

FEMALE AUXILIARY OF ALEXANDRIA, DIS. COL. 

At the second Anniversary, held a few weeks since, it appeared 
that the receipts for the year had been $ 184 83 ; of which sum 
958 60 has been appropriated as a donatwa to aid the Parent So- 
ciety, and $20 to the Rev. John H. Hill, missionary to the Greeks, to 
aid him in his Tract operations. Distributed, 258,638 pages. 
^ The report lays much stress on the tjftUmatie gnd etaied ditiribU' 
tion as the only efficient means of supplying the population with 
Tracts. The town is divided into twelve Districts for monthly Dis- 
tribution, some of which have been very faithfully supplied; and the 
whole number of families reported is 565. Great numbers have been 
found who wholly neglected the house of God, some of whom now 
attend ; some have been supplied with the Bible ; and some children 
brought mto the Sabbath and Laacasterian schools. One family has 



46 AUXlLlAKIXft. [April, 

been induced to give up Svaday marketing. One nan ha« been 
snatched from the dominion of intemperance through the reading of 
KUtredg€*i Jiddttn ; and of one man who ridiculed his children for 
praying, as they had been taught to do in the Sabbath school^ but 
who was prevailed upon to receive and read the Tracts every month, 
it is now said, " Behold he prayeth" 



AUXILIARY OF NEWPORT, R. I. 

Anniversary held in the lecture room of Rev. Mr. Choules' church, 
February 10. Addresses were delivered by Rev. Dr. Patten ; Rev. 
Messrs. Choules, Beecher, Van Vleck, and Tucker ; Col. Cranston, 
and Mr. William Guild. More than 100,000 pages have been distri* 
buted during the year. Rev. Mr. Choules was appointed Secretary 
of the Society. 

AUXILIARY OF PRATTSBURGH, N. Y. 

First Anniversary February 7. The efforts of the Society have 
been chiefly directed to the MontMjf Dittribution. The town is di- 
vided into Districts, and supplied by about twenty Distributers. Num«> 
ber of families 400, in 8 of which the Tracts are refused. Twenty 
families found destitute of the Bible have been supplied. The month- 
ly Tract Worth of the Soul was the means of awakening three indi- 
viduals, who, by the Divine blessing on this and succeeding Tracts, 
have been hopefully converted to God. 



AFFECTING INSTANCES OF CHRISTIAN UBERALITT. 

Eztrcct of a letter to the American Tract Secietf, dated Prairie du ClUeu^ 

Ifateniher 24, 1830. 

There are probably not more than six or eight professing Chris- 
tians in this place. The few that are here are cut off entirely from 
preaching, and have latterly tried to improve the Sabbath day and 
Thursday evening in prayer meetings at each other's houses. A few 
evenings past a religious paper, containing a statement, showing thai 
the receipts of the American Tract Society for the present year had 
fallen short of the receipts for the preceding year near 10,000, was 
handed in by one of our number, and read to the persons present. 

We hope that, following the spirit that dictated that article, we en- 
deavored to consider it prayerfully, spreading it, like Heaekiah, be- 
fore the Lord, desiring that he might indicate what he would have 
us to do. Our meeting was refreshing, and at the conclusion I was 
directed to inclose }rou the within twenty doUan, as the amount of 
their subscription to the American Tract Society. 



FROM A LADY, ACCOMPANYING A GOLD WATCH-CHAIN. 

The wants of the American Tract Society have excited a deep con- 
cern in the hearts of many of its friends ; and I am glad to sec that 
some of its female friends love it more than they do their superfluous 
ornaments. I too profess to be a friend of that cause which is aid- 
ing to scatter the seeds of eternal life over a guilty world ; and having 
nothing exactly superfluous to resign, I have determined to substi^ 



1831.] 



TKZUiVti OFFBRED. 



47 



tote in the room of the ^\d vatch-cbain, which I encloie, one of an 
inferior kind ; h6pin^ thlic it will afibrd some little aid to your funds, 
and convince those worthy females who have preceded me in tlio 
performance of duty, that their example has not been altogether 
in vain. — — 

PREMIUM OFFERED. 

.An individual, believing that the infiaeoco of Lotteries is ezeeediofly pemiciooSf 
and very imperfectly imderatood by a large portion of the commanity, hereby 
offers a premium of 1 50 for the best Tract on the MivU9 of L^tteriett wliieb shall 
be presented on or before June 1, 1831. The premium to be awarded fay a Com- 
mittee consisting of Rev. B. B. Wisner, D. D.; Mr. John Tappan, and Mr. S. T. 
Armstrong, of Boston ; and the manuscripts to be committed to the care of William 
A.Hallock, 144 Nassau-sueet, New-York; or to Aaron Russell, No. 35 Conihill, 
Boston. 

Time prolonged. — The time of presentation for the premium for the best Tract 
** to all persons engaged or interested in the navigation and transportation upon 
Canals and Rail Roadtt" is extended to May 1, 1831. 

MONTHLY DISTRIBUTION IN BOSTON AND VICINITY. 

The success which has attended the Monthly Distribution in Bos- 
ton is very animating^. It takes a strong hold of the affections of the 
wise and good. Gentlemen of the first standing in the churches, who 
for a time doubted, are now ready to superintend and to distribute. 
One gentleman, who gave $ 50 for the object, on reading the report 
of the Distribution in Ward No. 1, declared, " it was worth the whole 
effort and expense of the distribution in Boston." 
- In Ntwlnuryport, Poritmoulhf.and Portland, the work succeeds welt.' 
In Exeter, N, H., the monthly Tract QtieneA not the Spirit was read 
by a thoughtless young woman— led her to see the necessity of the 
^irit's influences on her own heart— and she found no peace till she 
submitted to Christ. She has since united with the chureh. 

ICr For Other facts relative to the Monthly Distribution, see Cover, 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY 



^K^SKp '^^^k vsw^r I^Mr^vw^V 



March 15, 1831. 



FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 

VER.-~SudburT, Fem^ Sasan Ranger, Ag 

MASS. — Long Meadow, George Reynolds, Tr. 

R. ISL. — Newport, Rev. J. O. Choules, See 

CONN. — ^Brooklyn, (Windham Co. Aux.) Edwin Newlniry, Ag. 

Guilford, Henry E. Hodges, Ag 

Middle Haddam, Joseph Dart, Esq., Sec 

New-Haven, Jeremy L. Cross, Ag 

Norwalk, S. J. Froet, Tr 

Norwich, Fem., Miss Sarah Backus, Sec.- .... 
Trumbull, Fem., Mrs. LucreCia S. Edwards, Sec . 

Windsor, (First Soc.) Fem., Mrs. Seargeant, Tr. . 
N. YORK.— Auburn, Clark B. Ilotcfakin, Ag. .... 

East Hampton, L. l«, Joseph D. Condit, Ag 

Goshen, Orange Co., Dr. J. S. Crane, Tr. . • . . 

Harlaem, Fem., Miss L. Doughty, Tr. 

Huntington, Rev. Nehemiah Brown, Ag. 

New-York City, Alfred Edwards, Tr. .'.... 

Do. by Fem. Anz., Mrs. J. R. Hard, Tr. 

Do. in Ref. Dateh Ch., Greenwich Village, Abraham A. 
Campbell, Tr 



ForT^. 



59 00 
9 00 
7 SO 

70 00 
5 60 
500 
366 

36 00 
5 00 
1 S3 
1 SO 

10 00 
1800 00 

57 34 



Don. 

10 90 

5 OO 



1 39 



34 

13 75 



500 500 



u 



ftVCSH^Tt. 



Oyster Ponds, L. I., Rev. rhinehac Kobinsoa, Tr> 

Poughkeepsie, Lawrence J. Van Kleek, Tr 

Rirerhead, L. I., Dr. Jeabaa PanniDfr, Tn 

Rye, Wast Charter Co. Fen., Mrs. Ifw7 PaaAaM* Tr. . 
Shelter Island, Fem., Mrs. Mary C. Gardiner* Tr. . . . 

Someni, John Owen, Preside.nt, < 

Soathold, William Fuller, See 

TVoy, Charles Lyman, Tr 

West Farms, G«or|re St. John, Tr 

Wast Hampton, L. I., Rufba Foster, Ag. .... 

N.JER Newark, Ellison Conger, Sec 

Princeton, Fern., Miss F. W. Morford, Tr 

Springfield, Abijah L. Dunnell, Tr. ...... 

Westaeld, Fern., Miss Mary Pierson, Se«. .... 

West Milford, Jacob Tutile, Ag. 

PENN.oErie, Fern., Emily Wight, See 

MD<— Baltimore Branch, Carter A. Hall, Esq , Tr. . 

Do. by their Fem. Auiu Riesteratown, Mra. A* Niel- 
son Sec. .......** 

Do. do. do. Tqney Town. Miss Burrie, S«c 

DIS. COL.— Washington City, John Kennedy, Tr. . 
VIK.— Hartwood, Stafford Co., Col. Joraes Briggs, Falmpntk, Sac. 
GEO.— Augusta, Francis M* Robertson, E^q., Sec. 

OHIO.— Cincinoati, Henry B. Funk, Tr. 

If artinsburgh, J. D. Johnston, Esq., Ag 

MICH. TER.— Monroe, Monroe Co., Robert Clark, Sec. . . 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 
N. YORR.-.Naw-Utrecht, L- L, Fem., Bible, Missionary, and Tract 

Society, Mrs. C. Knapp, Tr. 

DIS. COL. — George Town, Juv. in Sunday School, . «' . 
Tracts Kid at the Depository to individuals, .... 



JarlV.! 

9e» 

3H 

1 80 
17 
3 15 
90 00 
1 » 
6 40 
1 5» 
500 
500 
ft 25 
SOO 

S40 06 



50 00 
10 00 
^75 00 
S5 00 
SSS2 



4 48 

5 50 
160 78 



J>on, 



500 



10 00 



5 00 
500 

500 



18 78 
10 00 



Directors for Life* 

CONN.— Hurlfiard, Rev. James A. 
Smith 50 

N. YORK.— New-York City, Rev. 
William D. Saodgrass, D. D. by 

Ladies, 50 

Do. Col. Richard Varick, / 
in part for perpetuating ** Bax- 
ter'* Call to the Unconverted," SOO 

Membert fir Life* 

CONN— New-MiUbrd, Miss Sally 
Northrop, 

Trumbull, Mrs. Lucretia S. Ed- 
wards, (iq p^rt of taO,) ... 10 

N. YORK.— Albany. Joseph Clark 30 

Flat Bush, L. I., Mrs. Susan Catlin, 

(in part of $90,) 10 

Do. Peter Stryker, . . SO 

Huntington, Rev. Nehemiah Brown, 
by Aus. Tr. Soc 80 

New-York City, Miss Julia Beers, 
by her father, 90 

ArmwH Member, 
N. YORK.-l«ewYork Ctty, Dr. 
Lvke Barker, . . ^ . . . . 9 

Other DonaHont. 
MASS.— Korthaanptoa, D. S. WUt- 
Mr, i . . 



00 
00 



90 00 



00 
00 



CONN.— Brooklyn, A Friend for 

Vail. Miss., 1 00 

Burlington, Rev. Eraatus Scranton, 

for fall. Miss 1 00 

Hartford, Fem., Friend, for ValL 

Miss 5 00 

New-Haven, Theological Students, S 00 

N. YORK.— Almond, G. Lockhart, 1 00 

Do. Stephen Migor, . . 1 00 

OOlFlat Buab, L. I., Jeremiah Lott, . 1 00 

Do. Mrs. Jeremiah Lott, . 1 00 

Jamaica, David Bergen, .... 3 00 

MXean, W. Tennent Shaw, Esq., 1 00 

Newtown, L. I., a Lady, .... 5 00 

New- York City, pr. Thomas Boyd, 

$10— A Fnend, $2— Do. $1— 

Do. $1— Do.$l 15 00 

West Hampton, L. I., Rttftis Foster, 1 00 



00 
00 

00 

00 



00 



50 



The above list contains donations-^ 
In part ^or perpetuating '* Baxter's 

Call to the Unconverted.'* . 1 200 00 
For Tracts for VaUey of tha Mis- 
sissippi, ...,•..... 7 00 



Whole amonnt of Donationf, |[547 60 
Receive for Trw;U sold^ 1,339 Set 



Total, $1,874 94 



- THE AMERICAN 



IS THE COUNTRY SUPPLIED WITH TRACTS? 

MvCK hu beco taiil, aad ciHi«Kler*blc done, Tor suppljint Ibe 
Vallty •/ Ihe Mi»*ittiffi with T»cti; b«l it ia the opinion of rbe 
Soeidj't late Ocnernl Agent Itar that conMry, ihu fMl m»» »«■ 
ont/oarlli part at iti population have jiet received >o much at oaa 
Triicl lo D family. 

The grdtnofic mdhJA/ji ifulribiifiBn hu en^gBd the aliention, th« 
effort! and prajen of great nninbcn of Chritttaiui but there ate 
prubablj> not ttt ftom 10,{IOO,COO of our popnlation whon Ihii tjt. 
innatic effort has not jel reached T 

The Americaii Tract Society lia> but B>e TraTcling Afenti. Their 
labon are confined cliiefly to deiiitute parti of Miiiouri, Illinnii, Id- 
diana, Ohio, and tlieWeMemDiilrict of Kew- York; and Ihe Societj 
hat no QlHer Tnntliag AgenI cngagorf tniUnrvUe tlmtigluul the wMt 
VitUedSlalei. TTiH the country be loon nippKcd with Tracti el Ihe 
preient rate of effort ! 

roi..yi. ' 5 Wbole No. Gt. 



^ STRONG AROUMEBTS. [May* 

Is it not of great momtnl t6 tbe progress of Evangelical piety 
thcoughout our country, that all who are willing to receive Tracts 
should be suppUea with them? Let ChfUtians look at those places 
which, during the past year, have bceii blessed with extensive revt- 
TaU of reUf ion, »ad wa* withbow &v e»ceptWM t^ hwra he«i 
previously blessed with the systematic Tract distribution ; and jho 
shall limit the amount of Influence exerted by the Tracts, the labors 
and prayers of Distrfbtttera, and tbe *«*• they hwe ifischiied «m- 
ccrning the spiritual wante of their fdlow-beingst 

Why shall not evisry Christian in our land be enlisted m this ser- 
vice ? It aids every other means of usefulness. The rery effort, by 
the blessing of God, strengthens those who make it. , Why shall it 
not, without any delay, be extended to every family willing to re- 
ceive Tracts, within all our boundaries ? 

SXEONG AKGUMENTSLOf A TRACT AGENT. . 
A devoted Clergyman of Philadelphia, having eonucrated a few 
weeks to the promotion of the Tract cause, and particularly the ^sys- 
tematic monthly distribution in the interior of Pennsylvania, say«» 
after he had pursued his agency a few days, he entered upon the fol- 
lowine plan, which he found to be very nseful in all the County 
Towns- viz.— Searching the county records, and ascertaining the 
amount ofpoor and crimmo/ toe* annUaUy paid, and laying the same 
before the people at public meeUngs. This showed them the enor- 
fuous taxes they paid for drunkennest and cr%me, and how small a 
portion of their annual tax wns necessary for purely governmental 
purposes. To give a specimen : 
*^ iJj Y County, the whole county tax for the year 1829, was 

} 20 679 94i and the county poor rates for the same year were 
1 1 830 27. and the erimkud ratee for the same year were $8^486 09, 
making a total of 9 15,316 36i, leaving the small sum of $6,263 97^ 
for eitnenses nnrely govermcntal for the same year. 

And frF— ConSty. the whole county tax for 1629 was |) 16,980, 
andtha poor r«<« of that year were $7,696; and the tnminal ralet 
for the same year were $4,937, making the grand total of poor and 
criminal rates $ 12,632 66 ; leaving the small sum of $3,406 45 for 
expenses purely governmental. .. 

I confess, says this Clergyman, my own mind was not a little af- 
fected with these statements : to see the waste of money on drunk" 
enness, and how little is really necessary to support the government. 
' 1 endeavored to show tliat the only way to reduce the poor and cri- 
minal rates was to make men sober and good — to cease to be 
drunkards and criminals ; and this could be done only by applying 
the Christian religion to their hearts— and that if they wottld not 
come into the churches to receive it, we mnsi carry ii to ihtm through 
the medium of TracU. This mode secured audience^ and attention, 
and I hope some good impressions were left on some, who came out 
to hear about their taxes only, and heretofore had never darkened 
a church door. 



ISSK] MORAX. WANTS. 51 

THE MORAL WANTS OF PORTIONS OF OUR COUNTRY 

NO FICTION. 

One reason why the actual moral condition of different parts of our 
beloved country is no more fully known, is that, if statements of facts 
are published, they are by som^ thought invidious, and by others, 
who know not the value of religion, are considered untrue. In the 
statements wt now give, which are from one deserving the most en* 
tire confidence, we omit all reference to place, to avoid the first of 
the above named objections — the other can only be done away by 
the moral transformation of the objectors themselves. 

Having provided myself, says this gentleman, with about 12,0QO 
pages of Tracts for distribution, 1 spent several days in a few adjoin- 
ing counties in the State of — — . The country is a region of hills, 
mountains, and water-courses. The population is sparse ; being sup- 
ported by the chase, by what is raised on small patches of cultivated 
land, and by cattle, which feed chiefly in the woods. The state of 
education and morals, as described by their most intelligent men, is 
lamentably Iqw. In three Counties,'comprising an extent of territory 
seventy or eighty miles square, and a population of 10,000 or 12,000, 
1 was informed there were in existence hut two tchoohf and that more 
than half the people could not read. I became acquainted with a 
major-general in one county, a justice of the peace and high sheriff 
of another county, and a gentleman who had been for several years 
a. member of the state legislature from another County — neitner of 
whom eovld write or read, 

. |n an adjoining County, containing 3,000 souls, I was informed by 
the person taking the census, that on the first of June last there was 
no school, thouffh a small one had since been commenced. In four 
adjoining counties, two pious young Methodist brethren preach, who 
informed me that they preached in about thirty places, and it took 
them six weeks to perform their circuit. In another neighboring 
county they informed me no preacher rode the circuit— -there was 
one local Methodist preacher, and one Baptist. There is a great 
destttiitioa of the Scriptures, and of books and papers of every de- 
scription. I could not learn that a cent had yet bCNen contributed in 
these counties for the Bible cause. 

On the Sabbath, people were continually passing on business; some 
with live fowls, and various kinds of produce, some with horses loaded 
with bags of grain for the mill, &c. On one Sabbath, on my way to 
a religious meeting, the first man I met requested me to exchange 
horses with him. As I passed through the counties, I distributed 
Tracts from house to house ; and where I found people assembled, 
gave them a Tract for each family. In this way I soon disposed of 
all my 12,000 pages. They were generally thankfully received ; were 
borrowed and lent ; many who could not read would get others to 
read the Tracts to them ; and thus they were extensively circulated. 
Let those who know the existence of such fiicts among extensive por- 
tions of the population of these United States, judge of the urgency 
of the call to send them the Gbspel. 



52 roRSieir. [MTay 



FOREIGN. 

From a Utter of WUliam WooUet, Sterelary of the Bristol Tract 

Soeiet]ff England, 

I vety hastily embrace the opportunitjr of a reUtire VMitinf your 
happy couDtry, to ackaowledge the extreme delight which has beea 
afforded us in the perusal of the Tract Magazines which you have so 
obligingly and regularly transmitted to us. Surely '* the arm of the 
Lord has been made bare" on behalf of the American Tract Society. 
He is working wonders among you by the most simple means, there- 
by proving that the excellence of the power is of God and not of man. 

Who could have calculated, seven years ago, that your Society 
would have risen to such a pitch of excellence and extensive utility* 
so as almost to equal any other Society of the same nature which 
now exists 1 But it is very evident that fhe amazing and encouraging 
success which has attended your Society, has been in answet to 
prayer, together with that holy zeal displayed in the UJ^ITED labors 
ofyow ministers, your managers^ and your members, who not only 
appear to pray like the wagoner in the fable, but also put their 
shoulders to the wheels of the Gospel Wagon. 

It is most creditable to see so many truly pious and eminent minis- 
ters' names associated with you, and so actively and usefully con- 
nected with your cause, and not merely confining themselves to pul- 
pit exercises. It shows that their hearts are in the right place, and 
that they are, by every mean in their power, desirous of promoting 
the great work of redemption by a crucified Savior, in bringing poor 
sinners to bow at the foot of his cross and acknowledge him Lord 
of all. 



FROM PORT AU PRINCE, HAYTI. 

A letter dated Port'au Prince, November, 1830, gratefully adcnow- 
1 edging the reception of a grant of French Tracts, says: — ^Tbis na- 
tion is enveloped 'in awful darkness as it regards the knowledge of 
salvation throuffh faith in Jesus Christ. They are wandering in error 
and fatal delusion, which are nurtured by the priests of their com- 
munion-^the Roman Catholic. These Tracts will be Kke a light 
shining in a dark place. May the Lord bless them to the dispersion 
of this midnight gloom. 



FROM CARTHAGENA. 

** Your Tracts, and other publications," says a pious Lady, " are 
very instructive. As soon as it was known that I had Spanish Tracts, 
the appUeaiions at my house were incessant, and they were soon all dss* 
^ibulal. I think a very considerable quantity could be sold, not only 
in Carthagena, but in other principal towns with which it has mer- 
cantile connections ; and request that you wiU send us a supply as 
soon as consistent. 



IftSiJ USEFULNESS OF TRACTS. ^S 

USEFULNESS OF TRACTS. 

" THE TAVERN SIGN BROUGHT DOWN." 

In reference to the TaVem Sign at 5 , mentioned in my last, 

sayft tbe Secretary of the Auxiliary of Winchester, Virginia, the cir- 
cumstances, so far as I am informed, are in substance as follows : — 
Some unknown person left in the tavern the Tract 7b DiHUUrs and 
their Allies. It came into the tavern keeper's hands, who on looking 
into it, found on the cover a piece headed '* The DrunkanFs Home" 
which drew liis attention. He read it and became considerably oot 
of humor, wondering who could have left that in hit house. Tbe re- 
sult, however, was, that he took down his sigrif declaring that his house 
should never again be called ** The Drurward't Horned 



EFFECT OF "THE YOUNG COTTAGER," AT A READING-MEETING 

IN PHILADELFHU. 

While instructing my class one Sabbath, says a very respectable 
lady of Philadelphia, I related to them some facts recorded in Jo- 
sephus, which caused them to express a wish to read the work. Ac- 
cordingly an afternoon was iixed upon weekly for the purpose. 
Thinking it might be pro6table to vary the reading, a Tract was oc- 
casionally intrMluced. Little Jane, or the Young OoUagetf was one 
afternoon read aloud: deep solemnity reigned} a topprcsied sob 
was heard ; and when I parted with, my charge, I left them bathed 
in tears. This state of feeling did not pass away, as is too frequently 
the case. My heart still rejoices in the Providence that led to the 
selection of " Little Jane" for our penisal. One member of my class, 
after eeveral months of deep exercise of mind, began to indqlge a 
scriptural hope, that she had " passed flrom death unto life,"^ and 
has, for a period of three years, witnessed a good profession, giving 
delightful evidence to those around her, that her inheritance is incor- 
niptikrfe, undefiled, and fadeth not away." I had presented this 
Tract to her some weeks before ; she had frequently read it without 
effect, but when the Spirit of God accompanied it, it came with 
power. 

THE HANDBILL, " WHERE AM I V kc. 

A Clergyman in Boston states that, as he was visiting several fa- 
milies in that city, he gave the Hapdbill Tract, What ami? Where 
am It Whither am I going? to a woman, who now regards it as 
the instrument of her conversion to God. 



TRACTS BLESSED TO TWO HEADS OF FAMILIES. 

Two persons, beads of fkmilies, says the Auxiliary «f New Fair^ 
field. Coon, have had their attention arrested to the subject of religion 
by Tracts put into their hands by some of our members, both of whom 
are now rejoicing in hope. 



» ■ 



54 USEFULNESS OF TkACTS. [May, 

SIQNAL BLESSING ON THE T&ACT «*aiIBNCH NOT THE (J^nHT.** 

Ad estimable Chriitian lady of Pennsjlvania itatet, that a pious 
female, having been requested by her cousin, to accompany herself 
and brother on a tmir of some weeks, consented with some reluctance, 
fearing that she might be expected to enter into gaieties which she 
could not sipprove. Resolving to avail herself of such opportunities 
of usefulness as might occur, she took some Tracts with her; and 
one morning, while waiting for breakfast in a hotel, she felt strongly 
inclined to put the Tract Quench not the Spirit into the hand of her 
cousin, who was reading the newspaper. She resolved and hesitated, 
and resolved and hesitated, and at length asked him if he would read 
it. He complied, and immediately commenced the perusal of i(. In a 
few minutes the Tract dropped from his hand ; he appeared much 
agitated. Suffice it to say, he left his home a rebel, unreconciled to 
his God ; he returned to it, after an absence of six weeks, an obedient 
subject, acknowledging his Father's right in him, and willing to de- 
vote hinuelf to his service. 8€vcn membert of the famUyt I am in- 
formed, have been brought to a knowledge of the truth through the 
instrumentalify of the same little Tract, *< Quench not the Spirit" 



A WELSH HANDBILL BLESSED. 

ReVk Mr. E., of U., N. T., says, the Welsh Handbill on Intempe- 
rance, was presented by a monthly Tract Distributer to a family, the 
^ther of which, on reading it, cursed and swore in a rage, asking his 
wife t0A.y ineh trash wot tcni to him 7 After reading it, he went out ; 
returned and read, it again, and read it four or five times. He soon 
told his wife he. must change his habit of intoxication-^ill this time 
has drunk no more ardent spirits { has become a steady attendant on 
public worship ; and appears seriously inquiring for the a^ay of eter- 
nal life. 



TRACT MAGAZINE READ IN A RELIGIOUS MEETING. 

It is with much pleasure, says a devoted friend of the Tract cause, 
in Virginia, that I enclose you S 44 00 as a donation, occasioned by 
reading the statement of the wants of the American Tract Society in 
a late number of the Tract Magasine. On hearing It, our ladies im- 
mediately raised $ 84 for the Parent Society ; and a gentleman who 
iraeet hisfirtt seriout impreesions to the reading of a Tract in aprajfer- 
meeting^ was also Inflaenced to constitute his wife a life member, and 
^ 10, m part for that object, are now forwarded. If the interesting 
articles contained in the Tract Magasine were more ft^qoently read 
in religious meetings, much intelligence would be thereby diflused, 
and many be induced to aid the cause by their contributk»ns and theif 
prayers. ^ 

THE TRACT ^< SABBATH OCCUPATIONS" IN VA. 

In my immediate neighborhood, says a Clergyman of Va. was an* 
overseer, verpr irreligious in his character. A pious lady, who knew, 
bb bad priaaples and unholy life, sent him the Tract, SMM Oeeu- 



IMt.] bkaucbss axo auxiliaeies. 55 

p&liMt. It caught hU atlwMioii, He ww coBTiaeed of bis tm, and 
bronght to repentance. He made a profefikm of relif km, and has 
ever since been remarkable for hie piety and ipiritoality of mind. 

BRANCHES AND AUXILIARIES. 
EAST TENNESSEE AUXlLIARir, KNOXVILLE. 

Eleventh Annirersary, December 6. Prayer by Rev. Charles Cof- 
fin, O. D. President. Beport read by Rev. Stephen Foster, Secre- 
tary. Resolutions were offered by Rev. Thomas H. NoImo, Mr. 
William B. Reese, Col. William B. A. Rfmsey, James Fark,Es<|. the 
Treasurer, and Rev. Mr. Foster, and iHoisnImously adopted. - Re- 
ceipts, during the year, abont $ 398. Issued 270,o6o pages of 12mo^ 
Tracts, besides many of the smaller series : ^,000 copies of the Chris- 
tian Almanac for 1S31 were also procured from the Parent Society. 

The East Tennessee Tract Society was farmed in 1819, and pre- 
vious to 1826, had circulated 345,060 pages. In 1S27, it became con- 
nected with the American Society, and has since circulated about 
692,000 pages 12mo. Tracts. 

The Female Anxiliaiy of KnoxviHe are persevering with the numtk" 
ly dutributian, having thus circulated 25,000 paces. The East Ten- 
nessee Society has in all twenty-nine AttxilianeS, by which Tracts 
have been faithfully distributed through an extensive population. 



AUXILIARY AT MEMPHIS, TENN. 

First Anniversary, December 3. After prayer Ixy Rev. Samuel 
Hodge, the meeting was addressed by him and Rev. A. C. Campbell. 
Distribated, during the year, 30,205 pages. The system of monthly 
dittribtttwn was adopted at the commencement of the Society's ope- 
raiions.^ The town was divided into three Districts, each of which 
was assigned to two active females. This little band of domestic 
missionaries, says the Report, have gi^ne fortli with a Christian bold- 
ness and humility, conveying the glad tidings of great joy to eyery 
door. 

AUXILIARY OF HUNTSVILLE, ALA. 

The Fourth Annual meeting was held January 18. Receipts, du- 
ring the year, ^330 59. Circulated, 143,768 pages. No copy of the 
Annual Report has yet reached us. 



AUXILIARY AT DARIEN, GEO. 

The Third Report, presented in Febraary last, spaaks with interest 
of the m&mihijf duinbviian, which had been prosecuted several 
months with enconra|iag success. Naariier of pages distributed 
graiuUami^, 62,267. The Traasuier, in a letter enclosing S 125, of 
which f 46 29 are a donation to the Parent Society, says, "our 
■Meting was more than usually hateresthig, and the aaora so as it was 
held at a time of special uripui inais among the inhabitants, A dergjr- 



56 AI^XILIAIIES* IMmjt 

man, «rho addreMed t)i« meetkif , stated that ka ted, dorial: tba ji^ear, 
witnaetad a revival of rdsgion in anotiier part o£ tha country, in 
which thera wera hopefully betwean thirty and forty cpnYersioas, and 
that the distribation of Tracts bad exerted a potoerful influence in 
promoting the work, and that he saw their happy effects constantly. 



TROY, N. Y., AUXILIARY. 

Fourteenth Anniversary, held March 16. It was a most cheering 
mejstiog, and the subscriptions made amounted to about $ 330. Re* 
flei'ptt, the last year, $530 30; of which sum $102 was received 
Irom annual members, $228 from life members, and $ 152 88 from 
the safe of Tracts. A donation of $ 100 has been made to the Parent 
Society for the Mississippi Valley. Distributed, during the year, 
661,183 pages ; of which 873,000 pages were employed in the month- 
ly distribution, 54,000 were upon the subject of Temperaope, 17,000 
distributed in Sabbath schi»els ; 10,000 to day schools ; 82,000 to ves- 
•els in the river ; besides a supply of the House of Industry and Pri- 
flon : 1,000 Christian Almanacs have been circulated, and one set of 
bound volumes presented to Rev. Messrs. Reed and Harvey, mis- 
tioBaries to Bombay. Whole amount of Tracts purchased since the 
IbrmatioB of the Society 3t000,000 pages. The Society has now 155 
tnembers ; 85 life members. 

Sueeen of the Monthly Duirilmtimi* ^ 

" This work,'' says the Report, *' was entered upon with an energy, 
and we humbly trust a proyetfidneat too, that have been honored 
with gratifying success. We experienced no difficuly in raising the 
necessary amount of funds ; in enlisting the hearts and the hands of 
competent influential distributers ; and we met with no hindrance 
that would bear a fractional proportion to what might have been an 
ticipated, considering the diversified character of our population. 

** Our monthly meetings of officers and distrlboters afllbrded us sea- 
sons of refreshment far more than sufficient amply to compensate aa 
for all our labor : none were present who did not find it good to be 
there. It was as if by Divine assistance we had planted a tree in the 
midst of this city, whose branches extended -themselves even to the 
very suburbs, yielding its fruit every month, as well upon the desolate 
cabin of afflicted poverty as the splendid mansion of idolized wealth ; 
upon eytry human habitation, where the panoply of pride or preju- 
dice did not prevent the descent, and under whose shade we monthly 
assembled, to wonder and admire ; to praise and pray; supplying our- 
selves with spiritual food, to give us strength for labor. 

Tettimony of a Dying DittrUnUer, 

We have to speak of the death of one of our Distributers. She 
was, when her strength penaitted, one of the most active of our nnm- 
ber. Her soul seemM to carnre in the BMiiithly distribution. During 
her protracted illness, awd even apon the bed of death, she qioke 
with a sweet satisfaetion of the interesting scenes she had witnessed, 
and the great pleasure she derived in going from house to house 
with these messengers of mercy, and again and again blessed God 
that he had emfrtoyed her m auch MigMal labor. 



1431.] AID rom ▲ Me»osiTO&T. 57 

JEFFERSON COUNTT AUXIUAET, WATEBTOWN, N. Y. 

Rereiptf the latt year ^Sl 90. Thm nonthljr iliitiibation if pro- 
lecttted ia Watertowo, and two etber Tillages in the oowity. 



KINGSTOCf, (U. C.) TRACT SOCIETY. 
The First Anniversary of this Society, Auxiliary to the London 

Tract Society, was held August 16; Hon. Marslioll S. Bidwell in the 
chair. Receipts during the year $219; distributed 176,625 pages, 
27JD65 of which gratuitously. The report hreathes an excellent 
spirit ; and we cannot but hope this infant Society has entered on h 
earcer of asuch usefulness. 



YOUTH'S TRACT SOCIETY OF PHILADELPHIA. 

. The Fourth Report of this Society, embracing one printed sheet, is 
an instructive and valuable Tract document. The Society has 122 
members, from the age of 15 upward. Receipts during the last year 
9 120 72. Distributed 166,004 pages ; making the total distributed, 
since the Society's formation, 292,192 pages. Weekly fn^er me«l- 
ings have been established in destitute parts of Philadelphia aad the 
vicinity, accompanied by. visiting and loaning Tracts in the imme* 
diate neighborhoods; four of which are now regularly conducted by 
members of the Society. Some of these meetings have been very 
Ibll and solemn. One lad of 15, who came to them reluctantly, has 
been hopefully converted, and is now a Sabbath schoor Teacher. 
Tracts on the Sabbath have been faithfully distributed in the Sunday 
markets ; and in November a systematic tcuM^ diiiribution was com- 
menced among the market wagons. Many interesting incidents are 
related as occur ing in these distributions ; and the etfbrts of this 
youthful Society have been manifestly owned and blessed of God. 



WANT OF AID FOR A TRACT DEPOSITORY IN OHIO. " 

Mr. William Yoaos, Agant of the American Tract Society in the 
vicinity of Dayton, Ohio, soys, " The establishment of a Depository 
here falls on a few individuals of limited means ; and it is by no 
means adequate to the wants of the surrounding country. Already 
eight or nine Societies are Auxiliary, and will expect to receive Tracts 
from it lor the supply of about 3,000 families monthly. If the Parent 
Society, or a benevolent individual at the East, could appropriate 
400 or 600 dollars for a Depository here, it would put the Tract 
cause on a firm basis^ and aid us more essentially than any thing-else. 
All the counties north of Butler, Warren, Clinton and Fayette, de- 
pend on Dayton for their supply, as they communicate in a com- 
mercial way altogether with the place. When the people of this 
county are satisfied as to the blessed elects of Tracts, they will, 
without diflicolty, supply themselves ; and lor this purpose Tracts 
should be brought as near them as possible. The population of th^ 
counties, above referred to, is not lar from 120 or iao,000 souls* be- 
sides those yet further north, who asay draw supplies from this pli 



y ♦ 



&8 RBCSKT POBLlCrriOKS* [Maj^ 

TRACT EFFORTS WELCfOSBBIX IN MISSOV&I AW> UJUBXOSk 

• Tb« CorrespoBfUn^ Secretary of the MiMOfiri and JUiiioit Branch 
Tract Sactety, located at St. liouit, aayi* our Committee rejoice to 
see the intensity of interest which is manifested by the American So- 
ciety in the New Settlements of our country, and feel satisfied that 
you do not set too high a yakie itpoo th0 putticationc you are circu- 
fating, or too highly estimate the good they are calcuUted to effect, 
especially in situations where the living preacher cannot oAtin, if at 
all, be heard. That God has put it into your hearts to feel this in* 
terest is to us cause fcfr thankfulness ; that He majr continilie and in* 
crease that interest, and liiess your hibors of loive, is our prayer. 
Extending our operations to the very frontier of civilization, and'cul* 
tivating a field many hundred miles in extent, destitute of the efficient 
and enlightened aid of ministers of the Gospel and private Christians 
in a vast portion of that field, our worie is laborious, and the circula- 
tion of your publications among our settlements, much more limited 
than we could wish. Still these very difficulties eqastitute arguments 
for our greater zeal and more untiring efforts. Through the assistance 
of your Agent, and the ministerial accessions recently received to 
th^e States, the operations of the Branch have been greatly en^ 
larged within the last year. We then numbered but four Auxiliaries, 
and the average issues from our Depository did not exceed 20,000 
pages per month. We have now 37 Auxiliaries, and 4he average 
monthly issues are not less than 70,000 pages. We confess that, 
when we look at the field, and think of its wants, it is doing. little ; 
but nevertheless, comparing the present with the past we would 
thank God and take courage. 

RECENT PUBLICATIONS. 

V No. 251. CoNvxRsioN OF Peter Batssiere, from the Romish 
CuaacH TO the Prqtestaht Faith« In a letter to his Children. 
Translated from the French — ^pp. 28. This is an interesting narra- 
tive of the steps by which Bayssiere was led to see the absurdity of 
the requisitions of the Romish Church, particularly the performances 
of masses for the dead; and by diligently comparing them with the 
New Testament, to inject them^ and embrace the pure- Gof pel, re- 
vealed by God in that blessed volume. 

No. 252. Mart la Fledr. Bt Rev. Joseph S. Curistbias^ latb 
PASTOR OF A CHURCH iiT MoNTREAL-*-pp 4. Showing the inflaence 
of a simple exhibition of the Gospel in enlightening her mind into a 
knowledge of thetruth, and leading her heartily to embrace the Pro- 
testaat faith. 

No. 263. An AppsAt. to the Patriot and Christiah oif ths 

iMPtntTANCB OF THE GoSPSL» ITS MlltlSTRT, ITA SABBAtH, AJtB ITS 

Ordibabobs^ to the weix-bbibo abi> perpetuity of our Free 
laiiTiTUTioBS. A premium Tract. Bt Rev. William C Bhownles, 
D. D.-*-pp. 28* Showing that free Institutions flourish only where 
there is inteUigenco and moral virtue m the community ; that the 
latter flourish only where a true Christian principle's cherished ; and 
thiu this is produced and cherished only by the means of God's ap- 
pointawnt t the Gospel, the Ministry, the holy Sabbath, -and its Insti- 
tuta^nt. 



1831.] 



EIGHTH volume: OF TRACTS. 



6j» 



The Tract lost mentioned completes the Eighth volume, which is 
already ptinted on uniform peper for binding, and will tooil be readv 
for delivery, with Indexes, &c. for the entire set of eight volumes. 
Price, at 44 cents a volume, H 3 52 for the set. 



itT Notices of the progress of the Monthly Distribution wUl h<e 
found on the cover of this number. 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OP THE AME&IOAN TRACT SOCIETY 

During^ the month ending April- 15» 1831. 

PROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 

R. ISL.->Provideiice, Innel H. Day, Sec 

COXN.— Brookljm, (Windham Co; Aux,) Edwin NewBiiry, Ag. 

Chester, Fem., Rev. Wm.Ca«e, Ag. 

Colebrook,Thomaa Rockwell, Tr 

Darien, Charles E.WhiUMy,Tr 

Bartford, Conn. Branch, Charles Hosmer, Sec. ... . 
Do. hf their Aux., Somers . . . 

Himtington, William Milto, Sec. 

New-London, Robert CoitfTr 

Korth-Greenwich, Rev. Mr. Willcox, Tr 

Korth-RilUngworth, Fem., Eunice King, Ag. 

Petttpaug, in SaybroO^, Clark Nott, Tr^ 

^Plymouth, Edward Langdon, Tr 

Roxbury, Rev. Fosdie Harrison, Sec. . • ^ • 

Sharon, Charles F. Sedgwick, Tr. , 

South-Britain, Fem., Nancy Mitchell, Tr, 

Watertown, Benjamin De Forest, P. M., Ag. . 
West-Greenwich, S. S. Anx., W.3. Sherwood, Sec. . 

West-Haven, William Stehbias, Sec 

N. YORlL->Albwiy, Central Rranetaf James Brown, Tr. • 

Cairo, Greene Co., D.Johnston, Tr. 

Fresh Poods, hi Huntington, L. I., 8. WoodtattU, Tr. . 

Hudson, Fem., Ophelia 01cott,Tr 

Islip and Huntington, South, H. Brewster, See 

Ithaca, (Tompkins Co. Aux.) Augustas SherriU, Aec* ... 
Livonint (Livingston Co. Fem.) Mrs. Anstres E. Stow, Ag. 
Newbargh.R.B. Williams, Tr. ' • •_ • 
New-York City Tract Society, Alfred Edwards, Tr. . 
• Do. by Fem.Aux., Mrs. J. R.Hurd,Tr. 

Do. Greenwich VilL in Rf. Dutch Ch., Abr. A. Campbell, Tr. 

Do. St. George's Cb., Fem., by Jiiv. A«x. . 

Pleasant Valley, J. Gabaudan, Tr. 

Rochester, (Monroe Co.) Levi A. Ward, Tr 

Troy.CbarlesLyiiian, Tr. ......... 

Utica, Edward Vernon, Sec. .■.•..«* 
West-Farms, Jnv., George St. John, Tr. • ... 

West-Hampton, L. I., Nathaniel GriAn, Tr 

N. JER.^Basklngridge, Horace Sheldon, See. . ... 

Voofflfiehl,Jttv., Robert R.K'eBogg, See 

Caldwell, Jonathan Provost, Tr 

Newark, Fem. 

New-Brunswick, Abrahnm Suydam, Tr. • . ' • 

Oxford, Fem., Mrs. S. Sherrerd, Tr 

FrioeelSD, Fem., Mist F.W.Morford,Tr 



ForTr. 


Don. 


92 50 




30 00 




905 




45 00 





302 




350 00 






500 


860 




450 




437 


• 


' 


IT 00 


19 38 


10 IS 


' 6 60 


10 40 


7 69 


3 56 


1 07 




3 63 


404 


67 




5 36 


1 78 


400 




109 34 




800 


• 


fi^ 


.. . 


400 




8 11 




50 00 




3 56 


5 67 


10 00 




777 00 




36 50 




4 00 


« 50 


800 




5 34 




100 00 




100 00 




850 00 




1 07 




588 




339 


1 13 


4 80 




a 30 




30 00 




' 69 




435 


, 


3 00) 





eo 



BICCEMPTS. 



Stillwater, Fern., MiM Cjitharine Johnioii, Sec. 

Vlft.— Fraderidubvrr, Aox. Dttp^Her. S«ibu«I B. WilaoD, A|f. 

Richmond, Charlea Holt, Jan., Tr. 

Shady Grove, (Brttii«wick Co.) .. . •. • • 
Slorteonvillc, Fern., Mim Ann ■• F»W, Tr. . • • • 
N. CAR.- Shiloh, GmnTille Co. FeiB.» M". JndiMi WatkiiM, Af. 
S. C AR.-CharIeiton, 8. Car. Branch, Rer. Jowjph Brown, Tr. 
GEO— Darien, Bayard E. Hand, Eaq.,Tr. . . • 
ALA—Hnnteville, Samuel Coltart,Af. 

TuacahKwa, D. Woodruff, Tr. . • 

KEN.— Danville, Michael G.Yo«nce,Af 

QHIO.— Cincinnati, Henry B. Funk, Tr. . . • 

Elvria. (Loraine Co. Aux.) Rev. Daniel W . Lathrop, Sec. . 
"^^'■^ ^SOCIETIES NOT ACXJLIARTi; 

MASS-^We»tiSeld, • • „ • 

WiHiamstown, WiHiaaifl CoMj^e „ • , * . L , ' a * 
N. YORK.— DaahvilloFalU, Fem.^ Mr*. Jane A.BuUer, Sec. 
Orange Co. S,S. Union, J. Wells, Ag. • • • * * 
Ouego, Temperance Society, Eiihn Phuuy, Tr. ... 

N?7bR.— Paterson, 2d ReV. Dutch Ch., Corneiius C. BlaitveU, Tr. 

FENN*— Wilkea Barre, W.C. Gnder8leeve,Tr. 

TrpctM eold at the Depository to indiYiduals, .... 



1 



FtrTrA D^n. 
I 84 
SOI 

50 00 
S9 00 

10 M 
320 

800 

438 50 

^n 45 » 

70 50 
30 00 
19 8T 
S3 00 
SOOO 

18 89 

10 00 ^ 

1 18 

4 10 
9300 

3 00 

5 00 

19 19 
46188 



Members for Life, 

CONN.— Chester, Rey. Wm. Case, 

by FemPrayinr and Benev. Soc. 

Greenwich, Rev.baac Lewis, D.D. 

' Hanover in Lisbon, De>ft. Barnabas 

Huntington, (in AiU of |S0) . . 

» Joshua Perkins, Esq. do. . • 

*• Capt. John Bingham, (in part 
of #90) . ... . . ^ 

**, William Lee, . . . d^* 
Middletowo, Henry 8. Waid, Esq. 
New-Lmidon, Miss Frances A. 

Chew, by a friend, 

** M'tts Catharine E. EdgertOD, 
by do. ....... • 

** Eunice A. Law, by do. . . 

** Miss Eiiaa Richards, by do. 
North Stottington, Mrs. Rebecca 

Wheeler, ...*.... 
South KilHttgly, Rev. Stephen M. 

Wheelock, 

N. YORK.— Bloomingborgh, Ahr. 

V. W.Van Vechten, (in part 0«>) 
Lenox, Madison Co., Lydia Hall, 

CinfuUoftaO,) ...... 

Troy, Haofbrd N. Lockwood, . . 

«* Angelica, Lane M*Cown. by 
her grandmother Mrs. An<^ 
tfetiea Lane, ...... 

** Matthew P. Read, . . . . 
WhitesborOugh, Rev. Elon GalU' 

cha, by Ladies, 

Atmuai Membert. 

CONN.^WestbrMk, Mm. Nancy 
Lay, 



90 00 
90 00 



Sag-Harbor, Marcus B. Osbom, . 2 00 



Other Dettatiofu, 



AttOttymociB, left at Depository, . 

VER.— Fair-Haven, fM Graves, 

MASS.— Barre, Rev. John Storrs, 

CONN. Salisbttry.A Friend, . . 

N. YORK. Albany, 2d Presbyte- 
rian Church and Congregation, 

Durham, Greene county, Dea. Ben- 
jamin Chapman, 

New-York City, A Friend, $1 do. 

do..95cte. 2octs. 

** Female Friend, . . . * . 

Pompey, J. A. Smith, for Vail Miss. 

^ 00|pENN.— Pittsburgh, Wm. Semple, 

(deeeasedO a Legatnr, . « . . 

GEO INtfien, Col. W. A. Dun- 

bam, 03 50, H. T. Hall,t9, R. 
King. 05, ........ 

** B.E.Hattd,E8q.010,Rev.N. 
A. Piatt, 88, E. S. ReesyEsq., 010 

Darien, Jamen Smith, 

5 OOJALA. Whitesbttrg,Hrs.£li2af>eth 
Gardiner, ........ 

TENN. Tasewell, n. Graham, 

IND. East Leavenworth, Anony- 
mous, 



5 00 
10 00 

500 

300 
25 00 

90 00 



20 00 
90 00 

90 00 

90 001 



10 00 

90 00 



90 00 

90 00 

90 00 



700 

200 

200 

95 

SO 00 

11 00 



ISO 

1 00 

2 00 

so 00 



10 50 

28 00 
t 50 

3 00 
77 

10 00 



900 



N. YORK.— New-York Ci^y, Rer. 
W. C. Brownlec, 09 Mnt James A. 
8teveas,f2, 4 00 



The above list contains dona- 
tions -For Tracts for Valley ol'the 

Miseissippi, 9 oO 

Legftsy of Wm. Semple l|ite of 

Pittsburgh, ........ 50 OO 

Whole amount of donntions, 3,958 SO 
Received for TracU sold, . . 008 17 



Tomi, #«,9«B,6r 



THE ABfERIGAN 



vol. TI. 




AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETr. 

The Sixth Aanual Meetng of ihe American Tract Societj wag 
lield fai the Middle Datch church, fCetr-Tork, on WedacMlay Mav 
11, at 10 o'clock, A. M. the Preaident of the Society, S. V. S.' Wa- 
DKR, Esq. in the chair, supported by Col. Richard Yarick, and the 
Hon. Stephen Van Rensselaer, Vice-PresideaU. 

The meeting was opened with prayer by the Rer. John Oosman, 
of the Reformed Dutch church, King^ston, N. Y. The President de-' 
livered an appropriate Introductory Address; after which the Treas- 
urer, Mr. Mosxs Allek, read the Report of the Committee who an- 
dited his accounts ; and the Annual Report was read by Mr. Wit- 
i-iAM A. HALtoca:, Corresponding Secretary. The following resolu- 
tions were then presented and unanimously adopted: 

On notion of the Rev. Theophilus Packard, D. D. of the Coagie. 
gational Church, Shelbume, Mass. seconded by Rer. D. Dunbar, of 
the Baptist church, New-York, 

On motion of the Rer. Jacob Van Vechten, of the Reformed 
Dutch church, Schenectady ; seconddd by the Rer. N. B. Crocker, 
D. D. of the Episcopal church. Providence, R. I., 

JteMlveil, Hut the display br the power end grace of God in the conviction ana 
cottTeriioa of aiiiMra through the inatnimeBtality of Tracts, dioaid excite the liv*. 
lieat emotioiM of gratitude in eyery hewrt, and giro aaew impvbeto Aitoreoflbrta. 

Ob motion of the Rer. John Reynolds, of the Protestant Episcopal 
ehurch, Harrisburg, Pa. seconded by the Rer. Lewis Mayer, D. D. 
Professor, Theological Seminary, German Refomed choreb, Yoik, 
Pennsylrania, 

Xativedj That the evidence contained in the Annnal Report, that not mere than 
tmmJkmwth «iart of the population in the Great VaUmr of the Miaainippi hare yet 
d by this aociely with ao much as one Tract to a fiunily, ««ii« jbr re . 



On motion of Rer. D. C. Lansing, D. D. of the Presbyterian church, 
Utica; seconded by Gen. WiUiam WiUiams, of Stonfaigton, Conn., 

yoL.yi. 6 Whom No. OS. 



62 SIXTH AlT5IT£RSARr. ' [Jooe, 

RuoUedt TImI the spiritual wwata vtvsMma of Mir populatioa, and tbe Uewinf 
of God which baa ao rigiiaUy attended the Monthly Diatribution of Tracta, demand 
peraevering and prayerfyd efTwts to extend thia syatem to every ftoiily in our coun- 
try willing to receive them. 

On motion of the Rev. James Milnor, D. D. of the Episcopal churchy 
seconded by the Rev. John Daniel Andrus, Bishop of the Moravian 
church, Bethlehem, Pa., - 

JZeaoleed, That <m a review of the whole operationa of thia aocieQr daring tbe past 
year, and the Divine favor with which th^ nave been attended, there ia no reaac|i 
for dSacooragement; but on the contrary the Society perceive abundant cauae for a 
grateful continuance and more zealous proaecution of their labors during the en> 
suing year. 

On motion of the Rev. Jdhn Breckenridipe, of the Presbyterian 
church, Baltimore ; seconded by the Rer. Thomas M'Auley, D, D. o<f 
the Presbyterian church, Philadelphia, 

Retohfedf That this society diould embrace in its operations the spiritual interests 
of their unenlightened feUow-aen in distant lands, and with reference to this cb^ecH 
they win endeavor, by the Divine blessing, to sup^ evangelical American mission- 
aries in fiweign countries with aa maigr approvod Tracts, or the means of procuring 
them, as shall, in the opinion of the Executive Committee, be needed ia the prosecu- 
tion of their labors. 

On motion of the Rev. Robert Baird, General Agent of the Ameri-r 
can Sunday School Union, the officers for the ensuing year were elect- 
ed; and the exercises were closed by singing the Christian Dox- 
ology. 

The meeting iras addressed by the Rev. Messrs. Dunbar, Van 
Vechten, Reynolds, and Breckenridge ; Gen. Williams ; and the Bev^ 
Drs. Mayer, Lansing, Milnor, and McAuley. Rev. Jh. Milnor pre* 
sented a view of the various grounds afforded in the present state of 
the society for gratulation and encouragement ; and in compliance 
with the urgent request of the committee of arrangements, laid before 
the meeting a delightful narrative of his recent visit to the Isle of 
Wight, where once resided the " Dairy man^s Daughter,*' the ''Young 
Cottager,'' the ** African Servant," and th» lamented author of the 
Tracts with those titles, Rev. Legh Richmond; from which it ap-^ 
peared that the scenery depicted in those Tracts is described with no 
less accuracy than beauty. The Rev. Dr. Codman, of Dorchester, 
Mass, stated that he visited the Isle of Wight in 1826, and fully cor- 
roborated the statements of the Rev. Dr.. Milnor. The appeals made 
in behalf of the monthly distribution, and the manner and spirit with 
which it should be executed; and the equally impressive and power- 
ful appeals in favor of euppiyiag the perishing heathen with Tracts, 
came home to every heart, and left impressions which cannot soon be. 
obliterated. 



J831.] SIXTH ANIfVAL REPORT. 63 

EXECUTIVE COMSnTTEE, 

Elected May n, 1831. 



PUBLISHING COMMITT£S. 

R«v. James Jifilnor, D. D. of the 
Protestant Episcopal Church. 

Rev. Thos. M*AaIey , D. D. LL. D. 
Phila. ofthePresbjterian Cb. 

Rev. John Knox, D. D. of the Re- 
formed Datch Church. 



Rev. Samuel Green, Boston, Mas- 
sachusetts, of the Congrega- 
tional Church. 

Rev. Charles G, Sommers, of the 
Baptist Church. 



DISTRIBUTING COMMITTEE. FINANCE COMMITTEE. 

Thomas Stokes, 
Dr. James C. Bliss, 
Marcus Wilbur, 



Dr. Marions Wiilett, 
William Forrest, 



Arthur Tappan, 
Dr. John Steams, 
Moses Allen, 
l^lijah Pierson, 
Richard T. Haines. 



Mr. Wm. A. Hallock, General Agent. Mr. Jesse Talbot, Ataulant. 

Mr. Harlan Page, DepoiUary, 



ABSTRACT OF THE SIXTH AlfNVAl^ RSPORT. 

The Executive Committee of the American Tract Socistt would 
present their Sixth Annual Report, with thanksgifring to God for his 
continued favor. The lives of all the OiBceis of the Society have 
been preserved; harmony has attended their . proceedings ; and 
though there has not been the same rapid increase of the Society's 
operations the past as in some preceding years, its importance 
in advancing the Redeemer's Kingdom has never been more ap- 
parent. Every effort has but prepared the way for Increased ex- 
ertions ; and the Committee cannot repress the hope that the results 
they are now to report will excite in the friends of Zion a new sense; 
of obligation to pray and labor for the highest advancement of this 
cause. 

LABORS OF THE PUBLISHING COMMITTEE. 

Secenty-thfee New Pub1icatk>ns have been .unanimously sanctioned 
by the Publishing Committee, and stereotyped since the last anni- 
▼ersary, making the whole number of the Society's Publications iice 
hmdred and swty-eight 

Of the Tracts added to the principal series the past year, four wei« 
obtatned by premiums offered by benevolent individuals, and awarded 
by Committees of their own election ; the Tracts having been submits 
tad for examination by the PuUbhing Committee, aAer the aw|ird. 

Six are on the subject of intemperance, the very extensive sales of 
which are the best evidence thatt their number is not greater than 
has been demanded by the friends of tl)« temperance cause. Four 
oontaiA a vindication of the tntths of Eyangeliod religiion aga^t the 
corroptms of the church of Rome. Seven are Authentic Narratives. 



64 Sl^TH JkSf^iVAL Jl£FC»T. [Juoe, 

This eatertatniug: and .iiteAil class of pttblicatioii* the Connittee are 
desirous ta increase as fast as suitable Narratives of actual occurrences 
shall be furnished. But they have, in conformitjF with the prevailing 
sentiment of the Christian conMMUuty, judged it inconsistent to pub- 
lish fictitious narratives under the aspect of truth ; and in this view,. 
having ascertained that two Tracts, vis. Nos. §2 and S^ are not au- 
thentic, they have reselvied to cease their publication and tttbstitiii« 

others* 

Tract No. 253 completes tbeSth v<olanie, widch is bownd, wilh in- 
dexes for the entire set. 

The Penuaneet to Etni^f Puiy the Conunitioe consider a very va« 
luaUe accession to the Society's pnblications. hx point of Evangeli- 
cal pungency and force^ it has scarely a parallel in our language. S» 
high is the estimation in which it has been held by a pious " Erglisb 
Baptist/' that the Commltlee banre the pleasure gratefully to ac- 
knowledge the receipt from him of the stereotype plates of this work, 
cast under the care^l supervision of the author. 

They have also to acknowledge the receipt from the Religious 
Tract Society in London, of a set of stereotype plates of the same 
work abridged, presented tk^ a token of their Christian love and re- 
gard for the prosperity of the Institution. 

The DaHy Textt and Dicary, each containing a text of Scripture and 
a verse of a hymn for e^ch day in the year; the DtW'Df9f9t contain- 
ing a text for each day in the year ; and the Gtmt of Sacred Paeity, 
are aU re-printed from the publications of the Religious Tract So- 
ciety in London, in a very small size, convenient fox use as pocket 
compan ions. 

The Committee regret to state, that, though, by the tibemlity of re- 
spected Christian friends, the entire sum requisite for perpetuating 
Banyan^ PUgrMs Prograt was obtained soon after the last anni- 
versary, a new English edition, which has been loi^ expected, not 
having^ yet been received, this excellent work is not yet stereotyped. 
No pains will be spared to Mfil, as speedily as possible, the wishes 
of the donors in bringing it before the public. 

The Committee have also obtained, chiefly through the liberality 
of one of the Society's Vice Presidents, neaiiy the snm requisite for 
perpetuating BasOer'* Call to the Vncomerl^, which has been una- 
nimously approved, and will soon be published. This work is so 
well known, and has been so much blessed, that the Committee need 
say nothing of its excellence. 

The Christian Almanac,, for 3881, was published in 22 editions. 

The new system ofpricesof the 12mo. Tracts adopted since the last 
anniversary, requiring the covers to be counted, the Committee have 
iprepared and stereotyped appropriate matter for all the covers* 
limounttng to 216 in the principal and Occasicuial Series. 

While ft has been the unanimous desire of the Committee to issue 
ftncb publicattons as shall most clearly exhibit the sool-bumbifBg doc- 
trines of the purity and obligations of the Divine Law, Man^s ruin by 
sin. Redemption through the sacrifice of Christ, and sanctification bv 
the Holy Spirit; they have been greatly encouraged in their woA 
byihe very general approbation of Evangelical Christians; bat more 
especially by the evidences of tht 0ivhie trpprobation, manifested la 
the converting and sanctifying infiuences of the S^iWit; fi«itb have 



1 1151.] PUBLlCiLTIONS AKD EXPENSES. C5 

never more signally attended these fMibficati<N» Ihao durii^g^ the 
past jemr^ 

PUBLICATIONS PRINTED AND CIRCULATED. 

Tracts primted&urimg^^yeUr, .* . « . 5vS8S«90i 

Do. do. since tiM fiirmatimi «f the SodNHV. . . , , -aSMM^SOO 

fNif^MoflSmo. Tract*, printed during the year^-. t 61tWltM0 

Pttgee of mAUcatiotUt do. do. the year; . . . , 68,788j900 

Pofes of tSoNft. Tracts pcintediiaceibtnatMa of 8ou«^, . mjOSOfnO 

Pages of ISmo. Tracts <wrciiki<Mf dorin*^ the year, .... 61,8M»064 

Fages of jNt^itco^MfUcirctthrted during the year, .... 66y938»nM 

Do. do. 4o. since formation of the Society, . 354,470,92$ 

There hare been .printed, daring the year, of the Tracts Appeal to 
American Youth and Disappointed Hope 76,000 each; of the Ini> 
poriance of Consideration 80,000; of the Worth of a Dollar 81,000; 
of Quench not the'Spirk, and Putnam and the Wolf, eaeh 92000; of 
the Worth of the Soul, and Joseph Archer, each 9G,(ttOT«f the Pcv- 
suasiire to Public Worship HK>,000 ; and of 44ie Hope of Fohtre Re« 
f jentance 1 12,000. The nuaftber of Tracts on tte «uh|ect of Tempo* 
ranee, printed during^ the year, is 516,000. 

GRATUITOUS DISTRIBUTIONS. 

Pages, 

TOTAL.->FV>rftif«, 4d2,«77 

Ships ferForeiga Ports, 14^090 

Army and Nas'y* 88|2&0 

Benevolent InstituUone, 130,140 

Individuals, 1,467,613 

Auxiliaries, 813,099 

il,9654X)6 
Total,. West and South ef the JMIegliaKy ITountaiiM, . 1,7M$oeO 

Grants in Forsiga Langnages, taelwUag !S00 Trw:ts ia the Cbip^ 

pevay LaaguagOk 931,093 

Also granted in money, to aid^ tlie Baptist mission in Barmah Im 
(lieir Tract operations, f 900. 

The above gfrants of Tracts have beei* Miade in 3^ d4stinet appro- 
priations ; and thoagh the Commit^^ ^etph' regret that they hare 
heen enabled to do no nior* iirr'the.dosfitiite io oar own and'tbreign 
lands, it is a source f»f -«Afeigned^oy and gratitude to Gro4, that they 
bare been thus permitted, gratuitously to send at least some portion 
of Divine truth to so many of our perishing feHow-men. 

JB.CCEIPTS AND EXPENDITURES DURING THE Y£UR. 

Recticedt during the year, eadiog May 1st, 

For Traca sold, nearly at cost, $34,137 77 

Donations from Branches and Ansiliaries, $%S06 87 « 

Do. from 39 Life Directors e.CSO 75 

Do. ^m 113 Life Members, ... S447 64 

Annual Subscriptioas and other Donations, .... 1,468 96 

Total amount of donations, 98,784 

Total receipts during the year, $ 4S;99S fid 

Paidt during the year, 

For paper, 15,173 48 

For printing, stereotyping, engraTiag, fblding, atHeMag, sad- 

binding, including expense of Chrittian.Almasae, 16,300 46 



f 



66 SIXTH AVVVAh SEPOMT. [June, 

SerrioM of the CwfwipwidinyBtwtefy and Geanral Ageut, 
tha AviitaBt Seerataryt the Depoiitary, end three AssUtantr, 
^^ whoae time uideflbrts are whoUy devoted to the Society* 2,624 51 

^^ Senriees and ezpenaes of Traveling Agents, chiefly in the 

Valley of the MiMiasi|ipi, 3,698 18 

Grant to MiMion in Burmah, 300 00 

EqpeoMt of the General pepository, peetage, taxes, inaiur- 
anee, fiiel, and all otiier expenaea, as by items in Trea- 
surer** repmrt, . . • . ^ 2,741 M 

Total paid during the year, . #49^983 50 



• 



It appean from the above statement that, in closing the accounts 
for the year, on the first day ofthe present month, the whole amount 
receiTed had been expended ; and there was still due on that day, the 
sum of $1,358 66, which the Society had no funds to meet. The 
Committee have also been compelled to raise, by loan, at different 
times during the year, to meet the Society's current expenses, sums 
amounting to ^9,794 60, all which had been paid previous to closing 
the account; but obligations are now resting on the Committee for 
paper on which the Tracts are printed, to the amount of S 10,676 67, 
which must be paid within six months. 

This painful deficiency of receipts the Committee beg the friends of 
the Institution to bear in mind, as facts, adduced in subsequent parts 
of their report, shall show the pressing claims on the Society from 
various portions of our own country and the Pagan world, and the 
incalculable amount of good it may accomplish, by the continued 
blessing of God, should the requisite pecuniary means be furnished. 

TRAVELING AGENTS. 

The only Traveling Agents now employed in the service ofthe So- 
ciety, are the Rev. Warrxh Day, whose labors are confined to the 
Western IHstrict of New-Tork; Rev. Jambs Andbrsoit, now laboring 
in Central Ohio; Mr. William Tonge, laboring in the South Western 
part of that State; Mi^ Moses H. Wilder, in Indiana; and Rev. 
Cyrus W. Allrr^ in IUinot& and Missouri. Thus, in all the AtUmtic 
SiaUt, exclusive ofthe Western ^DU^rict of New-York, and in afl the 
Vidlnf of ike Miuitiippi, South, o/lke ^hio, (he SoeUty hat now no 
JSraoding JSgenL This fact (he Committee bofia will lead members 
9f enlightened and flourishing congregations to come forward, uoso- 
licited, and bring '* their gifts into the Treasury," and M the same 
time induce at least some qnalifie<l individuals to consecrate them- 
selves to this self-denying service, especially in the more destitute 
portions ofthe country. 

BRANCHES AND AUXILIARIES. 

The number of New Auxiliaries recognized during the year is 94, 
making the whole number now immedintely connected with this So- 
ciety, 906. 

The American Ihraet Society at Boston, which is a Branch of this, 
had at the time of its last anniversary, 672 Auxiliaries. Its receipts 
during its last year were S 11*102, and it circulated 7,866,868 pages, 
l,234,d48 of which gratuitously. It has, during the past year, con* 
triboted to this Society, in donations, $^840 88. 



1€S1.] AVXILIARIKS* 6f 

* The New- York CUy Trail Sneuify hat pM into the St>ci6't^^8 Treti* 
sitry. daring the year, $ 3,958 04, of which $ 477 2o Were cohtribnted 
by the Female Branch. It circulated in 14 months previotis to it« 
last rnniversary, 7,721,000 pages,, of which 5,847,000 were circulated 
in the Monthly Distribution among the near 36,000 famllios of the 
city ; 866,000 pages among the 90,000 jSeameu whicn it is estimated 
visit the port in the course of the year% -and 154,000 pages to the 
3,000 innates of the Humane and CritttiQfil Institutions ; besides dis- 
tribuliont to the Markets, the Islands 4n the harbor, &;c. At a very 
iaterestlng special meeting of the Society, held the last autumn, 
$ 1/954 47 w«re subscribed and contributed for its aid. 

The Femmtjivama Branfh; PhiladdptiHi, had, at the time of its last 
Anniversary, 429 Auxiliaries ; it haa circulated, during the year, 
4,437,890 pages, and has remitted to this Society, the last year, 
4^ 5,644 09, heing the largest amount received from ^ny of the So- 
ciety's Branches. At a special meeting of (his Branch, held in Octo- 
ber 4ast, subicriptiens were made for the aid of the Branch, and of 
the MontMy Dfitributien in Fhiladelphta, whkh ircre smoi^ictdy 
aiier iiscreased to upwards of |^1|700« 

The PiUsbutgh Branchy at its last anniversary, had about 150 Aux- 
tTiaries;1t had circulated, in eighteen months, 3,497,150 pages, and 
by the aid of Agents of the American TVact Society, had explored the 
17 Counties of Weitern Pennsylvania, and formed Auxiliaries wivere* 
v^r it was practicable, it has remitted to this Society the past s^ear, 
$640 00. 

The BaJHmort Branch has 600 Auxfliaries \ its receipts the last 
year were S 1,^^ ; and it circulated 926,46S pages, 240,80f> of which ' 
t^re in the Monthly Disfribution. It has explored 13idf the 19€odn- 
ties ef Maryland, with reference to supply tug flie entire population 
wifimg to receive Tracts. 

Ttvelve other principal Branches and Auxiliartes East of the Alle- 
giiany have remitted the following stims during the year, vl«. 

Providence, R. f. f 247 60 Troy, N. Y. $498 00 

Hartford, (Conn. Br,) 1,140 92 iJtIca, N. Y. 1,4M 00 

New'Haven, Conn. 816 25 ' Washington City, f25I 18 

Albany, N. ¥. 498 46 Winchester, Va. 286 02 

Auburn, N. Y. 200 04 Charleston, S. C. 6^ M 

Rochester, N. Y. 398 25 Aognsta, Geo. 479 00 

Seven Branches and Auxiliaries in the Valley of fhi: Mi«sissippi 
bave remitted the followitig sums, via. 

Huntsville, Ala. $228 50 Louisville, Ken. $223 00 

Nashville, Tenn. 247 50 Cincinnati, Ohio, 779 13 

• Danville, Ken. 333 04 St. Louis, Mo. 457 5a 
Lexington, Ken. 287 00 

The Branch at St. Louis has rapidly extended its operations during 
the year. It has now 64 Auxiliaries; and' circulated the last year 
1 ,076,725 pages of Tracts. 

The liraits of this report ibrbid a more extended notice of Branches 
and Auxiliaries in tldi place. Various Items, ilhtftrating the success 



at SIXTH anaual ESPOKT. [JaOCi 

aa4 VftMotM of p«rtkiillir societiM will be ipceiiad uader their 
•pprapiteta beads, and an entire list will be presented in the Appen- 
dix, showing the amoant contribnted by each, both for Tracts and fas 
donations. 

Tlie Committee woald remind all the Auxiliaries, that, on their per« 
•eTeranoe and If^lity ; their proroptosss in remitting for Tracts ; their 
actiTitj in eircniatiaif iftem s4h'eir liberalit j in eontributing donations } 
their care in commvilBcatiog Ihtelltgenee; and their prayers for tiie 
blessinip of God, depends, iMder Him, more than npon alt other 
soorces, the prosperity and usefulness of the Parent Society. They 
are the fountains from which it draws its life and activity, end if 
these fail, it must cease to send forth its streams of blessings npon 
the world, 

INTERCOURSE WITH KINDRED INSTITUTIONS. 

[The Report here presents an account of the visit of the Rer. Da. 
Bf iLHOR, Chairman of the Ezecotive Committee, as a Delegate to the ^ 
Religious Tract Society in London ; his cordial reception by that In- 
stitntion, &c. which was detailed in the Tract Magssioe for January.] 

The Rot. Dr. Milnor abo had a friendly confereMe with the Cona- 
■sitlee of the Glasgow Tract Society ; and learned, while in Paris, 
that the Paris Tract Society was in a prosperous states The Com- 
mittee sustain a friendly correspondence with each of these Sodelies ; 
and to the Paris Tract Society they have recently made asmidl grant 
of Tracts in English for distribution to English and AmericaAresi-- 
dents, seamen, &c. It is hoped that the recent revolution in France 
will give a new spring to the Tract, and all other Evangelical entec«f 
prises thronghont that ktngdonr 

Venr cordial communications have also been received during the 

{ear, 'from tho Tract Society at Bristol, England, and from the 
'rsyer Book and Homily Society at London. Also from the Lower 
Saaony Tract Society, located at Hamburg, congratulating the So- 
ciety especially on the freedom it enjoys from the civil and rcclesias« 
ticu dominatioa which now oppresses and afflicts that Institution. 

The Committee also sustain very friendly relations to the Auxilia- 
ries of tlie London Tract Society at Montreal and Kingston ; and the 
Bi^Ud Cttnemi Trtxi Saese/y, and other kindred Institutions, in our 
own country. 

REV. DR. MILNOR*S VISIT TO THE ISLE OP WIGHT. 

In connexion with the visit of the Rev. Dr. Milnor to England, the 
Committee cannot refrain from expressing their gratitude that he was 
permitted, in company with the Rev. Mr. M'ltvaine, to visit the Isle 
of Wight, the residence of " the Dairyman's Daughter," '' the Young 
Cottager," and ** the African Servant," and the former residence of 
the fiev. IfOgh Richmond, who was enabled to bless the Church and 
the world by writhig those three inimitably beautiful, evangelical, 
touching, and at the same time truly authentic narraOves. With these 
three Traets in his hand, the Dr. visited most of the scenery therein 
dt«cribed, and found it delineated with surprising accuracy. He 



ISdl.J • VALLET OP THE UI8SIUIPFI. 60 

▼isitedtbc ifraveorthc Youn^Cottefer, the Imum M^ent.whera 
the Rer. Mr. Richmoiid retided, Mid thechulxii in which he i^rcacbcd ; 
saw the -high down and the Jntttiir rock i|nd«r which heconrevsed 
with the African Servant; and visited the cottage of the i>aii7«MD, 
mnd the chamber where the eoul of Elisabeth aeceoded to its rest. 
Here he was kindly reeehred by the snrviring brother of the Dairy- 
man'fl Daaghter,-a man now advanced in yoart, and taw her>Bible, 
in which was written her name and 4he date of her birth «nd death. 
He then pasted over the tame ground at her iVmeral procettiony to 
her grave in Arreton chorch-yaffd, 6nding the detcriptiont-in the 
Tract of the scenery through which he was passing so- affecting, that 
sometimes he was prevented, by the vaiiout emotiont excited, fivm 
punning the narrative; and deriving Irom the visit a tatisAiotion 
which Paris, with all its palaces, and gardens, and paintings, and 
statues, had not been able to afford. 

VALLEY OF THE MISSfSSIPFi. 

Fornearlv two years preceding the last, the efforts, made £or the 
West, cofistituted the most prominent item in the Society -s opera- 
tions. Thousands felt a deep interest in the object. They consi- 
dered the rapidly increasing population ; the deficiency of quaiified 
preachers of the Gospel ; the impossibility of soon supplying that de- 
ficiency ; and the adaptation of the Tract system to the wants of that 
portion of the country. They contributed to this object of their sub- 
stance, and offered their prayers to God for its success. Such can 
not but be interested to know what is the preuaU tiaieot the Society's 
operations there. 

At the last anniversary the Committee reported nint Agents la- 
tioring in that wide field— 4hey now report but four, two of them Lay- 
men, and all North of the Ohio River. They then reported tlmt 
a,«56,067 pages of Tracts had been there gratuitously distributed. 
They now report but 1,766,660. They then reported^ as received 
from that portion of the country, for Tncts, f 13,085 49, and in do- 
nations $941 64— they now report but $4,890 54 received for 
Tracts, and $515 86 in donations. 

While soch is the deficiency in the efforts now making by this So- 
ciety for the West, it is doubtless a Ihct, that the call f^r Tnul uperu- 
ffotts ik^re woi aceer mere sxfsnnae mui wrgenl than mi ^he pretemt 
Aanr. By the efforts which have been made. Tracts have been <ac- 
ried to many of the flourishing churches and conaregations ; bnt the 
great mass of the scattered and destitute population are .not yet 
ivached. It is the dsJiberate opinion of the Society's late General 
Agent for the West, and of the other Agents who have labored 
longest and most suceesslvlly in that field, and had oppostunittes for 
tlie aaost extensive obiervation, that mot mere Hum one-Jwrih part 
of itt entire pofmUUion have pet been furmithed by ihit Society troA jo 
muek mt one Tract to a family* In fuU accordance with thit estimate 
are communications from the most credible sources, showing the 
■soral state of different and wavy distant portions of the field Incon^ 
sidevation. One of these is as follows: 

la T— , a county town, says one of the Society's Agenla, I am 

6* 



70 SllTH AMfUAli REPORT. [June, 

MbniMd tli4M are •boot 40 Infidel and Anti-EfaDgeUcal periodicali 
taken, and bat one religious, Evangelical paper. I mi|[bt epecify 
facto witli regard to every county town I ha?e recently visited, and 
.slMMild not generally give yon a mucli brig liter picture. Tliese coun- 
ty towns are polluted by tlie groceries and otber^causes, so that they 

• are the most hopeless points in the country, though one would think 
.benevolent Societies might be formed in every one. The capital of 
.-*-^ county is almost spell-bound with Jesuitism. The Jesuits have 

here two schools, one for male and one for female scholars ; and a 
commodious chapel. Their arts to attract the attention of the people, 
their foolish and profane ceremonies, are disjg^sting hi. the extreme, 
and such as you would suppose no part ot our coipmunity would 
countenance. The Jesuit missionaries are generally traveling through 
the country. I am told that there are 8 or 10 that make this place 
their rallying point. But the seal of the nuns in getting scholars into 
their schools has recently been to uncommonly g^reat and persever- 
ing, as to attract peculiar attention. There is scarcely an individual 
that enters their school a Protestant, but she becomes a Cath<ilic. 

• Equally apparent is it Arooi the success which lias already attended 
•Tract operations at the West, that they art admirabhf adapUd to the 
■ wmm tt of the popmiatioH. 

I cannot repress my feelings of gratitude, says one of the Society's 
Agento, when I think of the blessings which God is enabling the Ame- 
rican Tract Society to scatter through these states. This thought 
cheers me in all my labors, and my sympathies have become SQ ri- 
vited to the people, that nothing but an imperious call of duty could 
now persuade me to suspend my exertions. 

Never, says the Rev. Thomas Barr, of Ohio, have my labors, during 
nine sucoesoive years in which I have acted as a Missionary, been 
more satisfiMloiy or apparently useful, than when I used Tracts as 
my osnttand,* particularly the Narrative of <' Dinah Doudney,'' which 
I believe I have read nearly 100 times in public ; occasionally in fa- 
mBies— to two or three families collected expressly for the purpose- 
in schocds— -at the close of sermons, and on other occasions. It was 
always heard with deep interest, and afforded me openings for close 
practical addresses to the heart. I could relate several instances of 
hopeful conversion following, some of which I beard of as much as 
seven years afterward. 

Follow your Agmita at the West, says the Society's late General 
Afent lor that country, in all their journey ings— -go with them to the 
hn ihl e oaMa and the splendid mansion—- hear them converse with 
the learned and the ignorant, the rich and tlie poor — hear them read 
Tracts to those who had never read or seen one themselves— follow 
them to tha public assembly, and mark the effect of the faithAil exhi- 
bition of IMidne truth-— and you will see that they are the instruments 
of great good. Then look at Ihe influence exerted by the TrocU. Go 
with them to every individual and family where they find their way-^ 
see them by the evening fireside, in the closet, on the steam-boat, or 
in the social prayer-meeting or. public assembly— see the tear start 
from the eye, and the countenance' bespeak new resolutions to turn 
from sin and live to God— and you will see that they also are the 
meaai of great good. Then survey the " much land'' that <' remain- 



l€dl.l UONTHLT SlSTaiBUTtON* 71 

6th" ** t« be poMeaied"-<4i«e the enemiet «r rel^ion awake in the 
service of Aidr uaster-^etemiined opporition to the Goipei in- 
crefttiB9--*aiMl 70a will see that the churches have neither time nor 
talenU to be lost in pushing forward this great enterprise of Chris- 
tian benevolence. 

Not less erident is it, that, in large portions of the West, Agmtt 
fnutt be nutaimd, and TS-acU JwnUhtd for gratuilotu disinbutionj at 
least for a time, prinetpaUy by the hberaiity of Chrittians from 
abroad. 

When We consider, says the Secretary of an Auxiliary in Oiiio, the 
state of the scattered population in this country;- the* deplorably low 
state of morals, and especially the famine of the bread of life, and 
what is worse, the absence among many of all desne to obtain it; it 
appears that, unless Tracts be distributed gratuitously to the people, 
many will neither hear nor read concerning the way of salvation 
from year to year. 

. An Agent, who had explored the '' Military Tract'* in Illinois, a 
territory about as large as the state of Yermont, says : There are 
many settlements here so receilt and scattered, that no combination 
of effort can yet be expected ; but they are not on this account the less 
in need of Tracts. In view of the great destitution of almost all other 
means of grace, I have felt constrained to make numerous grants 
of Tracts ; and it gives me pleasure to state that circuit preachers, and 
Christians of various denominations, have engaged cordially in dis- 
tributing them. These grants I have made, notwithstanding the press 
ing wants of the Parent Society. In view of, the judgment day, I 
could not refuse them. 

i might wring a tear from the heart of sympathy, says another 
communication from an Agent, if I should detail scenes in which I 
have been called to act and feel ; but the more I do in this great work, 
the more important and absolutely necessary it appears. In general, 
the populatiou here are enterprtsing, generous, and high-minded, and 
with WW exceptions they are anxious and grateful to receive and 
read the Society's Tracts. I sometimes fear I am too liberal in the 
grants I. make; bat the people need the Tracts and ask for them, 
and many have no money to pay for them ; and sooner than be re* 
strained in making grants as I have made them, I had resolved to 
give up my own little stipend and go elsewhere and beg the means 
of defraying the expense. There are Christians dispersed here and 
there, who will aid in distributing Tracts to every lamily, provided 
the Tracts can be furnished. But they have very little money in cir- 
cnlaiion, and cannot pay for them. Tract operations here must be 
sustained, for the present, mainly from abroad. 

THE SYSTEMATIC MONTHLY DISTRIBUTION. 

The Committee devote a distinct portion of their report to this sys- 
tem of effort, by no means as precluding miscellaneous distributions, 
which they believe may be made, with great profit, by every Chris- 
tian ; but as a system which, from its commencement, has been re- 
garded with deep and increasing interest by many of the friends oi 
Zion, and has been productive of especial good. 



70' anvB AUSiVAh fsmat. [June, 

. la tliii» M HI other efibrtt to tpreotl tbo Gotpol, the best qiuilified 
and most gneoefsfiil Ubofcn may not alwayi have been obtafaMd ; 
bat where this point haa been secured, the system has see»ed to 
open before those enfaged in it an ahnost unlimitad sphere of use- 
fulness. The good accomplished by the faithivl Tract Distributor, 
sis by the Pastor of a congregation, has, through the Uessfasg of Qod, 
been measured by his qualScations for the service; his powers of 
mind, his discretion, his spirituality, and seal for the glory of God 'm 
the salvation of the perishing. 

In another part of this report the Ck>amittee will present some of 
tlie evidences ol^the usefolneis of this system, which are of surpassing 
interest. But if no such evidences had yet been communicated, it is 
so entirely in ttecordance with the finl pnnctplct ^ Evmn^elitai 
tfoH^ that it must commend itself to every enlightened Christian. 

It will not be doubted by any, that the design of our Savior's death, 
nest to the Divine glory, was that salvation through his blood might 
be published to every creature, that all who will believe in him may 
be saved. 

Nor will it be questioned that the grand object for which his church 
was constituted, beside her own spiritual purification, is, that she 
may be Gkid's Agent, to convey a knowledge of the Redeemer to all 
who have it not. She is not merely to furnish spiritual food for those 
who come to her; but she is to go out into the ** highways and 
hedges" of thb apostate world, and *' compel them to come in," that 
her " Father's house may be filled." 

To say nothing now of the pagan world, or foreign lands, it is 
known (and the better known for what has already been done in the 
systematic Tract distribution) that a very Urge portion of our ooan- 
^mett*— we should be glad to be assured it is not now a majority-* 
. have not the opportunity of enjoying the public and stated nseans of 
grace ; or if they have the opportunity, habitually neglect them. This 
is neither, on the one hand, the language of despondency, nor on the 
Other of a wish to exaggerate the moral wants of our country. The 
actual moral condition of many millions of our population is doubt- 
less such as to make heaven weep, and justly give alarm to €vvry 
genuine patriot and Christian. 

The obligation to labor by every means to bring all this portion of 
our population to embrace the salvation of the Gospel, all are ready 
to acknowledge; and the point that bears especially on the system of 
eifert now in consideration is that this can only be done by its being 
carried to them tU tkeir Jiretidei. Hundreds of thousands are now 
living withui the sound of the Sabbath bell, but heed it not; hundreds 
of thousands more know where the Gospel is proclaimed, but will not 
go to hear it ; the commissioned and stationed preachers of the Gospel 
usually find it impracticable to extend their family visits much be- 
yond the limits of their own congregations ; and the qualified and 
fliithful missionaries, sent forth into the moral wastes, scarcely amount 
yet to an apology for supplying att our destitute population with the 
Gospel. 

In these drcomstances, the Committee greatly rejoice in the Sab- 
UUk Sslsel efibrts now made, whereby not only children are in- 
strnded, b«t a most happy influence is exerted on their parents ; 



1891.] irONTRLT DISTRIBUTION. 73 

and in the efforts fo place the JHNe in every family, whereby the sn- 
cred Tolnme is depositedy and itt presentation is accompanied with 
words of salvation from the lips of the Distributer; and in every 
means by which the Gospel is carried and tendered to our fellow-men. 

But .they still see an opening for the systematic laliors of faithful 
Tract Distributers so wide and promising, that, when they look at it 
^nd consider it well, their hearts are overwhelmed at once with the 
greatness of the work to be performed, and with deep regret that they 
are yet doing no more for Its promotion. 

They attach importance to this system of effort by no means ex* 
dmtvely as a method of Tract Distribution. In tMt sespect it has 
come admirable advantages, compared with misccUAnaons distribn* 
tion, or perhaps any other mode that has been yet adcq[»(ed. 

It carries Tracts to all who are willing to receive therfl, whereas by 
any unsystematic effort, vast portions of the population are wholly 
omitted. It presents but one Tract ai once, thereby gaining a degree 
of attention usually denied to a larger volume. It presents Tracts 
at suitable intervidtf like the Tree of Life which yielded its fruit every 
month, and whose leaves are for the healing of the nations. It pre- 
sents the same Tract in each dbtribution to all, and thereby justly 
gives offence to none. It is related of the Mayor of one of our con* 
siderable villages, that, having received a Tract on Intemperance at 
the commencement of the Distribution, he went out the next mom- 
ing, determined to cane the individual who left it, provided it were 
not a lady. As he proceeded to make inquiries on the subject, one 
said to him, '* The same Tract was left at my house," and another 
and another made the same assertion, till perceiving the Distribution 
was general, he ceased to be angry, and expressed bis approbation 
of the object. 

The system, moreover, when properly conducted, hingt a devoted 
Chrittian monUdy vnto each famtfy. The Tract is a happy introduc- 
tion to religious conversation, and thus the way is opened for the 
Distributer to invite attention to the concerns of eternity, to the read- 
ing of the Bible, Public Worship, placing the young within the means 
of instruction ; relieving temporal necessities, imparting consolation 
to the afBicted, leading their devotions to God as circumstances may 
direct, and thus becoming, besides a Tract Distributer, a Domestic 
Missionary. 

And who that remembers the words of the Lord Jesus, how he 
said, '* It is more blessed to give than to receive," will not place a 
hich estimate on the blessings that come into the heartt eftht Du- 
tfwuten themtehes f Can such fidelity, and prayerfolness, and Chris- 
tian love, and self-denial, and watching for the souls of men, as their 
duty involves, be oalled into exerelae in the heart of any christian 
unaccompanied by his own growth in grace ? Thousands can tes- 
tify of the blessing they have derived from engaging in those labors, 
and that that blessing has been, in a great degree, pr0portioaed to 
their fidelity. 

But besides the benefit to the Distributers, there showld also be taken 
into the account the awakenmg i^fluenu exerted upon the ehearchee^ 
Through the Monthly Meetings for prayer, and the commnnica^ 
tion of intelligence in private Christian intercourse, and by other 

2 



74 SIXTH AK5UAI. KEFORT. . fjlta^e, 

means, the factg which the Distrilmten ascertain coacenMny the 
wants or their fellow-men are quickly communicated to their bre- 
thren ; thejr are made the subject of pray%r and conversatien in the 
social circle ; the spirit of Christian action and enterprise, which has 
moved their hearts, is caught by others ; the doty of laboring for souls 
around them is seen and felt ; prayer is answered, and efforts blessed ; 
God's works revived ; and it is the tendency of the system to keep 
alive the spirit of prayer and Christian action in the hearts of all. 

Should a list be formed of all the places which have been visited 
doring the year with the special influences of the Holy Spirit, it is 
believed it would appear that in by far the greater portion of them 
this system of effort has been prosecuted, and very faithfully in some 
which have be^ specially distinguished. How far those infloencea 
have descen^id directly or indirectly in connexion with this means of 
usefulness is uajcnown, except In the ver^ numerous cases in which 
the awakening and conversion of individuals have been communi- 
cated as resulting immediately from this effort. 

Progress of the Monthly DistrUnttion, 

The Committee are unable to state, with precision, how far this 
. system has been prosecuted in our country, it has, during the year, 
been commenced in Boston, and is now in operation there, and pro- 
bably in from 200 to 300 other cities and towns of New-England. It 
is sustained with vigor in the city of New-York, and with more or less 
efficiency in most of the principal cities and villages in the state, and 
in connection with numerous congregations in places of less magni- 
tude, especially in the Western District. It has been adopted in se- 
veral places in New-Jersey. In Philadelphia the work is well sus- 
tained, as it is also by, many Auxiliaries of the Pennsylvania Branch. 
' tn Baltimore, where it ceased for a time, it has been revived ; in 
Alexandria and Winchester it is well supported ; in Richmond it is 
reviving from some interruptions ; it is now sustained in Charleston 
with an energy and success that scarcely has a parallel in the coun- 
try, and is prosecuted in a number of places of less magnitude in the 
Southern Atlantic States. 

In New-Orieana it is sustained especially by the efforts of the per- 
manent Agent for the Tract cause in that city ; and in most of the 
large cities and towns west and south of the Alleghany it has been 
prosecuted with various degrees of fidelity and success, as well as by 
Auxiliaries in the vicinity of most of them, and in not a small number 
of New Settlements. 

In some instances, the work has been prosecjited throughout entire 
counties; and a few noUe examples of this kind need but to be gene- 
rally imitated to ensure success throughout the countiy. 

The system has evidently progressed daring the year, especially in 
the Northern and Eastern States ; but it has probably not yet reached 
over from 2,000,000 to 3,000,000 of our population ; leavmg at least 
10,000,000 to be reached by future efforts or wholly passed by ; and 
these embracing by far the greater part of all our population which 
have not the stated means of grace. 



1931.] HOKTHI.T DISTRIBUTION. 79 

imporUmee of iht JfimlAiy DUtriXhUion in Nmo SetiUmenlt and 

duHtuie piaees. 

As thii effort, at its commencement, was principally confined to 
tome of our larger cities and towns, it has been questioned whether 
it is equally adapted to a more sparse population. On this point no 
testimony can be more satisfactory than that of the Society's discreet 
Agent in Missouri and Illinois. 

1 have made it a point of ver^ special prominence, he says, to pro- 
mote the system of Monthly Distribution. I think it peculiarly adapt' 
edtotht condition of this new country. It need not be confined to 
cities and villages. In almost every place where it is practicable to 
establish a Society, it to practicable to carry into operation this sys- 
tem, or at least, in such cases the sparaeness of the population need 
not be an objection. All within the circumference of five or ten miles 
are considered near neighbors; and to ride ten miles on horse, for 
mfUA or woman, is not considered a greater task than by many in our 
older settlements, to walk one mile. The people, especially chris- 
tians, are active and enterprising, and this active mode of doing 
good is adapted to this characteristic feature. To many, the sim- 
plicity of a Tract needs explaining ; to many families, it must be read; 
and many objections to benevolent objects need answering. There 
i« a general conviction among the most active friends of Christ here, 
that this system is the very thing (or this country. In a number of 
towns and settlements within the States of Missouri and Illinois, this 
plan is already in successful operation ; in several other places it i» 
just commencing, and before many months expire, I trust that a con- 
siderable portion of this extensive field will feel its happy effects," 

Adaptation of the character of the Society , to the Monthly Distribution, 

The Committee cannot leave the subject of the Systematic Distribu* 
tion without alluding to the kindness of Providence in uniting in the 
Institution so many different Evangelical religious denominations; 
whereby the charge of sectarianism is precluded, and an access 
gained to all not inimicsl to the humbling truths of the Gospel. '* In 
such a town as this in which 1 reside," says a clergyman not less a 
friend to this Society than to one supported exclusively by the denomi- 
nation with which he stands connected, "the Monthly Distribution 
could never have been undertaken but on the Catholic principles of 
your Society. This one fact — as applicable to a thousand other places 
as to this— demonstrates the invaluable worth of your Institution to 
the cause of Christ.'* 

MitceUaneous DiMlrilntiton not to he omitted. 

While a faithful record of the Society during the year has required 
the Committee thus to dwell on the importance of the Systematic 
Monthly Distribution, they would deeply lament its being made to ex- 
clude the efforts of Christians generally in personal distributions of a 
more miscellaneous character. Tracts, in ten thousand instances not 
within the reach of the svstematic effort, are needed, and to the " arrow 
thrown at a venture," in dependence upon Him, God often delights 
to give a special efficacy. It is much to be desired that every chris- 



76 SIXTH ANNUAL REPOltT. [JUOC, 

tisii thonldengnfe, uopportmiiiies are prefented, in the dispenion of 
all theTariety of Tracts, as they ehall be found adapted to the wants 
hoth of the. destitute and others within their reach. 

FOREIGN OPERATIONS. 

So limited have been the Society's resources during^ the year, that 
the Committee now report onlv an appropriation of (900, in money, 
for Tract operations in Pagan lands, which was to aid the interesting 
Americmn Baptist Mission at Burmah ; together with grants of Tracts 
for foreign countries and the aborigines of our own, to the amount of 
462,fl67 pages. 

But though so little has been accomplished during the year, the 
Committee hare felt deeply the importance of doing more. That our 
beloved brethren, who have torn themselves flrom the privileges of 
their native land, and are enduring all the burden and heat of the day 
among the Heathen ; many of them in sultry climes, and sinking un- 
der the weight of their labors, should call on Christians, who remain 
here surrounded with privileges, for so Many Traett as they need in 
the prosecution of their work, and be /emedf the Committee believe 
would scarcely have the consent -of any Evangelical Christian in our 
countiy. 

In view of calls immediately upon this Society, particularly from 
stations where American missionaries are laboring, a special Com- 
mittee was some months since appointed to consider " what openings 
there may be in Providence for extending the Society's operations in 
Foreign Countries." By that Committee a correspondence was 
opene<^^h all the Missionary Societies in our country known to be 
engaged in promoting the spread of the Gospel abroad, and informa- 
tion sought from other sources, the results of which rendered more 
ptlpaUy evident the importance of this branch of the Society's ope- 
rations. 

£The results of this Correspondence were published in the Tract 
Magasine for November, showing the want ofTracts for the 17,000^000 
of Bnrmah ; for 12,000,000 who speak the Mahratta, among whom 
the American Missionaries at Bombay are laboring; for 11,000,000 
who speak the Tamul, among whom are the Missionaries at Ceylon ; 
for the millions of China; the Sandwich Islands ; the countries on the 
Mediterranean ; France, South America, &c.] 

A communication from the Mission at Ceylon relates the striking 
conversion of a young native, by readfaig a Tract, and says : ** ivS 
method of doing good in CtSfton, or India, it to promising, unih the tame 
sacrifice, at the distribution of Traett. They are better adapted for 
general circulation than even the Scriptures, among such a popula- 
tion as we find here, who read but little; and they feel not Uie tun, 
and tkik not under the dimate, as doet the living Missionary.** 

Communications from the Missionaries in Burmah and Bombay 
urge with equal emphasis the importance of Tract operations. 

The review of the fields now mentioned for Foreign Tract operas 
ttons, will show that the appropriation of at least $ 10,000 annually is 



183J.] mVXXE BLESSl^'Q. 77 

urgently deM«»dea for foreig^n fieMs, which no oth«r tnstihitioti h 
occupyingf, and which have a manifest and immediate claim upon 
thiB Society. The U^ing mesf engers of mercy to the Heathen, as aU 
ready intimated, are sinking, one by one^ under I he pressure of their 
duties and unhealthy climates, to the grave. It is of great moment 
to secure every inch of ground gained fVom paganism; the millions 
of idolaters are crowding into eternity with no knowledge of Christ 
and Him crucified; the Committee feel that this work cannot be de- 
layed, and they have therefore proposed a resolutron, which will be 
submitted to the meeting by an esteemed Brother, proposing more 
extensive Tract operations in Heathen lands, especially in connec- 
tion with American missionary stations. 

It is the earnest desire of the Committee, not only that a resolution 
of this character may be a^lopted by the Society, but that it may be 
accompanied with such efforts and'co«tribations, from vear to year, 
as shall warrant them in rejecting no valid call hereafter made on 
them ibr Tracts for the Heathen. , They here add a transcript of the 

Rules kjf tohieh the Society it governed in He appropriations for aiding 
in the eirculeUion of Tracts in Foreign Laitguaget, viz. 

* ' The Tract* should come within on« or other of these tb«r daates : 
1. ** Tracts \nvmi from the General Depository, under the tano 
tioQ of the Publishing Committee ; or 
2^. ** Faithful translations of Tracts, thus iff ued and sanetionei; or 

3. " Faithful tranilatioBe o€ selec t po rtions of Scrip ture, i nc h m 
the Tea Commaiwimeint,!!^ Seflir6n on Tfie~M«iiir,^Tiie:BmMCrer 
our Lord, and other plain passages ; or 

4. ** Original Tracta in foreign languages, faithful translations of 
sshich into English ehall have been approved by the PubHsbing Com* 
inlt*«^." 

DIVINB BLB88ENO ON THE SOCIETTS TfmUCA'n&NS. 

The year has been distinguished by the effutfons of the Holy Spirit, 
and amofig other instrumentalities the pubHcatianf of this Society 
have been great^ blessed. The instances of their uieliibiess, which 
are known to the Committee, are chMy those communicated in the 
correspondence of the Society and the Reports of Auxiliaries, and 
are pToba(>ly but a small portion of all which the day of Ju^^gment 
will reveal. But enough are communicated to give assurance, that - 
the Society is owned and bleated of €}od, and that labors in this cause, 
in reliattce on him, shall not be in vain. Indeed, so mnlliplied have 
been the instances of good communicated the past year, that the limits, 
of their Report forbid the Committee to insert th^m in detail^ with the 
attending circumstances, which serve in a high degree to verify and 
give ittlertit to each. Some of the principal £Mts comnumlcatted, 
they will narrate as a monument to tiie praise and glory of God. 

The iuHMTopriety of publishing the namet of living individuals wh» 
have thus been hopefully bleued, will be at once perceived. If the 
work of D|vin# grace on their hearts is genuine, the humility it in* 
spires shrinks utterly from such publicity ; and if they are self-deceir* 
ed, relijgion h^ nothing to gwn by publicly announcing their unhappy 
case, The CoifiiDittne pretend not to assert that erery convenion re- 



7e SIXTH A3INCAX. REPORT. [Juiie# 

poTt«d is genuine. All they caa do is to obtain satittfnclery evidence 
that the sources are authentic, Qiid|Miblish the fMCto as eommuntcMted. 
Wherever initials arc used, they «Pe the real initials of the peraoas or 
pJacte referred to, and the original documents are, in a large portion 
of cases, preserved in the files of the Society's correspondence. 

[A number of the facts showing the usefulness of Tracts, which are 
noticed in the Report, have been inserted in the Magazine. Of the 
large number remaining, we can insert only the following, for want 
of room. 3 

BLESSING ON THE MONTHLY DISTRIBUTION. 
The MontUf Trmt bU»»ed to a Foreigner. 

A Foreigner, in New-York, trained in the Roman Catholic Church, 
ignorant of religion, and but partially acquainted with the English 
language, says : *' A kind, benevolent young mart brought a Tract 
monthly to the shop where I worked as a journeyman^ Sometimes I 
read the Tract, if I found it an interesting story ; but I received and 
destroyed many of these messages of grace. At length came the 
Tract, The Wmf to be Saved, As soon as I laid my eyes on it, I saw 
that if I would be saved I must leave off every sin. I felt determined 
to commence leaving off my aggravating sins, and began to pray. 
My mind was in such a crisis, that makes me tremble to look back, 
having no Christian friend to help me, and ashamed to let my ac- 
<piaintaocef know my feelings. But the Lord provided for me a 
fnti|([L whol&rst l^d me to Qa<|«e from working on the Sabbath day, 
and nm is a place wtiere the Gospel fs preached. Now I say, The 
Distributar planted, the Preacher watered, but God alone gave the 
increase, to whom be glory for ever and ever. And now, *< by the 
grace of God, 1 am what I am,*' and God has granted me the great 
privilege of distributing Tracts. 

THE DAIRYMAN'S DAUGHTER BLESSED IN THE CONVERSION 

OF ELEVEN PERSONS. 

As I was distributing Tracts last month in Washington-street, says 
a monthly Distributer in his Report, dated April 4, 1831 , 1 was asked by 
an elderly man, if i did not recollect giving him a Tract last spring — 
T%e Davryman*t Daughter. He mentioned that, at the time he asked 
me for.it, it was more for sport than a desire to read it; but, said h^, 
'* My friend, the few words you said, hoping I would read it prayer- 
fully, and that it might prove a blessing to nie, I could not shake off. 
I read it, and was struck with deep conviction, was led to pray, and 
go to church, which I had neglected, amd in a few weeks I found 
peace to my soul. Yes, I have found a Savior ; and I am happy to 
inform you that that Tract has not only been blest to me, but to all 
my family. Mjf wife and three ehildretit I hope, have been converted 
to God by those few pa^es of Crod's truth, and likewise sic other per- 
tons in my neighborkooa," I do not know, says the Distributer, when 
I have seen a more humble and pious man than he seemed to be. 

EFFECTS OF FASTING AND PRAYER IN THE MONTHLY DIS- 
TRIBUTION. 

A Female monthly Distributer in New-York» whose labors have 
been greatly blessed, sets apart the day in which she is to distribute 



ISSl.] DIVINE BLCSSiKO. 78 

for fasting and prayer to God, that hU Spirit may go before' her and 
irith her, and gain her admission to the hearts and coascienoes of the 
people. In November last, she reported, ** I can truly say it has not 
been a vain thing to call upon the name of the Lord^^the people al- 
most universally gave me an affectionate welcome, and many opened 
their minds to me, as if I had been a tried friend. Found several in- 
dividuals anxiously inquiring the way to-Zion, and one young woman 
almost in despair, to whom, after directing her to Christ and com« 
mending her to God in prayer, I gave the Tract Great i^^aiiim An^ 
wwend. In December she reports, ** I found a mother rejoicing over 
a $on and a daughttTf who had been brought to repentance by read- 
ing the monthly Tracts. In another house I found a lady, who in 
November was under conviction of sin from reading the Tract Poor 
Sartihf now rejoicing in the love of Christ. In January she found 
four individuals who had been deeply affected by reading the Con- 
version of Mrs. Enurmn, One of them, a gay young lady, who now 
appears to be a hnmble penitent — and anoiher, a Deiat, who was led 
by that Tract to see his lost condition as a sinner, and, as he hopes, to 
embrace the salvation of the Gospel. In ber report for lasl month, 
rooking back on the dealings of God with her, she coold say, ** I have 
great reason to bless the Lord for what he has done in my District. 
I have been permitted to witness his mercy in hopefully bringing to 
hnnself eighUen precious immertal souls. Hee of these have been 
convicted by hearing the Gospel preached, and thirtun 6y reading 
the moniUy Traettt and plain conaenolton about their mnUand a fit- 
tnre state- Most or all of them have since united with Baptist, Pres- 
byterian, VI MettnnltSt cttUK«>k«a, ntMl «c>verftl ^nrv nvW tn(|UlrliiC. 

The Braitcb Traot doCUTV i.T Utica report that the Systematic 
Distribution, which is prosecuted in about sixty villages in that vicinity* 
has been greatly blessed. In December, five conversions were reported 
to have occurred in Utica, through Tracts as the direct means. Of 
these ybur were infidels, who acknowledge the Tract Fraiicts Newport 
OS the instrument, through the agency of the Spirit of God, in bring- 
ing them to renounce their sentiments and embrace the Savior. Nine 
other individuals in Oneida County, six of them men of a hardened 
character, in the narration of their religious expericncr, when ex- 
amined for admission to the church, attributed their con version to the 
instrumentality of the Tracts, Francis Newport, Danger of Delay, 
ITniversRiism, Day of Judgment, To-Day, and Importance of Con- 
sideration. 

ACCESSiONB TO THE GOflPEL BIINIBTRY BY MEANS OF TRACTS. 

A Clergyman in New-England, says the report of the 'Aaserican 
Tract Society at Boston, informs that, when he was about twelve 
years old, he read akmd to his parents the Tract Dinah Doudn^, till 
deep emotions and loud sobs prevented his proceeding. He retired 
into a secret chamber to weep there. At night he could not sleep lest 
he should awake in hell. That seriousness continued, in greater or 
less degrees, for some years, when he trusts his heart was renewed by 
Divme grace. A Student in Theology also states, that his attention 
was first arrested by the same Tract, and about one year afterward, 
be hopes, he submitted to Christ. 



90 SIXTH AWN UAL REPORT. [Juoe, 

REVIVALS OF mELnSKW FAQMGTED BY TRACTS. 
First F^ruUr of a Revhal of BeKgion brovght in by mtann of a TraeL 

The Rev. J. G. H. of North-Carolina^ applying for a grant of Tracts^ 
arges the great destitution of several counties in the £astern part of 
that state, of all the means of grace, especially the preached Gospelr 
and adds: I feel encouraged to aiake this application from the fact 
tlMLt l^aets have been n«eful among us. A young lady, gay and 
thougiitlesfy wa» broMgbt to serious- reflection by reading a Xr«ct« 
She is BOW rejoieing in the hope of the GospeL She was t/ufinL 
fruiis of a revival of religion. A nuaaber of others have since been 
awakened and brought, us we hope, to accept of Christ a^ their portion. 

THE WHISKEY BURNT— AND FOUR SOULS CONVERTED. 

The Tract EaH of Bockettw, says a Clergyman in the Connecticut 
Reserve, Ohio, was distributed in a very dissipated neighborhood, and 
one man wae awakened by H, His wife, ^seeing bis distress, began 
to think of her own stare as a sinner; and not long after, another man 
and hia wife, both of whom were intemperate, were greatly distressed 
in mind. The drunkard kwmi up kk iehi$k^ and broke ku jug, and 
the fimr are now indulging a hope of pardoned tin. Religious meet- 
ings are iiow«s«»btished in the neighborhood, where befoi-e the mean» 
of grace were almost entirely neglected. 

TRACTS IN A REVIVAL OF RBLIOION IN MASSACHUSETTS. 

A XSSy O.n^ ~T^ ' , ltM»am, aay*, iwi«*>i aiU I icattre ttig TvYue of 
Tracts as in the revival of religion we have recently enjoyed. The 
^mier Forewarned, the Daif of Judgmeni^ tbe Wtqf to be Saeeil, 
the £tm««r Direetedto the Sofoior, and espectaily the Qjeettioneand 
Countel, were blessed to the awakenii^, and ta the hepeilil cenver* 
slon and establishment of several iadividuali. 

BFWSCTS OF ONE HUNDRED TRACTS SENT. TO THE PRINCU»AL 

OF AN ACADEJKY. 

The Society's Agent in the Western District of New- York says, the 
principal of the Academy at M— , to whom I sent 100 of the Tract 
Q,tteneh not the Spirit, informs me, that at a time of uncommon seri- 
ousness, he gave a copy of the Tract to each scholar in the school, 
and perceived distinctly its influence in increasing the seriousness of 
some, and exciting to thoughtfulness others who were before insensi* 
ble. One of these Tracts was given to a young man whose mind was 
too insensible to receive any special impression from it, but who was, 
providentially, about to return to his parents, who were both livhig 
without hope. He threw down the Tract with some inditfierence in 
the pretenee of his flither, who seised it, and read it. He wept^and 
read it again and again» 'His condition as a lost and guilty sinner 
was bfought with fearful deamess before his mind. He fwmd not 
peace till be found it in Christ. While in distress for his sou), he 
gave the Tract to his wife, who was also convicted of lier sins, and 
hopeAilly converted to CKmI. The attention of the neighborhood be- 
came awakened, iind a considerable revival of religion followed. The 



It51.] D1VI5£ BI.CSBI50. 81 

Tract WM fffeaUy sought for, and hung up in houMs to be read by 
viskera, A Baptiat CUtgynmn in the seigbborhood of the Academy 
sayi, these Tracts were the instruBBent of proflsoting the reviral 
there, snd that one of them, given to hit oirn daughter, who was re- 
turning to stupidity, was carried to her chamber, and read as a mes- 
sage of God to her. Her conyictions returned with great clearness 
and force, and she that very night surrendered her heart to Christ. 

REViyAL OF REUGION IN A MORAL WASTE, OCCASIONED BY 

TRACTS. 

. The Secreury of the AuxiUaiy at M M , N. Y.,«ays, 

one of our members, after hiving read her Tracts, sent them into a 
destitute town where no religious meetings were held, and few, if any , 
religious books read. They were received with such eagerness that 
neighborhoods collected together to hear them read, and for lack of 
hymn-books sung the hymns upon the covers of the Tracts. A revival 
of religion commenced very soon, and when we last heard, a power- 
ful work of grace was in progress. 

THE "TRACT TO-DAY" FOUND IN A GARRET. 

A young Lady in the city of New-Tork, on her examination for ad- 
mission to the church, gave, in substance, the following relation : — A 
few month since, being in one of the upper rooms of her dwelling, 
her e^e caught the title of the Tract !nhDay, as it lay among some 
rubbish on the floor. She took it in her hand, and felt inclined to 
peruse it; but hesitated, thinking she might defer it to a more ''con- 
venient season." She, however, resolved to read it. As she pro- 
ceeded her mind was overwhelmed with a sense of her own great 
sinfulness and of tho necessity of applying at once to Christ for par- 
don and salv^ition. She formed the solemn purpose of dedicating 
herself to the Lord, and saw that To-Dat was the Savior's appointed 
time. In that upper room, without leaving it, she trusts she was 
awakened, convicted, and converted to God, through the blessing of 
the Holy Spirit on that alarming and pungent Tract. She is now in 
full communion with the church, and gives gratifying evidence of real 
piety. . 

THE TRACTS ** BIBLE ABOVi: ALL PRICE" AND THE **AOE OF 

REASON.** 
[An Aaeodote for those who think Traets nsefiil only toCSiildrea.] 

In a remote part of my congregation, writes a clergyman of Vir« 
ginta, there lives a man of great wealth, hot who has been eatn«ly 
without God in the world. Not long since, he received from a mem* 
ber of our church the third volunM of Tracts. He read one or two of 
them, and the impression they made on his mind was so great, that 
he began to think of the salvation of his sooL He read a third, and 
sent to know if the other volumes could be obtained. Being inform* 
ed that they could not for aome months, he said to one of his ftunily : 
;" Itnll tkut up the book now, and read Imt ont Tract a-dajf^i AaU 
get ikromgh the book too soon.'* When he came to Dr. Payson's Tract, 
ThembUaknf€mUFri€e, (No. 71,) hesaid, "it Mgbt to be wnltMi 



8£ sixTB ASVfVAh REPORT. [June, 

in lellers'of gold. I huve read the Age of Reason until I believed the 
BiM^ to be a tiMueof falB6hoodi-HM»w 1 believe It to be the word of 
God/' This gentleman has ever since been a regular attendant on 
public worship ; and many of those who are interested in his spiritnal 
welfare, have hope that a work of Dirine grace has been begun in 
hit soui. 

I 

CONCLUSION. 

Thus have the C^ommittee presented a review of the Society's ope- 
rations during another year; the little that has been done ; the much 
land remaining to be possessed ; and the superaboonding mercv and 
grace of God, which has attended the efforts made. They have shown 

That probably not far from three-fburths of the population in the 
greM Valley of the West aire yet unreached by this Society's publica- 
tions. 

That 10,000,000 of the population of our country remain yet to be 
supplied with the Monthly Distribution. 

That about ^ 10,000 annually are needed for pagan lands. 

That a blessing without a parallel has, during the year, descended 
upon the Society's publications, in rendering them the means of con> 
version and sanctification to multitudes of souls. 

That with all these overwhelming incitements to effort* the Society 
has but five Agents laboring among the 13,000,000 of our population, 
and they lost iu the comparative New Settlements of a small section 
of country. 

And that the whole amount committed to the Society for its uae 
during the year has been $ 34,137 77 in payment for publications sold, 
and $ 8,7^ 82 in donations. 

The Committee make no comment on these facts. They beg the 
"friends of Zion to consider them well, and to bring them before the 
throne of grace in importunate prayer, till all who name his name shall 
be roused to fidelity to Him, and all who hope in his blood shall im- 
bibe in some degree his Spirit, when he came from heaven to bring to 
man the tidings of his Gospel, and offered himself a sacrifice for their 
redemption. 



NEW TRACT. 

No. S54. The Mountain Miller. An Adthentic Narrative. A PremiiUD 
Tract— pp. 90. This Traet is the simple Narrative of a Miller tm the Green Mo«n- 
tains of New-Eni^biid, whoconllded in his own richteousneM for salvation till mid- 
dle life, w^tt hie heart was renewed by the Holy Spirit, and he becaoM a dislin- 
Kttished monument of tlie grace of God. We wUl not anticipate the reader by al- 
foding to any of the affbcting incidents in the dealings of Provide&ce with this hum- 
ble but godly man. 



PREMIUM FOR THE BEST AUTHENTIC NARRATIVE TRACT. 

The subscribers have been nominated by the pers<m offering the above premium 
to decide on the merits of the several Tracts which should be submitted to them for 
examination, have read and considered thirteen manuscript IVafcts, and awarded the 
premium to the author of the Tract entitled **The Mountain Miller." Upon openim^ 
the sealed envelope aoeoaipanyiBg the sane, the author proved to be the RevTw. 



18St.] 



KECEOXB. 



85 



A. Hallock, of New-York. Agreeably to the terms n>eeified ky the offerer of the 
premium, the other Tracts are placed at the dsBposal of the puUishiny comarittee of 
the American Tract Society, with the aadentamiiiig that the envelopes accoupaii^^- 
inf any that may not be used by that committee shall remain wiopened,.and >f de- 
sHred, the Tracts be returned to their authors. 

JAMES MILNOR, 
JOHN KNOX 
April 21, 1831. . JOHN WOODBRIDGE. 



PRIZE BETTERS TO YOUTH AT COLLEGE. 

The undersigned, to whom was referred the duty of awarding the premium of 
JFV^ JDoUan for the best Essay adapted to the object above specified, having care- 
fully attended to the, business assigned UMm, have tins day unanimously agreed to 
prefer that entitled, "Letters to Students.'* On opening the envelope, the 
author was found to be Rev. Baxter Dickinson, of Newfrk, N. J. and in it was 
found also a postscript, announcing that the author " declines" recei vmg the premium 
in case of |he award. Whereupon, it was deliberately resolved, 

1. That should the American Tract Society, by their Publishing Committee, con- 
sent (as is ex]9ected) to stereotype said Letters, the money, now deposited in our 
hands, and which the author generously declines to receive^ shall be wlMlf expended 
in the purdiase of copies for the benefit of any colleges in the United States who 
may signify, by a vote of their Faculty respectively, transmitted to thA Secretaiy of 
the American Tract Society, their request tor their due proportion, wfch the implied 
engagement that they shall be faithfully devoted to the use of the students, acoord- 
inr to the intention of the duiors; and, 

\. That the Faculty of any College or University of learning in the Union be au- 
thorized, without charge of postage or other expense, to draw on the Secretary of 
the A. T. S. whenever the anticipated publication shall have been announced, for 
their proportion, wbich'is numerically ons copvfyr each Hvdemt. 

SAMUEL H. COX, 
JAMES M. MATHEWS, 
New-York, May 17, 1831. CHAS. P. MILVAINE. 

P. S. The remaining Essays will be left with the Secretary of the A. T. S. sub- 
ject to the orders of their authors. 



A list of New Publications will be found on. the Cover. 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THE TREASURY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY 

From May 1, to May 15, 1831. 

NoTE.^-The Reeeipts -from Amil 16 to May 1, ore omitted in this list, being ac- 
knowledged in the Sixth Annual Report. 

FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 

VER^— Pittsford, Abel Penfield, Tr. 

MASS.— Ashfield, Dr. Jared Bement,Tr. 
Boston, Amer. Tract Society, John Tappan, Esq. Tr. 
CONN«— Brooklyn, (Windham Co. Aux.) Edwin Newbury, Ag. 
Danbury, Horace Bnll^ Tr. 

Jewett City, Fem. Mrs. J. F. Bliss, Sec 

Salisbury, Lot Norton, Tr 

SoutMmiy, Nathan Mitchell, See. 

Stratford, Asa Curtis, Tr. 

N. YORK.— Angelica, Fem. Miss Sarah Uaight, Tr. 

Bedford, Fem. Mrs. Susan S. Nichols, Sec 

Catskin, Fem. Miss Jane Sayer, Tr. 

Corinth, Fem. Hannah Earley, Sec. 3 00 



FerTVn 


D9*^ 


760 




4 37 




aOMlfi 




10 00 


• 


18 00 




%m 


. 1 13 


83 05 


frOT 


6 03 


537 


6 18 


" 


1 75 




ISiMT 




640 





84 



ACCEIFTS. 



rmom auxiliarus and agebtts. 

£lbiM8^Fem.lliML^FduiCI«rli,«ee 

Fietiia, Onatge Co. Dr. H. K. C I i h ibb, Tt. 
Freah Ponds in Huntii^tiw, 3. Woodfadl, Tr. 
Ghent, Fern. Martha M. Boffeboonit See. ..... 

Hampateadt Rockland Co- Fem. Mrs. Elizabeth Coe,Tr. . 
HarpersYillOtBiooDie Co. Robert Pike, Sec. ... 

Hopewail» Fein. Jfn. Ann R.8wartwottt,Tr 

Hnntinglon, L. 1. Rer. N. Brown, Ag. 

Jamestown, Fern. Elmira Eddy, Sec , . 

Lodi,Erij^Co.J(MephPl«ttNTr. 

New-Wlndeor, Silas Corwin, Tr. . . . 

Owofo, (Tioga Co. A«it.)WllHMnPninpelly,Tr. . 

PMehogne,L.I.ReT.Noahfl.Oillet,8«e 

Schoharie Co. John Ingold, Tr. 

Schoharie, Fern 

South East, Fern. Mrs. C. Crane, Tr 

Troy, Charles Lyman, Tr. 

Utica, by their Auz. Richland, OswMoCo> 

West Farms, juv. George St. John, Tr 

N. JER.— Bloomfield, Jut. Robert R . Kellogg, Sec. 
Chatham Viilage, Morris Co. Fern. Mrs. Amelia Spencer, Sec. 
HackettstowipTFem. Miss Mary Campbdl, Sec. 

Newark, Fern. 

Tateraon, JiiT?lIeiiryVanHoBten,Tr 

-Princeton, rem. Miss F.W.Merford,Tr 

Washington, Fern. BIrs. Phebe S. Miller, Tr. .... 
PENN.~Honesdale, Joseph L. Kellogg, Tr. 

McConnelsburg, M. Augustus Jewett, Sec 

TIR.— Richmond, Charles Holt, Jun.Tr 

ALA^—Hutttsville, Samuel Coltart, Ag. 

OHIO.— Cincinnati Henry B. Funk, Tr. . . . 

GraoviBe, RcT. Jacob Little, Pres 

NewttTk, Rev. Soiomon S. Mllea, Pros. 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 
N. YORK.— New Utrecht, L. I. Fern. Bib. Miss, and Tr. Soc., Mrs. 

Catharine Knapp. Tr 

VIR.— Fredericksburg, Pr. Book A Tr. Soc. Reuben T. Them, Tr. 
Tracts sold at the Depository to ladiTiduids, .... 



im 

300 
690 
499 

6» 

693 

13 50 

800 

13 n 
17 68 
MOO 

1 M 

40 00 
67 
40 

640 

784- 

6 Do 

5 00 

10 00 

300 

1 50 

3 78 

772 

90 00 

60 00 

OS 50 

41 49 
SI 00 



30 00 

640 

49 18 



3» 
1 9» 
1 50 



S50 



10 00 



Direet4trs for Life. 

N. YORK^Albsny, Westerlo 
Van Rensselaer, byhisfiither, 
Hon. Stephen Vsn Rensselaer, $50 

Blooming Grove, Mrs. Frances 
Howell, (in full of $50) . . 10 

New-York city, Mrs. WilUam A. 



00 
00 



HaUock, in part for peipetiia< 

ting **The Mountain ftaier," 
Members for Lite. 
dOIRV.— Coventry, Mrs. Edna 

Needhatt, by her son,' Dwig|it 

Needham, .... 
Bridge water, Oneida €k>. Laurens 

Bull, 1^ his father, 
Durham, Greene Co. Mrs. Eudo- 

eia Booths, (in full of $20) 
GouTerneur, MissOctaTiaParMms, 

-^y her Ihdier, L. B. ParMms, 
Annual MemSbert, 
R. ISL.— Froriden£e,Col. Alesan- 

der Janes, . * 
CQNN.-Greeowicih, Miss Laws 
How, $2.— Samual How, $8, 



50 CO 



90 



90 



00 
00 
00 
00 



Tt, JER. — Coanecticttt Farmi, 

Union, P. O., Mrs. Matthias 

Bnmt, . ' . . 1 OO 

Other DofuUiont. 
MASS.— Pittsfield, Samuel A. 

Danlbrth, .... 1 00 
CONN*— Farmington, A Lady . 1 35 
HartflMPd, Rer. William C. Wood- 

bridge, . .10 00 

N. YORK.— Augusta, Oneida Co. 

Samuel Mose, . . 3 00 

New-York City, A Friend, $5: 

Do. $1 50 6 SO 

Sandy HiU, indiridnals, . 1 95 

Skeneateles, Pmh. Churdi, c«d- 

tribuUon for VaU. Mbs. . . 6 00 



400 



The above list contains dooatioo— • 
ForVafleyoftheMlsilssippi, . 6 00 



00 Whole amount of dcoatlons, $946 59 
Reoeiired for Tracts sold, $654 83 

Totals $3,903 35 



THE AMERICAN 

VOL. TI. JXnWVf 1881. HO. 7. 

CIRCULAR. 

• 

The Executive Committee of the American Tract Society beg 
to invite the attention of the friendfl of Zion to the sahject of the 
following resolution, unanimously adopted by the Society at 
their^iecent anniversary, viz. 

'^Kieaolved, 7^a<(&i9<Sbct6<y«Aou2cl embrace vnt^ropero' 
Hans ^ spirihml irUeresta of their unefnliffhtened,fijknD-mm 
in distant lands; and mth rtference to this cbjoa Ihev vriJl 
endeaiurr^ ty the Divine blessing", to supply Evangelical Am^ru 
can Missiotuaries in foreign countries vnth as mawf approved 
TYacts, or the means of procuring' ihem, as shally m the cpif^ 
ion (f the Executive Committee^ be needed in the proseciaion 
of their labors.^ 

This resolution has been adopted in view of existing facts and 
solemn obligations resting on the churches of our favored coun- 
try. The known wants of unevangeiized nations, the useftii- 
nesB of Tracts among them, and the reiterated claims made upon 
the Society hy Foreign Missionaries, induced the Commillee, 
some months smce, to open a correspondence with all the Insti- 
tutions in our country known to be engaged in Miseionaij opera- 
tions abroad. The results of that correspondence and mfinrma- 
tion otherwise obtamed, as detailed in the Society's Annual Re- 
port, give evidence that at least S 10,000 maj- be annuaUv appro- 
priate by this Society ibr Tract operations m foreign fietds^ with 
the &irest prospects of usefialness. 

Among the seventeen millions of Burmah, of whom laise 
numbers of the male population can reftd, tne attention of & 
first Christian inquirer is said to have been arrested by a Tract: 
and incitements finr Tract circulation are of the most nowerfol 
and animating character. The Missionaries at Ceylon, laboring 
among a population of eleven millions who speak the Tami^ 
say, '^No method of ddng good in India is so promising, with 
the same sacrifice, as the distribution of Tracts." The snuJlness 
6f their size gains them a reading, and they ^feelnotthe son 
and sink not under the climate as does the livrnf^ Misskmary." 
The Misskmbries at Bombay, among twelve millioDs who epeak 
Ihe Mahratta, bear easeiitiaily the same teitioiaDy* ^Partkne 

Voi„VL 7 Whole No. 64. 



86 cincvhAU. [Julfy 

of Scripture, 'or Tracts," saya the Rev. Dr. Marshman, "have 
had something to do in the conversion of ahnost every individual 
who hasjoinS the Christian church in India." The untold mil- 
hons of China, who, though they speak difierent dialects, read 
the same language, have at length become accessible through 
the medium of the press, and Christian Tracts are now in esca- 
lation among them. In the Sandwich Islands, Tracts are de- 
voured with an eagerness resembling that of the famishing ibr 
breeid. ti Syria, Armenia, Modem/Ureece, and other countrieB 
on the Mediterranean, there are wide openings ibr their circu- 
lation. France now presents a field which may, by the Divine 
blessing, prove of unparalleled interest. South- America, not- 
withstanding the spintual bondage under which her population 
groans, aflfords many encouragmff oppjortunities for usefulness' 
by this means ; and the fading aborigines of our own country 
have strong claims upon our sympathy and aid. 

But it is not the object of the Committee, in this document, to 
Urge mihutely the claims of different portions of the Foreign 
field ; for their validity is recognized perhaps by the entire Evan- 
gelical community. They wish simply to remind every friend 
of the Society, and the officers of eveiy Auxiliary, that, weighty 
and imperative as these claims confessedly are, tiiey cannot he 
met without pecuniary means. 

The Calls upon tiie Society in behalf of the increasing mil- 
lions of our own country have thus far exhausted all its receipts 
fiCm year to year, and their interest& it is plain, must not oe 
neglected in our efforts to extend the blessing of the Societv to 
distant lands. The C<»nmittee, therefore, invite their fellow- 
christians, while they continue their liberality for the spiritual 
benefit of the destitute at home, to consider, that the Society's 
determination and endeavor to extend its benefits abroad cannot 
be accomplished, unless the friends of the Redeemer are excited 
to further this psurticular design bv a prayerful consecration of 
free donations to a fund exclusively appropriated to its promo- 
tion. Thousands of Christian and Pagan hearts may be made 
to leap for joy, ^ every individual wilTbut promptly contribute 
an4 aendjorward the umount whicky in kis own judgment^ he 
can consiatently afford. These littie streams, there is reason to 
believe, would supply the demand, and as they eboxAd fiow in, 
from year to year, would continue to supply it till the day of 
millenial glory. Let each individual feel that his obligation is 
personal, and present, and fulfil that, obiigation; and, by the 
Divine blessing, every benighted pa^n on the globe may.soou 
have at least as much as a Christian Tract to teU him of salva- 
tion through a Crucified Redeemer. 

A separate department of the Society's receipts is opened, 
,80 that, whatever monieB shall be contributed for its foieign 



1891.] BmSCKlVRIDeE*8 ADBBttS. 87 

operati<»Qs, or for any distinct portion of llie foreign fields will be 
ieacredly appropriated according to the will of the donor. 

By order of the Executive Committee of the American Tract 
Society. 

JAMES MILNOR, Chairman. 
WiLUAM A. Hallock, CorresponMnff Secretary, 
\ NeuhYorky June, \^l. 



ADD&B88 

OF THE R£V. JOHN BRECKINRIDGE OF BALTIMORE, 

AT THE AlfHITKMAKT OT THS AMSRICAK TBACT MCIfiTT. 

R18OLTKD, Thai thiB SoHety thauld embrace in their operations the 
wpiritmal interesti of their unenlightened fellow men in d%»tant lands; and 
with reference to ihis object they will endeavor, by the Divine blessing, 
to supply Evangdieal American Missionaries in foreign countries wtlh 
iu many apprtmed Tracts^ or the means of procuring^ themj as thaU in 
the opvKMn of the Executive Committee, be needeain the prosecution 
of their labors. 

In moving this resolution Mr. B. said, — Mr. Chairman, next to the 
great plan of redemption itself, perhaps the most wonderful of all 
things is, God^s method of carrying it on in the world. The part 
which man is called to act as its instrument, is only less remarkable 
than the place he occupies as the object of its divine regard. The 
Oospd ofJesus Christ committed to us for our fellow men in all the 
world ! Delightful, yet awful trust ! Who can decide between the dis- 
tinction and the responsibility of such a commission ! It may yet btf 
a question, sir, with regard to many of us, whether it shall be our 
crown of rejoicing, or our unutterable calamity, to have sustained such 
relations to God and our fellow men. 

Of this there can be no doubt, that the obligation to sflread the Gos- 
pel is very little felt in proportion to its true force and extent, even 
by the great body of the professed people of God. The dams of 
Foreign Missions especially, though they outweigh unspeakal^y all 
other claims, are disregarded to a degree which makes an awakened 
observer shudder. 

I esteem it a peculiar privilege, sir, to have it in my power this day 
to plead this injured cause, before this assembly. 

Perhaps it may be proper briefly to state the leading facts on which 
the claims of Foreign Missions rest, before suggesting the considera- 
tions which have peculiar reference to your Society. 

If ther» be any thing in the word of God of which we are certain, 
it is, that we who have the Gospel, are required to give it to thoee 
who have it nor. The command to this effect is a BtmSlmg kaw.of the 
great code, and will continue to bind all men, in all thne, aniil the last 
heathen man shall have heard the news of salvation. Disobedience 
to this command has about it this peculiar aggravation, that it ex- 
cludes men from the remedy. The provision has been made, but this 
sin withholds it. Most sins are against the nature smd tlabm of 
Christ^s kingdom after it has been set up in n land— 4hii pr09enis 
Hi being set up. It denies to the Qoapel • hearittg, and 10 tiif Matbco 



88 smXCKIHRI]>»X*8 ADDftXSS. E^^'j* 

world the power to chooie. It is true thot man of himielf it tltogether 
intolBcient to cony on thit work, end thet God ii able to carry it on 
alone, without the agency of man. But it it also true, thst in his 
sorereignty He has adopted this plan ; with this He connects the 
triumphs of His prace ; and his Icinf dom, if we may spealc so, waits 
on the raoreroents of man. When man pauses, the ^spel also seems 
to pause. The only option which is left to us regards the method of 
obeying this command. We may choose between the forms, of carr 
rying or sending the gospel forth. Between these lies our only choice ; 
and the alternative is rebellion against God. In all ages of the church, 
to neglect this command has been highly criminal — ^bot noto, when 
the force of the obligation is so strongly and steadily pressed upon us, 
to disregard its claims is no lets than 'ddiberaie Jtn. 

In connexion with this we remark that obedience to this great 
command of our Lord is a test of the fidelity of his people. " If all 
the moral eril in the world. is not acting immediately against IIAem, it 
is against Him:'* The Gospel is the only effectual means of its de- 
struction ; and if we decline obedience to that command which calls 
for its universal diffusion, we do, in effect, identify ourselves with his 
enemies, and while we retard the conversion of the world, put supreme 
dishonor on his name. 

It is a striking fact also, that a proper regard for the claims of 
Foreign MUtimu, or a BRnionary ^irit in exereite, is not only a test 
of Christian character, but one of its great formation>principles. The 
character of a christian is so constituted, that it is not only fitted to 
do good, but under God, formed by doing it. Love to God is dis- 
played in love to man ; and in doing good to man, tlirough the Gos- 
pel, we not only save others, but exercise and mature the graces of 
the Gospel in our own hearts. Thus in the divine economy, we must 
spread the Gospel to enjoy it, or to retain it among a people. And 
he who in the right spirit gives, steadily gets, the blessing. 

One very affecting ground on which God rests our obligation to the 
Heathei| is, their perishing condition without the Gospel of Christ. 
Tet, it is sometimes difficult precisely to fix a point at which all pro- 
fessed Christians may meet in their views of the state and prospects 
of the Heathen ; and hence motives derived from such considerations 
lose much of their force in the public mind. But there is one poivit 
in which we must all agree, via. Thai Ood deait wUh ut who hme the 
Gotpeihut Off ifth^ perithedfor ever when toe vnthluld U from them^ 
We ehm he treiled, at laetf jiut at if they tcere lost by our n^teet ! and 
ofeourte, whatever beeomet of them, our guUl wiU he the tame ; for our 
duty it not determined by their ttate, hut by the command of Ood, 

In view of these and kindred thoughts (which I here omit) it Is un- 
speakably distressing to survey the extent of heathenism in our world. 
I hold in my hand the very affecting appeal of Gordon Hail, written 
from Bombay in 182<l. (only six weeks before he left the world,) ad- 
dressed to American Christians. The following is his sketch of the 
destitute condition of the heathen World. " It is grievous to behold 
such an extent of countrv— and so teeming with immortal souls, but 
yet so dettitnte of the Messengers of life. From Bombay we look 
down the coast for 70 miles, and we see two Missionaries^H miles 
. urther we see two osore— looking in a more easterly direction, at the 



1891.] BixcKiinuiNa's APomns. TO 

dirtttiee of abofitl 800 mil€S» irt tee one Mlnioavy , chitfly oceapie4» 
however, as a ckaplainamong Europvaiu, In an eastern dir««thMi the 
nearei I Missionary is about 1000 miles from us. Looking a Ittlle lo the 
northeast, at the distance of ISOO miles, we soe ten or twelve Mission* 
aries i% a little more than as many miles, on the banks of the Ganges. 
Tiiraing thence northward nearly 1800 mUes more, we see three or fovr, 
or fiye more, separated from each other by almost as many hundred tai- 
tenrening miles. And looking onward beyond these distant 
posts, in a north-east direction, through the Chinese Empire, and 
Tartaiy, to Kamschatka, and thence down the ttorth^wesiem coast 
of America, to the river Columbia, and thence across the monntains 
to. the Missouri, the first Missionaries we see in that direction are 
brethren Vail and Chapman, among thto Osages. 

** Again we look north, at the distance of 180 niiTes, we see two 
IMlssionaries ; bat from thence ( whh two or three doubtful exceptions) 
through all the north of Asia, to the pole, not a single Missionary is 
to be seen. In a north-western itirection, it is doubmil whether f hei'e 
is now one Missionary between us and St. Petersburg. Westerly, the 
nearest is at Jerusalem, or Beyroot. South-west the nearest is at 
Sierra Leone ; and more to the south, the nearest may be among the 
Hottentots, or in Madagascar. 

'*Can you count the millions and millions comprised in this range. 
Can any but an adamantine heart survey them and not be grieved ? 

** I should like to see a new chart of the earth adjusted to a double 
scale of measurement, one shoM^ue the comparative nn/ctce, and the 
other the comparative popuUtfumofthfi different sections of the earth-«- 
all presenting a black ground except those spots where the Gospel 
Im preached. And on a slip of white ground [ would have a note of 
reference to Mark zvi. 16, 1^ 'Anaiutmd unto than, Gope into 
€l^ the world, and preach the Ootpet to every ereatwre. He that 
Miemth and i» haplined thdtlketaoed, hut he thai btlieveih not thaU be 
damned ;* and this I would have bound up in every Bible so as to fkce 
the same divine charge of Christ to his disciples* It might be recom- 
mended to all church members, deacons, pastors, and teschers of 
theology, to add to the note on their map, Romans x. 14, 16. ' How 
then shall they eaU on him in whom they have not believed f And how 
ehaU they beUeve on him of whom they have not heard T And how ^uUl 
they hear without a preacher, and how ehall they preach except they be 




and who dtalt go form? Then eaid /, here am /, tend ms.*' which 
latter elaute Iwovid have every student in theologjf, and ymmg believer 
of good talents and edueationt print on his chart m grand capitids, pre* 
ceded by *Lord what tnlt thou haveme to da.^ ^* 

This was bis dying call to his guilty country* What eloquence 
of truth, what holy love it breathes T For five years has it pressed 
our consciences and reprovod our delay ; and yet alas with how 
little effect! 

But it is time thtt I pass to the more special^ object of my remarks. 
The resolution which I am permitted to oibr admits the daims of 
foreign Missions, aad goes to conaect your efforts as a Society more 

7* 



90 



BMCKimiiMs's Aomxss. palTi 



direcHy with tlkugi««l; came. lawp^ortofltmtBy imfKirtaatopn. 
tideratioiit may be tagfetfed. ^ ,,^ «, , 

It is true in eeneral that, whaiater reeammends the Trmet tmueat 
JkMM reeomnumdt U a2fo abroad. While at the Mine time, the daim 
af the foreign field is greater than that at home, in the dagiee m 
which the number of sools abroad exceeds the number at home— and 
ia the degree in which the field at home has been cultiYated beyond 
the foreign field. At home there are 18,000,000 of people— abroad 
thereuare 600,000,000; yet we have at home, perhaps, one hundred 
ministers of Christ where there u one abroad— and thousands of 
BiUes and Tracts where there is one abroad. 

My next remark is, that yottr Society u fitted in apectdiar way to con- 
nect the power of the prest with the eowBertUm of the world. MiUon 
says, " as well almost kill a man, as kUl a good book— he who destroys 
a good book, kilU reason itself— a kind of homicide may be thus com- 
mitted—sometimes a martyrdom— and if it extend to the whole im- 
pression, a kind of massacre." to invert the application— he who 
makes a good book, makes in a sort^ a good man ; and such is the 
goipel spirit as well as intellectual excellence of your Tracts— such 
is the cheapness and profusion with which you throw them off from 
the press, that they offer a most extraordinary facility for widely and 
rapidly spreading Christianity through every reading community on 
earth. This fact acquires an interest altogether inexpressible, from 
the present state of things at home and abroad. While the poor 
heathen are beginning to call for instruction, and the church of 
Christ is awaking in some degree to regard the cry, we have scarcely 
one man wnere one Uumtand are required; and the means of leiufing 
Missionaries are-scarcer than the men; and year after year most 
pass, and innumerable millions die, before the adequate number of 
Missionaries and Bibles can be sent. In this awfal interval, the aid 
you bring is the most seasonable and auspicious. Tour Tracts pA>* 
fusely scattered over the heathen world, will be as the dew to the 
parched earth while the latter rain delays; or the manna which 
nourished Israel in the desert until the promised land was reached. 
Tou seem, under Qod, to command not merely the beit but the only 
provision adapted to the present crisis. Tou are called to press 
forward, as the light-fi>rces of the King of Kings. The heavy artil* 
lerjr will soon thunder in your rear— and secuve the conquest on 
which you have entered. 

Another importmt eharaeterittie ofjfow Society, which eminently JUt 
you for thit toork, it the harmoniout union ofEvangelieal Chrittiam in 
the Tract came. Tour operations are a continued demonstration of 
the moral power and moral beauty of Christian union. The influence 
of the people of Grod becomes resistless and divine, when without the 
compromise of principle, or the affectation of a regard that is not M% 
they combine their prayers and labors in the Savior's cause. Eveiy 
such hearty and well-principled association silences the cavils of 
men; it convinces their Judgments— it extorts the reluctant tribute 
of their praise ; it gives great glory to God and exceedingly augments 
the power of doing good. Especially is this true in regard to hesthen 
lands, in which, if it were possible, the spirit of Christian secU ought 
not to be propagated— or if this must be done, as it seems inevitable 



t891.] BRBCKlXrmiDeB^f 'ABR188* 01 

toMNiM extend we maj at least apply inch correcttTet af your laetH 
tttCioa affords. 

I well remember Sir the ioterestiog^ day when the American Tract 
Society was formed* I taw on that aocpiciouB morning the lamented 
Sammerfield, who was himself a lovely specimen of the spirit of which 
I speak, and who, ss he moved through our churches with the unction 
of holy love upon him, more closely bound our hearts together. 

When he arose, which he did with great difficulty, it was to plead 
this cause ; to press its claims ; to predict its triumphs ; to set his last 
keal to the value and the power of Christian union. I fireely own that 
I had fears of the failure of this effort and distrust, not of the ejicel- 
lence, but of the practicability of the great principle. These fears 
and daubts have been rebuked from my hearty not merely by his lovc' 
ly eloquence, but by the unanswerable argument of successful ezperi-. 
ment. Tes, sir, the irresistible argument of successful eiperiment ! 

And now excellent and evangelical as are your Tracts^*no roan can 
tell by their perusal whence tliey tame, except from the mint of the 

Sspel. Whether the word be wielded by the Episcopalian or Bap- 
t, the Presbyterian or Congregationafist, the blow struck upon the 
heart is still the same ; and this ** is the hammer that breaks the rock 
in pieces." In your efforts among the Heathen, you will not only 
iiave more enlarged means of doing good by having unUed ymir re- 
fonrees , but the means will be made more ejfeelual by having united your 
hearts. You can say to them as you scatter all abroad these swift and 
deaihlesM messengers of mercy— '* In some things we differ— but in 
this we agree, tt> love one another— to love you, and to send to you 
the news of the Great Salvation." 

In Jine, rir, there can be no doubt of your tueeets tn carrying ihit 
reioltt/ton into effeet. A man must almost court unbelief, who can 
doubt that you will be susuined in this attempt by the country, by the 
church, and above all, by the Great Head of the church. 

We have been too slow to attempt great things for our Redeemer. 
His whole plan contemplates enlarged success. He has, if we may 
speak so, to Umit the eager outgoings of his infinite power and love 
when we attempt fmatt things in his name. Of late especially has He 
given us the most cheering proof that He is waiting to go with us to 
the verge of the earth ; and to sustain every enterprise undertaken 
in his fear and strength. He' has made the country willing, and the 
church willing to sustain every noble effort— and uniformly those 
plans are most approved, and b«t prospered which are most benevo- 
lent, most difficult, and most sublime. 

Look at the bold and believing Bissel resolving in God*s strength, 
though, likefilisha at Dothan, having but one with him, to supply the 
thousands of destitute families in his populous county with the word 
of God. 

The spirit of his resolve was communicated like electricity to every 
part of New- York ; to Princeton, and every part of New-Jersey ; tq 
Marylandt to New-England, to Virginia, and in truth to the whole na- 
tion : and now almost every destitute family among the millions of our 
country is supplied, through the great and united efforts of our Na- 
tional and other Bible Societies, with the word of Ufe. 



8i SEVENTUNTH AKKITEftSART OF THE [^V^Ti 

So U if with the Sanday School eatcrpriM ; and to with yoar own 
extended efforts in every part of oar land. Even while I speak our 
national hittitutions are reaching the limits of oar own territer j in 
every direction, and must soon seek out-lets for their kindliog aetlli 
and find more enlarged fields of action on heathen shores* 

Indeed, sir, if it shoold not seem in had keeping with the resoUition 
I olferi and disturb the mucy of my address, I should ssy, you ought 
not to restrict yomr ^orts to American MUrionariet\ Your field is the 
family of man— ^y our limit is the circle of the earth. You have no 
rirht to narrow it. But i see in this movement for missions, the are 
sftht dreU ; and while you are filling up the perfect sphere, it shall 
stand fi>rth as the bow of the covefumt between you and God. 

You will, I am sure, not stop here; but go- on from strength to 
sl^engtht and from conquest to conquest, in the great work, uatil you 
shall fake in everj/ JIHssionary station upon earth. You cannot fail! 
God will stand by you and liold up your goings. If you most fail, it 
will be noble to fail in such an enterprise. Go on from land to land 
and from mountain to mountain ; and when, in the greatness of the 
way, you shall climb to the last weary height and sink, let admiring 
nations there build your tomb, and be this the inscription: '^bxre 

FKLL TBI AMKRICAir TRACT SOCIETY IN ATTEMPTUTG TO OABRT THE 
GOSPEL TO EVERT CREATURE.*' 



SEVENTBESTH ANfriVRRSART OF THE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, BOSTON. 

This Society met in Park-street Church, on Wednesday evening, 
May 25th. Hon. William Reed, President, in the chair. The meet- 
ing was opened with prayer by Rev. Dr. Church of Pelham, N. H. 
The Report was read by Rev. Mr. Follett, the Secretary. 

On motion of Rev. Dr. Edwards, seconded by Rev. Mr. Cleaveland 
of Salem, 

Rdsolved, That the Report, of which an abstract has now been 
read, be accepted and printed under the direction of the Executive 
Committee. 

On motion of Rev. Mr. Waterbury, of Portsmouth, seconded by 
Rev. Dr. Codman, 

Reaotved, That in view of the success with which Crod has blessed 
the Tract cause, during the past year, the friends of Christ acknow- 
ledge their dependence on him, and press forward in tbe work with a 
spirit becoming the enterprise. 

On motion of Rev. Mr. Blatchford, of Bridgeport, Conn, seconded by . 
Rev. Dr. Cornelius, 

Ruotved, That this Meeting regard the systematic Monthly Distri« 
bation of Tracts as eminently calculated to. promote revivaJs of re- 
ligion. 

Addresses were made by Messrs. Waterbury, Blatchford, and Cor- 
nelius, embracing an array of arguments and facts, which mint have 
convinced every person present of the great snccese which has at- 
tended the monthly distribution of Tracts. 

The contribution amounted to ^ 162, and a grid watch key; a 
larger collection than the Society has ever taken on any previons an- 
niversary. 



18dl.] AMERICAN TRACT 80CISTT, BOSTON. 95 

AMraet of the Afumal Meport. 

The leading object of the Comndittee, during the jemr, hu been to 
carry into execution the system of monthly diMriitUion. For thig 
purpose nearly all the auxiliaries have been visiied or addressed by 
letter. lAanv of them hare seconded the efforts of the Committee, to 
aid the destitute, and about 300 haye sustained the monthly dis- 
tribution. 

Am&ufU Cirmlated.'^Thtfe have been told at the Paf m. 

General Depository 9,388,720 

Distributed gratuitously 662,800 

Besides the donatiops in Tracts, the committee have made several 
donations in money — ^to St. Petersburg Tract Society to prihit aild 
circulate Tracts in Russia, $100— to the Paris Tract Society f600— 
to the Am. Tract Society, N. York, $644. 

The whole amount of donations in Tracts and money is $1619 20. 
' StaU of the J^ndt^-^The Committee have never before lieen under 
the necessity of reporting the Society's Treasury overdrawn. Al- 
though the receipts for Tracts, and as donations, have been more than 
daring the preceding year, still the call for Tracts, and the demand 
tor aid in donations, have induced the Committee to make appropria- 
tions tiH they are under considerable responsibility to the Treasurer. 
Receipts of the year have been $9,888,74. The expenses of the year 
have been $10,868 37— a balance of $1,014 63 is due the Treasurer. 

The interest which has been taken in the Society is, in a great 
measure, owing to the periodical distribution. The extent of this 
eystem, in our country, is now very great. Its success has more than 
equaJled the expectations of its warmest friends. Nearly all the Urge 
towns in New-England have engaged in the work since the last an- 
niversaiy of the Society. The good effects of it are obvious. ' 

In this city, its utility is very apparent. One hundred and sixty 
professing Christians have visited between seven and eight thooiand 
fiuailies every month for the last seven months. They have seen the 
fin^t of their labor, and^xperienoed rich blessings in their own souls. 

Chxl has set his seal to the work. The Holy Spirit has accompa^ 
nied the Tracts with his saving energy. 

B2e«stng on a famibf m jtejfon. 

"The Bible above all price," arrested the attention of a thought- 
less young man, and led him to peruse the Scriptures. He there saw 
his lost condition, as an impenitent sinner, and the method of pardon 
and justification, through a crucified Redeemer. He found no peace, 
till, as he hopes, he submitted to Chrut. He then felt and manifested 
deep solicitude for the spiritual welfare of his parents and other mem- 
bers of the family, requesting them to attend public worship where 
they might hear Evangelical instruction. This they did. A few 
weeks since, the mother di^d,' giving evidence of a change of heart, 
suid her dying request was, that her family might hear, and embrace, 
the pure doctrines of the Gospel. Two of her children have since 
attended an inquiry meeting. The young man now maintains 
family worship, where, till the Tract Distributor found her way to 
their dwelling, no altar h«d been erected, on which the morning and 
evening sacrifiee was offered to God. 



94 raBrHSiLYAzriA bbancb. 

The Committee believe thif work to be intfanalely eonnected with 
the spiritual prosperitj of the church, and the progress of active 
benevolence. The manner in which it is generally commenced shows 
this to be its tendency. It commences with prayer, and with ques- 
tions like the following. Is this work practicable — ^is it expedient— ^ 
what win be its tendency — ^will it promote the cause of the Savior — 
ought I to engage in it and strive to save immortal souls ? The result 
is, that self-denial is practised, moral courage is roused, and the work 
is. undertaken and proves successful^ and God adds his biessing. 



FOU&TH ANNIVEESARY OF THE PENNSYLVANIA BHANCH OF TBE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 

The fourth anniversary of the Pennsylvania Branch of the Ameri* 
<saa Tract Society, was celebrated in the Presbytertan Church, corner 
of Third and Arch streets, May 31, at 8 o'elock, P. M. 

The President of the Society, Thomas Latimer, not being presenti 
the Vice President, Rev. George Boyd, took the chair. 

The meeting was opened with prayer, by the Rev. G. R. Livings 
8ton» D. D. 

Addresses were delivered by the Rev. Dr. Cathcavt of Terk^ Pa. » 
Rev. Joseph Sanford of Philadelphia ; Rev. Robert McGartee and 
William A. Hallock of New-Tork, and Rev. O. Eastman. 

The audience was unusually attentive ^ and one universal iieeling 
appeared to pervade the meeting in favor of increased eff»rts, to es- 
tend tbe ioiloeace of the Tract cause, and particularly of this Branch. 

MtirmEt of the Fawrih Ammai Ikpart, 

Vmt... 
Since last report there have been received 8,174,84a 

Whole number of pages circulated 6,565,912 

Total received since opening the Depository 35485,04^ 

Total circulated since its formation 22,d09,7 12. 

State of the Pundt, 

During the year ending this day there have been received 
into the Treasury, for tracts sold, including donations 
from Auxiliaries, Life Members, and Directors, ^5,345 70 

Special appeal to city churches, 3,202 78 

Amounting to ^ $8,548 48 

During the same period, there has been paid to the parent 

Society, $6,113 88 

For printing Reports, Magazine, Almnnnc, &c. 389 3*^ 

For services of General Agent, and other expenses of the 
Depository, including rent, fuel, &&c.— to travelling and 
other agents, S2,045 28 

Amounting to $8^ id 18 



RECElPTSt 

INTO THE TRSABURT OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETT 

Dmrimg the rnrnntk tmdmg^ Jmu 15) 1631. 

FROM AUXII.URT TRACT SOCIETIES. 
VERMONT^Benaoo,ManlnnR.Me«dMn,See. . 
Rutland, A. L. Brown, QepMituy, ...... 

St. AlbttUiFeBi. Rev. Worthington Smith, Af. .... 

MASS.— Boston AmericaB Tract Society, John Tappon, Eaq. Tr. 

Do. do. ETanmUcal, Nathaniel R. Cobb, ^. 
Pittdkdd,SwnuelA.Daiiforth,i^. 

Do. Fem. Mrs. H. P. Tu>pan, noa. 

Stockbri^MbaasFair^iiUUTr 

CONN.— Brooklyn, (Windham Co. Anz.) Edwin Nowbvry, Ag. 

Darien,CharleaE. Whitney, Tr 

Elbworth,Fem. Mrs. Mary E.tiridley, Free. .... 

Green's Fanu, Edward Hyde, Ag 

Guilibrd, Henry E. Hodges, Af 

BfiddletowB, L^e C. Lyman, Sec 

New-London, Robert Coit,Tr 

North Woodbury, Fern., Jan^ Bacon, Sec 

Peltipattg, in Saybroolc, Clark-Nott, Tr 

Sharon, D. Gould, Tr. . . 

West Greenwich, S.S.Aui.,W.B. Sherwood, See. . 
Woodbury, Fern. AugnaU L. Drakeley, Ag. .... 

N.TORK.—AahTUle, Reuben B. Johnson, Sec 

Athens, Greene Co. Fern. Mrs. John Read, Tr. 

Attica, Geneasee Co., Abel Wilder, Tr 

Bainhridge, Fern., Mrs. Pynihin Muttger, See. 

Bath, Janes G.Higgitts,Tr 

Bedford, Fern., Susan N. Nichols, Tr 

Berea, in Montromery, Fern., Miss Maria Houston, Tr. 

Berkshire and Newark, Elijah Belcher, Tr 

Bridgehampton. L. I., N. Y., Rev. Amzi Francis, Pres. 
Ganandaigua, Fern., Mrs. Eliza M. HubbellfTr. 

Carmel,RedMUlB,Fem.J.Badeau,Sec 

Champlain, P. Moore, Sec 

Clore, in Rochester, Ulster Co., Rev. B. B. Westfall, Pres. . 
Colchester, Del. co.. Fern., Mrs. Eliza Downs, Sec. . 

Coxsackie, A. Tan Dyck, Ag 

Dunkirk, Thmnas Farnfaam, Sec 
EastGranville,Fem. Miss Lucy Savage, Tr. , 
Greenville, Greene eo., Fem., Miss Hannah Hicock, Sec. 

HarlflBm,Fem., Miss Letitia Doughty, Tr. 

Harpersville, Broome 00., Azor Smith, Sec 

Islfp and Huntington South, Henry Brewster, Sec. 

Keeseville, Fem., Ermima Prindle, Sec 

Lansingburch, E. R. Parmelee, Sec 

Lincklaen, Chenango county, 

New- York City Tract Society, by Fem. Aux., Mrs. J. R. Hard, Tr. 

Penn Yan, Fem., Mrs. Martha Gould, Sec 

Pwry Centre, T. Howard, Tr < 

Plattaburgh, William Weed, Tr 

Fort Bay, Wajme county,, Elisha Benjamin, Sec. 
Portland, Chautauque county, Timothy Judson, Sec. . 

Poundridge, Fem., Hannah L.Keeler, Sec 

Prattsbnrrh, Erastus Skinner, Sec 

Shelter Island, Jonathan Huottinff, 

Southampton, L. I., Rev. P. H. Sfiaw, Pres. .... 

8outhold,WimamFnner,Sec 

Tompkinsville, StaL Isl., Fem., Mrs. Maria M. Root, Sec. . 
Troy, Charles Lyman, IV. 

Utica, Edward Vernon, Sec 

West Hampton, L. r., Jaber Foster, Tr 

NEW-JERSEY.— Blbomfield, Juv., Robert R. KeDogg, Sec 

Mmiafield, Fem., Hetty H.Sherred,Tr. 

Paterson, Henry Von Houten, Tr 

Prineelon, Fem. Miss F.W.MorfordfTr. . . . .' 
BomerviUe, Fem., Mrs. Sophia Talmage,Tr. . . » . 

Sparta, Sussex county, Fem., Mi« Beach, Tr 

WaUpflek,Dr.S.Rofeiikra]u,Ag. 



iForTr. 


Dm. 


15 00 




11 17 




37 00 




90 00 




16 87 




SOO 




950 




300 




15 00 




liW 


600 


800 


750 


45 




2 40 




40 00 




10 00 


' 


10 00 


19 00 


3S 




400 




00 


30 


7 75 






1 50 


600 


SOO 


13 00 




838 




10 00 




800 




11 81 


394 


188 




S83 




90 75 


10 00 


560 




19 00 




990 




600 


900 


658 




346 




600 


200 


400 




300 




4 48 


100 


1 01 




5 19 


lOQ 


99 00 




800 




160 45 




444 




6 00 




15 00 




6 33 


9 10 


906 




750 




18 00 




940 




7 10 




3 74 




3<X) 




95 00 




95 00 




030 




160 


t 


16 50 


5 50 


14 00 




40 




800 




495 




300 





9« 



« H£CE1PT8. 



FROM AfJXn.URT TRACT SOCIETIES. 

Weitfeld,Feiik,]ltaBM. F.Clark, Sec 

FENNw-^Dundafi; Dr. Willittn TerbeU, Tr. 
MontroM, (Suaquehuiaa Co. Aiuu,) Jerre Lyons, Sec. 
FUladalphia Branch, Rev. Joel T. Benedict, Gen. Af. 

FittrtMirfli, Rev. Robert Patterson, Ag 

MARYLAND.— Baltimore Branch, Carter A. Hall, Esq. Tr. 
8. CAR.^-^liarleston Branch, Rer. Jot/Mh Brown, Sec. . 
GEORGIA^— Savannah, Anz. Dep., Dr. Edward Coppee, Af . 
ALABAMA.— Oreensharottgh, John Hillhouse, Sec. 

Hontsrilie, Samuel Cidtart, Aff. 

OHIO«-^incinaati, Henry B.Fank,Tr. . . . . 



Daytim, Dr. Jk>l» Haines, Sec. 

Granville, Rev. Jacob Little, Free. 

Hadson, llortage county^ Prof. EUmr Wrif ht, Ag. 

Mount Vernon, L. Brooks, Esq. 

itearr and Swan, Hockinf county, 

MICH. TCR.^Ann Arbour, Fern., E. H. Flatt, Tr. 

Detroit, E. P. Hastings, Ag. 

Dexter, Fern., Mrs. Elisabeth P. Clark, Tr. 



Monroe, S. P. Warriner, Ar 

SOCIETmS NOT AUXILIARY. 
N. YORK«— Canajoharrie, Fem. Ben. Soc, Mrs. Wardsworth, Tr. 

Dnrden, • . . . . 

Windham, Greene county. Mrs. E. B. Strong, Tr. 
N. JER^-Paterson, in Ref. Dutch Ch. Ri^ Doremus, Tr. . 
VIR.— Briery, Prince Edward countj, H. P. Goodrich, Ag. 
Tracts sold at the Depository to Individuals, .... 



7 10 

900 

K>10 

500 00 

113 58 

150 00 

910 00 

50 00 

40 00 

17 00 

9045 

10 00 

50 

100 00 

700 

95 00 

400 

14 00 

694 
300 
900 
987 

d36 47 



400 
900 



Dineior for L j^. 

CONN.— Hamden, Mount Canuel 
Society, Rev. Stephen Hubbell, 
by Miss Abigail Kshop, , ; fSO 00 

Members for Life, 

CONNw— Hartford, Mrs. Horatio 

N. Brinsmsde, 20 00 

N. YORK.— New Baltimore, Mrs. 

Elisabeth Van Slyck, ... 90 00] 
New-York City, Rev. George Du- 

boii, by Young Ladies of lus 

Church and Congregation, . . 90 00 
Rushville, Rev. Joseph Bracket, 

by Ladies, Qn f^ll oftao,) 
South Salem, Mn. Hancey Roek- 

weD, 90 00 

PENNw— Leacock Congregation, 

Lancaster county. Rev. Joseph 

Barr,byaFriend, 90 00 

OHIO.p>Lancaster, Fairfleld co., 

Rev.J.Wricht,byLadles, . 90 00 
MarCinsbuif , Rev. Henry Harvey, 

by J. D. Johnston, Esq. ... 90 00 
Mount Vernon, Ijm»z co.. Rev. 

James Scott, $ 10, by Ladies of 
Ch. and $10, by Thomas 



Fishkin, Fanny M. Gary, . . 

New- York city, James Davidson 
$ 9, J. D. Kirck $ 9, Mrs. Peck 
$9,LewisThibott99, . . . 

Other Donationt. 



90 



ilimtMii Direetor. 

N. TORK^New-York city. Dr. 
J.R.B.Rodger8, ...... 

Annual Mewien. 
MASS.— Cununington, Alttis Pain- 



OONN.^Manchester, Frederick 
IVoodbridge, ••*•..» 

M. YORK.-%rooklyn, L. t. Join 
fliephi e net Jvn. • ». » » i i 



1 A. Tithe, for Tracts for 

Valley of the Mississippi, . . 
CONN.— Ridgebury, Dea. Daniel 

Benedict, 

West-Chester, Church and Cong. 

Woodbury, Ladies, 

N. YORK.— Albany, Second Pres- 

byterim Congregation, . . . 
> S. Hoyt, 



on Auburn, Rev. Otto 
*^ew-York citjv Edward B. Hunt- 
ington $9, Harlan Page, for 
premium Tract 1 50, Mrs. Jer- 
rett 19, Legh Richmond, in 
Aill for perpetuating **The 
Young Cottager,** 1 40, . . . 
Portland, Dea. Eiyah Fay, . . . 

RushviBe, Ladies, 

N. JER.— Newark, " W. W." 
by hands of Mr. J. Sajrre, . , 
VIR.— Staunton. MiJ. Samuel Bell, 
OHIO.— Frederick, Knox county, 
1^ Rev. John M^Kinney, . . . . 
^ Martinsburg, Thomas Marcos, Esq. 



409 

900 

800 

500 

1 00 

10 00 

600 

50 00 
900 



94 00 

50 

1 18 

50 00 
50a 

1 00 
15 00 



Tbs abote list contains donatkm— 
5 OMFor Valley of the Mississippi, . 5 9fk 

For premium Tract, 50 OO' 

In full for perpetuating " The 

Young Cottager,** 40 OO 

9 001 

Whole amount of dnmtioin, . #548 99 
1 00 Received for Thwts sold, . . ^67131 



90o| 



ToH •3»»0 9T 



THE AMERICAN 

Oh. TI. AUaiTST, 1831. NO. 



See Trul No. SH, ' Tba MduMb HUh-." 
L.ABT HOUKB or 

JEREMIAH EVABTS, Esq.. 



It annot b« unacccplable to Ihe readcn of ibc Americui Tract 
Misiiin* 'h>t we ihauld <icciip7 ■ brief ipacs In recounling Ihe di*. 
pl*>>af diiiiic grace In llielaM boun of an eminent Mrrant of Chrii), 
who had beea longaa able and railbful officer of one oreurniMt im- 
porUnI BencTolent Iniliuilioill. 

Ha. EriRTi had been linking tome time under (he acciimDliting 
labonorhii reaponiilile lUIinn, and near the doieortfaelMt winter 
had morted to one of iha Weil India liland* for hu health. He 
reached Chart eil on. May 8, In a aUle of great debility, where he wu 
cordially weLcomed at the home of Ihe Re*. Doclor Palowt. On the 
ailth, at hit requeil, lereral miniateri met in hia chamber, ohm, 
though enceedingly weak and prottrate, h* addreiied them, nnd rg. 
Biirked that he knew hfi cue to be eiVenMly erbtcal — that he (bond 
it pleaunl to be in the handtoftlod, whs wontd dn all thinge well— 
that h« had no pahiliil MHeltade u to ihsTcaalyof hb liclUNai, bat 
lluMfht it hii dutjr to BM cvarjr neaai for hk ncortry. He Iban 
VoimTI. S WhoUg No. B». 



98 iwiSf noxM or (Ao^. 

Requested an jatere»t ia their tpedal and unittd prajen :-«-]«i. That 
if contHtacrt iHtk eini'n trill ha might recovar. 2d. That ha might 
have a twaet tame of pardoned sin, and an unahaken confidenca ia 
the SaritHT. 3d* That if God should apare his life he might be whoU^ 
and eniirelt/ the Lord's — consecrated to his iervice ; and 4ihljr. Thai 
if it should please God to remove hiip by thi^ sickness, he diight be 
Ale to glorify Hlm^oii a bed of languishing and pain, and thiit ifie 
precious cause mi|flit be promoted by his death. He then ezproMed 
a firm and abiding hope in the Lord Jesvsy amd seemed like a little 
child, sweetly redming on the arm of its foiihfnl protector. 

Saturday evnlng he remarked, " To-morrow b the rest of the Holy 
Sabbath. I may be in eternity beA»re It arrives. My mind is so 
weak, I cannot pursne a tram of thought, but I bleu God it is trai^ 
qniL Not my will, but thine O God, be done." To one who remarked , 
we hardly know how to spare you from the Missionary cause, he said, 
" i>on't mention it, don*t meation it — the Lord knows best.** AlUr 
taking a little gruel) he said, " I shall require but tittle more nourisb- 
metnt in this world. My wcnrk is almost done— Jesas relffn^-blessed 
be he— I wisii to lie as a penitent sinner at the ftx>t ot the crots," 
About nine o'clock be breathed out a short biit comprehensive prayelr 
m interrupted and broken petitions, making, at its dose, a full and 
'entire surrender of body and souf into the Kedeemer's hands, and 
said, '* O dear Savior, if this is the last night I have to pray on earth, 
let Jny unworthy prayer be exchanged for praise in thy kinsdoqii 
above; Amen, Amen." Speaking of his tkmily, he said, '*rpit|r 
them, but God is a faithful God, he wHl take care. of thenn-^e will 
take care of them, that Is enough." On bein^ asked if he had any 
particular message to send them, he said— ''Oive them my late, my 
dying love The Lord reigns." 

In the morning his appearance was greatly changed, and doriog 
the day he was gradually sinking, yet he conversed considerably. 
To a young professor of religion who was in attendance, he said, 
** You have prolbssed religion while young; so did I, I rejoice in it. 
All I have to say to you is, endeavor to aim at great attainments. 
The present age demands great things of Christians. Be not satis- 
fied with being half a Christian. Be entirely consecrated to the ser- 
vice of Christ. There are some thhigs I could do if Providence wills 
flMt I shottid get better, but I have no will of asy own» I can rqJMce 
that i am in the hands of the Lord. My mind is perfectly dear." 
To several young Christians he said) ** 1 feel a great interest in young 
tlhristians. I want to exhort you to help each other. Live near to 
God. Be bold in his service. It Is the only thing worth being bold 
in. Do not be afraid. The Lord be with yoa." 

Ataix ia the evening he was free from pain, called for hie TetHa' 
iBCBt, aelecte^ the 13th chapter of the 1st Corinthians, and requestfd 
a fHend to read it. AAer which he spent some time in silent medita- 
tiea. Rev. Dr. Leiand came in, and Mr. £. conversed wifb him wi^ 
great interest, and in the coarse of his remarks observed, " I havi^ 
giwwitn^fteff aU awa^r*" 

This is the Imsd of Beul^ said Dr. L., is it not ? <' T think it would 
be^" ke replied, "** if l4iaiKstreagth to contemplate it. I cannot oor' 
▼ofse aaach; but althongh I buX far my family^ t am willing to go. I \ 
k*T oeasaMltedtheiit aU toQod. He has been g«od to theca." He 



lati;] JERSUia ETAlTt, ICBq. 90 



«ilh «li^»vf IbfiliBfdf hit fonil^^lm, uMl mU^^' be fffoieed that 
iM bad coaM-#«t ko\A\y Mid daoidediy far the Lord/* 

l^liaoazt laoniin;, (lie lOtli, his fjpviptame of approachjag disso* 
latien t ao m^ c t to kiereate. Dr. Palwer aifcad him if h« fak that he 
ara« near home. " Yes, yes," was his reply. Is your mind ec^mfort- 
aMa 1 lie bovrad asseat. AAcr a iitiie while lie r^neated same 
aMttrie4Mieat«*theii eaMad the familj together, aaentfoniaf M. ill 
l^ mt i ca lar, who had heen sicic tt»e atght before { and asked of a female 
^nend how loag sh^ thonght be had to li*«. Sher repiied that te 
^aaetiaa coald aot he deterraiaed ; hot that death appeared la heneaf - 
He aatd in reply, " The wiH of the I.ord he daae. Attend aow «> 
aidrnt I say, as to «he words of a dying maa. To my dearly helored 
artfis, ta my hekwed daagiiter Mary, to my heioved soii4a-law CireM, 
t» B^ h«lo««d daughter Martha, *o itiy beloved son Jotm, to my hehatr- 
«d SOD WHIiam,to «iy beloved aitfter Waslih«m,tomy ttelared hrotKar 
ia Fengaaat, to my other hehnred aiiter in Vermont, to all my rala- 
<kMM and friends, grace, moroy and pcaee in the Lard Jeitis Christ, 
iff whom alone they aad I can hope to |>e saved; and L vi^ in tlie«e 
dying words, to recognise the great Redeemer arthe Savior from sin 
and hell ; able and willing to save ^11 that come onto God by him. — 
To Him I commend tn^ spirit, as to an all-iaffident Savoir. He is 
the great champioa and conqaeror of death and hett. And I reoog- 
nise the Great Spirit of God, as the renovator of God's elect, ami 
iierein. If I gather strength, I wish to recbgnite, and acknowledge 
the charch of God, dontaialng all who have truly dedicated them- 
selves to him, tn a new and everlasting covenant. And here permit 
ine, a ^or anworthy worm of the dust, to give thanks to manv of 
Che chddren of God from whom f Itave received confidence, kind- 
ness and favor, as a disciple of the Lord Jesus Christ. And one 
more doty — Brother P., if in any aaspeet I have offended the chil- 
dren of God, t ask their forgiveness. If I have grieved them by im 
patienee, or id any other way, I ask their forgiveness. And what 
ahall f say now T if yoa think of any thing, tell me. Have I spokeih 
intelligibly ?" Giving his hand to Mrs, Wright, of the Choctaw Mis- 
•ion, who was present, he said, ** Sister Harriet, have I spoken io- 
(elligthly 1 Iff have not { am ready to give any explanation." Be- 
ing then exhausted, t>e said, " If the Lord give me more strength 1 
will apeak again.** 

About two hoars after the Rev. Mr. Osbom asked« fs vonr mind 
In a happy state f With great emphasis, he replied, ^t^tc.** is 
Christ precious to you f " He is." He does not fail you ? ** He 
does not fail me.** lesus can make a dying bed, &c.— kIo yoa 
realise this to he true f " Tea, yes.*' Have yoa any thing to say to 
the missionaries— any message f He c^id, ^* O yes, O yes; but 1 am 
afraid f shall mniae distinctions-— don't let me make distinctions.** 
Jfo was the reply-*^aS missionaries. Does not the missiooary ca<i«B 
Jtppesr more precious and important than ererf After -a ^consider^t- 
t>le pause, and with much expression of countenance and emphasis 
of qsanaer, he said. ** Yon have called me back to the world." With 
M vievp of again fixing his t|ieught8 on Heaven, Mr. O. said, Yoq cap 
aay v for me to die is gain f ** "Tes, yes/* That sulyect suits you 
kiOUx^ 4oeB it ? <« O y^M^ y es^** ' 



IIM " EJ»»l«IOtJ« TRACT [Aug. 



About 9 o'elodK in the evening, ezpeetinf that hit titaie 
he requested to be laid in the potiiton guitable for that occasion, 
in about a quarter of tn hour he had a short return of violent pain, 
and when nearly exhausted, he said, '* dear, dear, dear"*^ frien€ 
laid.Jesusf— •" Yes, yes, dear Jesus.'* It was added— While on lik 
breast I lean my heail, and breathe my life out sweetly there, — wlien 
he burst forth with expressions of rapture which cannot be described 
*' Praise him, praise him, praise him in a way which you linow not 
of." It was said, you will soon see Jesos, as he is, and you will then 
know how to praise him. *' Wonderful, wonderful, wonderful glory. 
We cannot understand — we cannot comprehend — wonderful ^ory, I 
will praise him, I will praise him. Who. are in the room T*' Dr, and 
Mtrs. P. and a christian brother ** Call all in — call all— let a great 
many come — I wish to give% directions— wonderful — glory— ^sns 
reigns." All the members of the family were called, but before they 
could be assembled he sank down exhausted, and scarcely fpokie 
again. He continued to breathe free from any further parozjnni of 
pain until a quarter before 11 o*clock, when be fell asleep in Jesus. 



THIETT^ECOND ANNIVEESARY OF THE 
RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY, LONDON. 

The 32«i anniversary of this Society was held at the West end of 
London, May, 5, the Marqou of (yHOLHONDKLBV in the Chair, 
when the meeting was opened with prayer by Rev. T. S. Grimsraws. 

Oil the 13th May it was. also celehrated at the City of London 
Tavern, Samujel Hoars, Esq. presiding ; prayer by Rxv. Mr. 

HUOHSS. 

HOME OPEILATIONS. 

From the abstract of the Report Jt appeared that peace and har- 
mony had continued to reign in the counsels ofthe Society ; also that, 
during the year, they had printed S233 new publications, and it was 
gratifying to knoMr, that although they had issued so many new works, 
there sf ill continued an increasing demand for religious publications. 
Of their first series of TracU they had circulated 4,000,000. Of the 
narrative series 700,000. with great numbers of sermons for all ages, 
Slc &,c. The Society had also continued to publish the a'orkic of the 
Reformers, and last year had sent forth editions ofthe works of Arch- 
bishop Cranroer, Bishop Jewel, and the immortal Wicklifle. Also, 
the Gorapanion to the Bible, chiefly from the Commentaries of Henry 
and Scott, aod they had added to their catnfogue the works of Pri- 
mate Usher, and many other lights ofthe church. From all parts of 
.Irelnnd they had had applications, and had sent to that country 
179,000 Tracts of various descriptions, and twelve different Tracts 
printed in the Iri^h language and character. In London they had 
circulated 800.000 Tracts to SNbbath-breakers and others ; and the 
total issue of the year had been 1 1,0^,047 Tracts, being an increase 
of 500,000. The funds of the Foreign Department had not increas- 
ed, as the subscriptions amounted but to jS3,d00, while they had ex- 
pended je4,400. Their total income, however, has been £27,060 



14t. 2d. (ft^JtiO.) b^iof an iRerense of j6^,<K)0 beyond th^ preeed- 

FOREIGN QFERAT10NS. 

Tktie hare been very extemive^ the Sedeiy Imtiiig aided Ui mak- 
iog kn«wn, id no leM Ikan Sfe¥jL9vr DfF^ERfinr tA4foi7A«E«, the 
MotearabsMe -riclMi el Christ 

In Mexico ]Re much had the denMuiid raoieaaatl, that latft year €0«<X)0^ 
copies of childreos' and ether books had been sold there, and as a 
|>roof of their success £300 had been remitted froifi t4^t country foe 
<he Society's pablicatiens, Iti ■Russia the Cause «f God was reviving^ • 
•ad SO9,O0O Tracts had heeii distributed there. In Prossia and Ger^ 
waisy nany similar eoMaietiiss were in active operation^ awdafl their 
reports spoke favorably for that countiy. In Greece the dislci^wlioA 
was still contipaed, and ttie Societv had availed itself of the lare 
t>peain§^ in France, and the Committee had granted X40O for the 
printiag of Tracts in epfiositioii to Fopery and Ihfiddity ^ • ^ 

In India the Society has ^levan coooei^ionSy all coasbined with di^ 
lerent Missionary Institutions, and from aUo4rthem« great number 
«f Tracts have been issued. Many of the Brahmins now receive 
Tracts grateAiUy, aehools are molti^ed, and chvHftian books use^ 
te them. Many direct converstons have Mken place, in which the 
iirit iaspressions were made by means of Tracts, almost all' of which 
have been translated and printed through the Iai>on of Mltsionariei. 

In the Society's o|ieraHavi» in CfiinA special encouragement hat' 
hN»en. afforded, the way having at length been opened lor introducing 
Christianity in that benighted Country. 

FIRST APPEA|y TO THE BOCmtY FROM X I9ATIVE OF CHIN4. 

Leanga Fa, a native Chinese, thus appealaf to the Society tn a 
letter dated ** China, Dec. 10, 1899. Th« manner ef pvoelaimiiif 
ittie tfftif h efthe Gdspel in tlie eastern land, China^ is different from 
that ef the nations i» the west. In the tands of the westerii nations 
fhey have pabliebaiMhsgs end pitbHe assenibfies, where the people 
meet.. They have the weekly Sabbath, ttid settled mddes of insimc^ 
iliea. Rence, to these who know the language, the Gospel may be 
eommunicatad orally to those who wtH listen, in thie way instruct 
tloa is communicated earily ^ bat, in Chhsa, there are no ptfl^htild>' 
ingt in which to cMlect pnUie osseiMiei of the people ; there is no 
^pdtkljfSakbaik, nor regular customs Ibr the-inf^m^Moit ef the ptopk^ 
Wfa^i the month is enjoyed to pfeaebtlie GkMpel and instruct peo^ 
file, althettgh some will listen fbi' a short thne, there being no fixed 
filacer to preach and teach, there is a want of conthmons preacMn^ 
«iid becrhig. Thus, the truth enters men's hearts with difficulty, and 
Maves^theHr hearta nnmoveiU Therefore I, (a thnple person,) wfillk 
Dr. MorrisoM, have f hoaght of taking the most important parts ef 
Imly Set^i^ture, and explaining the prineiptee therein cnntained te 
familiar language, and making small beeks, t<» be pi*esented to fH» 
Morritotf for his revision and eerre«libfi. If they cenid be printed 
«nd given tn people In variosw placed, fhey could eontinusflly look 
ehemoeer, and more easily would the truA evfer nseMf* hearts than 
evhea ^oken by the m.o«th to the esr,** 

8* 



lOf ESUeiOUS TRACT {Aug* 

The ComiftiUee inytfuctea LeancmFa to pnnt 18/)00,copie« of 
nine Tracts which he bad preparer!. And Dr. Morrison, in Movent- 
ber last, communicated the cheering intelligence, that Leanga Fa 
Had then printed and circulated, in the interior of China, upward of 
7,000 Tracts on the most important subjects. In this woi k of faith 

he was also accompanied by Agonj, another Chinese convert. 

The Report enters intA a vant field of details of the Society's op^ra- 
tions for the spiritual benefit of foreign and pagan nations, in which, 

diough our limits forbid their minute specification, we do truly re- 
joice ; earnestly hoping that the day is not far distant when tha 

friends of Tracts in America shall, in the expansiveness of their views 

and efforts, more folly imitate the steal and energy of our traosatlai»> 

i4c Brethren. 



ABSTRACT OF ADDEESSES, 
AT THE LONDON SOCIICTT'S ANNIVBRSARY. 

The Hon. and Rav. B. W. No«l drew an. argument of special ed- 
cooragement from the signal Diviite blessing upon the Society in 
its extensive operations, at Jiome and abroad. He dwelt particularly 
on the interesting facts communicated from India, from China, and 
from France, which Infidelity had ravaged with it* pestilential inflit- 
eoee. He related the formation of a. Society in the vicinity of a market 
town in Shropshire, which was originated by a Gardener— was ana* 
naged by tTie poor laboring people of the plaee-^the farmer* wl«» 
resided around became members ; and now. although at the pericAl 
of Its formation so small and so humble, it had become a large 
Society and had 6,000 subscribers. Such a fact showed what might 
btf done by individual exertion.— He urged upon the writew i>f 
Tracts the importance of great simplicity in their style. They shoald 
never use a l9ng word, if a short one could be found equally clear and 
comprehensive. Short and piihy sentences were also to be preferred, 
whi<:hmttke an impression not easily erased from the memory.. Tbejr 
shoiald also »et forth the fulness of the. Savior )Bnd the all<mfficieiicy 
of the Gospel through the Divine Sfiirit. A Tract ought to possess 
ioformati9n for the man, coqched in la^ignage fit for the understand* 
ing of a child. Who could forget the Tracts of Leeh Richmond T 
foil of tlie Savior's love. He referred to the delightful harmon^ 
prevailing in the Society. These were times of great political aeita- 
tjon : party rage ran high and strong — families were divided — friends 
were estranged— some rallying point was needed where all might 
unite. Sueh a rallying point this Society presented. It was de- 
lightful — it was ^eavenly, to find a desire possessing the IflMirt to 
unite in doing gooil to our fallow men. He believed the good work 
of such Societies would avert the wrath of God and destroy tha 
power of the rreat enemy of mankind. 

The Rrv. Poctor Cox accorded with the sentiments just uttered. 
It was delightful to come into such an assembly, to hear such epi* 
oions, and feel their benign influence. He forgot that he was a Dis^ 
senter, and if he might be permitted so to say, the Rev, fientlemasi 



k 



ISM*]' SOCtKTV, LOHDOIC. 108 

•thai hail preceded him teamed to forget, alto thai he was a Church- 
man. The Diuenter and Churchman met on that platform, and 
thook handt : all diff«*rence between them Ceated in their desire to 
promote the g^reat work of Jehovah. It might be said» in such a 
state of things, that Heaven had come to earth, *' Behold the taber* 
nacleoftheLord r* 

Thk Rrv. Dr. STEiiTKOPrp adverted to his first visit to England, 
thirty years ngo, when the friends of Benevolent Institu^ons inl^on- 
don were a little band which assembled in a small room-— now tens of 
thousands, nay, even millions of the human race were deriving from 
them spiritual assistance. When he looked at the exertions of this So* 
ciety, and snw their publications circulating in France, Spain, Portu- 
gal, Italy, (vermany, Sweden, Denmark, Iceland, Greenland, and other 
nations, in their respective languages ; and compared those exertions 
with the limited means at the commencement, he could not but re- 
joice. In Saxony 268.000 Tracts had been circulated last year. One 
Minister in Germany, had, in the course of his life, distributed 80,000 
Tracts — and a Merchant in the same Country, during the space of 
fifty years, had put into circulation nearly 1,000,000. 

Mr. Pster Jones, a Chippewa Indian from Upper Canada, at- 
tired in the peculiar dress ot his nation, then addressed the Meet- 
ing : stating how poor, and needy, and ignorant his nation were, and 
how much had been done for them by Missionaries, portions of the 
Bible, Tracts, and Schools. There were now 15 schools in different 
parts of Upper Canada, attended by no less than 450 Indinn children, 
of whom 200 can read the word of God. The " Swearer^s Prnjfer/* 
presented by himself, had been blessed in the conversion of two pro- 
fane men to God. 

The Rev. £i>ward Crawly, of Nova Scotia, presented a cheer- 
ing view of the progress of the Gospel in America since the Pilgrim 
fathers first landed on the Rock at Plymouth. ' He despaired not, 
some time, of even a Mandarin being seen upon that platform, as 
an Indian had been thatjday. returning thanks to God for what the 
Society had done in behalf of his benighted Countrymen. 

The Rev. Eustace Caret, (from India) said, that, as God com- 
municated his truths 'to the Jewish people, not at once, but at inter- 
vals, so it pleased Him to effect His purpose in India. Time had 
been when a Missionary could ' scarcely distribute usefully thirty 
copies of the Holy Scriptures in India in as many months. Now 
no difficulty existed in getting the Indian to speak respecting the 
narratives and communications which were conveyed in Tracts, 
although it might he hard to get him to attend to a whole volume. 

TRACTS BLESaED TO A DEVOTeE IH CALCUTTA. 

He knew a Devotee at Calcttlta who had resolved to sacrifice hit 
tongue to his God. For four long years he had vowed never to 
speak. For more than half that period he spoke neither to his god 
or man. His lips wf re sealed. But at length a Christian Tract was 
placed in hit hands. He pr^dered over its contents, and hit vow 
was broken. His lips were unsealed, and "the dumb tpake." Aye, 
and he spoke well, too. He had listened to him for hours together. 
He would chant with enthusiatiic delight tha PsaJmt of David, and 



tM iAenmiu paomimmb t^Ufj* 



9tiff *' Wksttict. mmd fcygerif lMi«i I b«tt««t4 until my ejet were 
^tpmm^." Tbv man filed in ilie Ail) fmUAi of lli« l«rct JesiM. 

C^MV^nfon o/ a young Brahmm by a Tract, 

THe Brahmins,, or priests of India, are the qnly persons to whoiQ 
knowledge of religion or fcience is permitted. The common people 
are not allowed to read the ^AiM/er. To a young Brahmin, A mis* 
sioaary gave, in the Biehgalea tongue, the copy of a Tract. Tbr^r 
months after be returned and said to the Missionary, *' I have bad 
no rest in my foul since you gave me that little book." He made 
l^reat progress in his Scriptural studies, and communicated to many 
of hi# brethren some divine tryths. His Scriptural labors com* 
m«ficed ; but alas ! they were vpon terminated ; for one night h^ 
was attacked with the Cholera Morbm \ and before three Vdock iit 
the morning he way ft corpse. When in his mortal sickpess,.h9 
called one of our Christian brethren to him and ai>ked him t^ 
siiig. " What shall I sing T'* said fhe Missionary. The reply was, 
** S\n^ the song of Salvation through the death of Christ.^' Tb«t 
beautifal Hymn was then sung, and our dear brother in the Itord 
l^reathed bis last when liAtening to Ft. 

Thk Rev. T. WroDKOFFS, of the Cbujrch ^n8«ionary Society, re^ 
lated, that at a meeting of the Native Tract Society at Nagercoil, a 
converted Hindoo rose up and m^Bntioned the fbllowing mode of 
providing means for the Society, ad(H>ted in his own family : " la 
Che course of the year, my wife has taken daily a small portion o/ 
!tb« usual quantity of r<ce from oiv daily meal, and put il by for 
the Tract Society, which has produced one rupee and a half. So do 
you likewise.'' He then laid the money on the tab)e.-*-At>other 
member rose and said, '< If toe-do not this gaod work,, who else will ? 
Will the Mahomedaas, the Roman .Catholics, the Idolat^s, or the 
unbelievers ? they will not. Shall then, we Christians also, who have 
received so much knowledge through our Lord Jesus Christ, sit still 
and do nothing t By no means. Let us then not b<? slack in this good 
work, but do it diligently for the salvation of the people around us I*' 
Could not many jn this assembly to^ay> (inquired Mr. W-^,) imi- 
tate this practice of economy, and save something toward contri* 
liutingto the wants of this Society ? 

Ma. Jamvs MoNTao^BRY, of Shefield, illustrated in an interesting 
manner the value of Tracts, and the influence which such short and 
simple publications exert ujpon the commMoity, ^mpared with larger 
volumes. 



LETTISH WBL&VL THB PAKIS: T1IAC7 SOCIETY. 

We ha^e great ptensare in faying before our readers a commmlca^ 
tion, under dafe of May 14, lS8t, from. Miu HkNRV Lvttkrotk, 
Secretary of the Religious Tract Society of Paris, showUig the state 
^ TrMt oftraiimM amottg ^POO^OOO of PravweVttbia inte|«al«iig 
crisis of tbe'ivopaft condition. of t4ias eeuntry. 

AAer acknowledging the reception of a grant of Tracts m English. 
Ibr the supply of the Acmerlcffn and English population, a consfdrnr* 



1631.} PA&IS TKACT IMKSIKTT* 166 

ble portion of which are committed to actlTO friends of religion in the 
ports of Havre and Honfleur^ Mr. Lutteroth thus proceeds : 

We thanlc yoi» for the 8)>ecinienaof your recent publieatioos. We 
have already translated several of your Trficts into French, and we 
doubt not. that, among those nowfent, there are some appropriate to 
the religious wants X>( our country. Permit us also to offer you copies 
of a number of publications we have receptly printed, and please ac- 
cept them as a token of our christian affection. 

You ask for soine details respecting our present operations. They 
have been greiilly exten<|ed since our last revolution. We have dis- 
tributed this year more than 430,000 Tracts, which is about 200,C00 
.copies more than the preceding year, and tvhich increases our total 
distributions to nearly 1,700.000 Tracts. This amount i| small com- 
pared with what is done in America and in England; but it is immense, 
if you reflect on the tmallneu of our means and the difficulties we meet 
in a country where it is scarcely twelve years since operalion& of this 
kind began to engaee attention, and where every thing was to be, as 
it were, created. We had no Bibles, nor modern reli^ous ho6k$ of a 
decisive christian tendency, nor schools, nor even active and serious 
christians, who made the advancement of the Redeemer's kingdom 
their first object. 

At present the aspect of Protestant France is very much changed, 
and .although the mass of Catholic France are far from being made 
attentive to the truth, yet many manifest a desire to know some other 
doctrine more In harmony with the wants of souls. The impious 
eflbrts of the Saint^Simonians are not without usefulness in this seitse ; 
for they draw men- from that stMe «f religious insensibility into which 
they had fallen, and they excite that spirit of inquiry so necessary 
tft the progress oi tfie Gospel, which we hope will be engrafted in 
many, uponthe wild and fruitless tree which these newMversaries 
of Christianity offer themselves to plant. We have deemed ourselves 
called on, in these circttmstsnces, to print Tracts peculiarly adapted ' 
to the most learned classes, particularly those showing the proofs, ex- 
ternal and internal, of the authenticity of the Gospel. Suc^i is the cha- 
racter of oar* last publirations. Our Tracts not entering upon sub- 
jects of controversy among the true disciples of Christ, we distribute 
them among the |K>pulation generally. We are ev^n aided in our 
distributions by some Catholics. In general, however, our sealous 
and active auxiliaries are to be found among Protestants ; and we 
ouj^ht to say, with gratitude, that the facilities for the diffusion of 
Tracts increase daily. We continually find new helpers, and believe 
we shall soon have some in every, department of France, inhabited 
by lhirtjf4wo tnUUom of souls ! to whom, vers not our meam to 
limited^ if e should easily have an access, by the creation of Depots 
and sending them our publications. The generous gift that was made ' 
to us lately by the Tract Society at Boston, has already enabled us 
to give, in some d«»partments, more esiension to our labors ; and if 
our brethren (»f New York were to cunie to oi|g assistance, as they did 
some years ago, we might be able |o cultivate anotber spot of that 
kisnense field which we have under our eyes. Yon give us that hope. 
Attd wo shookl be bappy to see it raaiisad. 



106 TftAcv 09 pmATsm. [Aag*. 

AVXILURY QP WASHINGTON CITV. 

Eleventh Anniverfajr, March 21. Rkt. Dr. L^urue, Prcikieii^ 
in the chair. Renolutions were adoptied in favor of the Monthly Dis- 
tributioD in Washini^ton, and of the Sodety's eltbrts to tapplj five ad- 
jacent coimiies in Maryland with Tracts; and addresies were d%* 
Ihrered by Rev. H. B. D. Johns, Rev. J. N. Panforth, ami Ret. £. 
SmMi. Receipts during^ the year, $347 24, of ^hich f 131 60 were 
donations, and the rcmai^er fMr Tracts sold Circulated in th^ 
Monthly OHtribution in Tf^ashfngtpn 100,000 pag^es ; total salefe 
215,354 pages ;- waking a grand total of l,S29,92y pages circulated 
by the Society since its^rmation. Twenty-fon'r Societies have been 
formed in fonr counties of Maryland. The city of Washington was 
dWidiid into 64 Districts i fOODtsrribntors were employed; and 1,784 
ikmilies repotted as supplied. Mr. John Covlk, Jun., Secretary. 



AUXIUART AT WINCHBSTER, VOIGINU. 

Fourth Animal Report* prasamed April &il. There have bean issued 
during the ycAr, of Trwta 960,578 pages ; 90 Rise and Progress; 
70 Saint'* Rest ; 10 ChriHtiafi Reader ; 18 bound vofomes; 48 Sabbatlir 
•cho^I volumes ; 24 volumes duldrecM^ tracts;, l^KOOfhildreas* books $ 
7,141 hand-bill tracts; 297 broad sheets; 26 Sermons to Aged ; 197 
Memoirs of Newton, Leighton, and Swans; 860 cards '*te gentle- 
men" (on wearily); SOU Christian Almanacs |br 1931; 4 Diary for 
Itidl ; 2 bound vols. Tract MsgajEine. Of Ibe Tiacte, 63,678 >were 
sold to Anziliaries ; 99^70 to Wiochtster Tract Society ; and 7|,7t8 
io individuals. . 0608^ bav* been Mnuttcd la thmParent Society, of 
whieh $03 18 have bean donations. Present value of the depo- 
sitory |i358 70. 

About 600 families have been regularly sujM^lieil for devea 
aaoatbs, beside 60 or 70 shops, stoFSs, iic. An aged female, now a 
member of ihe Methodist Episcopal Church, ascribes her sa|vatio% 
under God, distinctly to *' that blessed Tract," (as she emphatically 
called it,) Q^eneh ttol /Ac SpM. Another individual was bi^ov^ht 
.by ik» some Tratt to attend immtdiaUly to the subject of religioo, 
Jind (ogive her heart to Christ. Mr. Dasiel Gold, Secfetecy. 

AUXILIARY OF PLORENCE, ALA. 
Second Anniversary, April 6. Resolutions were adopted in favor 
of the Monthly Distribution, and interesting addresses delivered. 
Receipts during the year $118 ^5, of which if 111 were subscriptions 
an^doikations. The Monthly distribution was commenced in Juno 
last, and the dtstrihutbrs have cheerfully, promptly, and successfully 
prosecuted their work ; iTO familes being raombly supplied. . 

AUXILURY OF MIDDLEBURY, VERMONT. 

Fourtli Anniversary, March S^. The Monthly Distribution ha# 
iMea faithfully prose^pted in Middlebury throughout the enfira 
year ; 300famUietf, on an average, having been supplied eadish Months 
The Boanl feels dmsfrained to prosecnto this work more extensivsif 
in their own vicinity, and also la afiard inareiisad aid to tbe Pareal 
Society. 



1831.] 



let 



MONTHLY DUllBUnON IN BOSTON. 

A Qitarterly Meeting of the SupeHntendiints «nd ]!>istri!)uton en- 
paged in lite Monthly distribution in Boston, was held on Wednes- 
day evenin^» June 29, The Beports |»recented were very etteouraf. 
'"C*.c.^^^*^*** addresses were made, and a deep interest in t*ie worh* 
eznibited. Il would seem that none who love the Lord Jesus Christ in 
siaeerity can longer donbt the inefuloefts and excellency of (his work. 

Our neat l^vmber will contara ioifte iwry Ubtenating facU which 
have occurred in the Monthly Trapi Disiributisn, pafticiiidriy in ffcw. 
York Ajt* 

■■ » ■ ■ * 

TAACT ON PRAYER->TIMS PaOLONOED. 

t*he'Comiii|tte« to whom were dubmilled Chci MtAttsefipt iVacts M Pruaer itv 
.of (he (»mioii that no one of them is of suffitie&t excellence to merit the premium 
of fifty dolUrs, which was offered. They view the subject u vers lawoitaat, and 
have determined to prolong the time till We>r#C ^ of Ifintimbertuxtf^ii the hope 
that Frayiaf »<>■• who have the ability, may be constvained and assisted to pre. 
pare a Tract on this subject which shall proTe a rich blessing to the Cbtfrch. 

" The exigencies of ihe times," says the gentleman who proposed the prcgnhim, 
* seem to require a comprehensive manuaFon the duty of Prayer, frtiich may1»e ac- 
cessible to all, 4nd adapted to the peculiar circumstaoi^et of this new era ot the 
world." 

'* The Traol should contain particular instructi<»i relative to Clo»et Prta/er. Fa^ 
milff ProMw, Sodal and Spendl Prayer ^ and PnhUt Prayer. The whole to be so 
exhibited that a plain man may easily comprehend the subject, and be led. bv the 
blessing of God, to feel its importance." 

The Coaunittee of award are Rev. Warren Fay, D. D. of Charlestown. Mass. : 
Rev. Justin Edwards, D. D. and Rev. Lucius Bolles, D. D. of Boston. 

The Manusoripts should each be accompanied by a sealed envelope, contoininjt 
the name of the writer,^ and may be addressed either to Mr. Aaron Russell. No 5 
Comhill, BafltM^or to WILLIAM A. HALLOCK, 1« Nassauwrt., N-ewYork. ' 



• " R£CSIPTS 

li^Tp THK TEISASUEY or TfiS AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETT 
Dirtv ^ <*•<»•<& trnMrng Ju^f 15, 1631. 



. FROM AUXILURY TRACT SOCIETIES. 
V^RMONT.--^rling ton, John WickWare, Sec. 

S»rmiraltR.P.Binrham,Tr. . ., . 
iddh)bui7,£lisha Brewster, Ag. 

Do. College^ J. tteacbam. Sec. ..... 

KASS^^^ringfiold, Henry Kirkham,Tr. . ^ •. 

ODNN.->Chest«r, Rev. WiJltam Gaae, Ag. 
Ctatlfcrd, Henry £. Hodges, Ag. . 
itartfcfdf Connecttcbt Branch, Charles HoaaMr» Sec. 
New-Haven, Fern., Mrs. Henrietta F. Whitney, Tr. . 
Norwalkj Alfred Mallaiy, • • . 

Winche8UrCeaire,Rev.Fr«derfekMai»h,Tr. . 
NEW:YORK,^Bro«»klyn, L. I., JoMipiiHdward,EM|.,Tr. 

ObaaeasvUle;jBlM Randan, Tr 

Chatham, Columbia county, WUlian A. Hiilchintoa,fiec. 
Olivtnck, CokunhiaoMaty, F«Bk» Mrs. Rkhard Shtyter, Sec 
OailiHIlfl Falla, Fa»« Jane Aaa Mer, Tr. 



\F9rTr.\ 
16 00 
4 49 
70 00 

14 09 



30 tW 
St 

sop 

I 14 



that. 

90 60 

60O 

7 75 

775 



108 



ftECElPTS. 



FHOM AUXIUARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 
Eut Hampton, li. Lf Rev. Joseph D. Copdiot, Ag. 
Galway andCharleton,LiUia8M*KliMlley,8ec. .... 
Goshen, Dr. J. S. Crane, Tr. . . . • ..• • 
Uarperafleid, Delaware county, Ebeneser PenBfleid, Tr. . 
Hndiom, Female, Mra. Root, Tr. . . 

Lexington, Greene county, Williani H. Bull, Tr. 
Newburgh, R.B, Williams, Tr. . . . 
New-Rochelle,F«ni., Mrs. Sophia Brewster, »BC, •. • • 
New-York City Tract Society, by«f em. 4^ai*y Mrs. J. R. Hurt, Tr. 
Oyster Pond%L. I., ReT.Phineha*Rooin8on,Ag. . 
Rochester, Monroe county, Levi A. Ward, Tr. .* 
Romulus, Williajn BTCarty, Jun., Ag. . . . 
Rye, Female, Ann H. BuekleJvSec. . . *„•-,* 
Tompktn^Tille, Staten-Island, Fem^ Mrs. liana M. Root, Sec. 

Troy, Charles Lyman, Tr 

Truston, Female, . . . • • • 

West Hampton, L. t, Jaher Foster, Tr. . .^ . • 
NEW-JEaWEY.--Bloomfield, Juvenile, James Crane, Tr. . 

Caldw^AC/ S.Crane, Sec. •„•«*„,.•»,'• 
Greenwich, Warren county, Mrs. Mary Robbius, Tr. 

Oxford, Femffle, Mrs. S.Sherrerd,Tr. • . • • 
Perth Amboy, Female, Mrs. Margaret Mattnce,Tr. 

Pomptoa,Gen.Charles Board, Sec. •„•„>• • 
PENNSYLVANIA.— Erie, Female, Emily Wight, . 
Pittsburgh, Rev. Robert Patterson, Ag. . . 
VIRGINIA.— Farm ville, John Rice, Tr. . . 

Richmond, Charles Holt, Jun.Tr 

Winchester, Daniel Gold, Tr. . • , • . • .' «• 
NORTH-CAROLINA.— Salem, WilUam Lewis Benrien, Sec. 
GEORGIA.— Savannah, George W.Coe,Tr. .... 
OHIO.-^Norwalk, Huron county, David Gibbs, Esq,, Sec. . . 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 
NEW-Y6RK.— Greensburgh. Female, Miss Polly Ward, 
Windham,.Greene cot|nty. Female, Miss Julia A. Ives, Pres. 
NEW-JERSEY.— Bloomsbury, Female Juvfenile, . . . 
Paterson, in 24 Reformed Dutch Church, C. C. Blauvelt, Tr.. 
Tracts sold at the Depository to individuals, .... 



\ForTr. 


950 


640 


31 84 


8 31 


6 00 


390 


1 51 


1 00 


97 68 


2 14 


79 56 


^20 


1 00 


1 80 


50 00 


6 do 


41 


1 60 


560 


15 09 


64 


2 51 


9 87 


10 00 


6 79 


62 50 


80 00 


31 88 


50 00 


170 00 


10^ 


10 00 


4 00 


1 62 


1 60 


261 •84 



JDOH, 

360 



1 60 
300 



I 



18 66 
560 



9 88 



Directors for Life. 

NEW-YORK.— New-York city, 
William Couch, Esq. . . . $200 00 

N. JERSEY.— Greenwich, War- 
ren county. Rev. WilUam B, 
Sloan, by Fern. A. T. S. (in foil 
of$50,) 

Member t for Life. 

CONN.— Bethlem, Rev. Paul 
Couch, by Mrs. Elisabeth HHl- 

house, »••••».••• 
Mrs. Mary Ann Williams, . 20 00| 
N. YORK.— HHTpersAeld, De1a<^ 

warecounty. Rev. Harper Boice, 

by Ladies, ....... 2000 

Ogden, Rev. Avelyn Sedwick, by 

Ladies of his Congregatioir, . 
Rhlnebeck, Ret. J. B. Harden- 

burgh, (in addition to $20,) by 

Female American Tract Soc, . 
VIRGINIA.— Charlotte county. 

Rev. Andrew Hart, .... 20 00 

Other DoT^ioHs. 
CONNECTICUT.— A Friend, 100 00| 



Litchfield, An aged Friend, for the 

Valley of the Mississippi, . . 5 00 
New-London, Miss Lucy M. Wood> 

bridgd, for foreign distribution, 10 00 
NEW-YORK.— East Bloomfield, 

Mrs. William Steel, .... 00 44 
INbw-Rochelle, A Friend, ... 00 50 
16 5(^New-York ci^, anonymous, for > 

Tracts for foreign countries, . 20,00 
"ChrisUanns, 1 OQ 

JA.Po«t, 20 00 
N. JERSEY.— New-Brunswick, 
A Frieud for Tracts lor foreign 



20 00 



countries, . *: 5 00 

NORTH-CAROLINA.— An un- 
known Friend, 1 00 



The above list ooniains donaflons— 
For Tracts for Valley of the Mta. 

sissippi, $5 00 

10 ool^^ TracU for foreign countriea, 35 00 



Whole amoilnt of donatioas, . $573 28 
Received for Tracts sold, . . 1,417 8$- 

Total, $1,991 13 



THE AMERICAN 



MONTHLY DISTRIBUTION 

IN NEW-VORK CITY. 
It canoot bat be graHty'mg ti> all Ibe friendi of the Tract c*D)e, (• 
know tbit the svstihitic MnsTHLT distribution, afier ■ Taithful 
eiperimeDt of nesrl; iao and a knlf ytart, ii tlill proteculed witli 
energy, add adegree oC tucceu demanding eipecial griiilude (a God, 
among the nearly 35,000 familiet o{ the cilj or New- York. The fol- 
lowing lactf were all recevllj/ repoTltd al a tntrntUymeeting or the 
Cit; Commlltee, to whom this deparlment of their aperaJioDa it re- 
ferred by ibe Hew-Toik Cily Tract Society. 

In the lit ffard, Iha Saparintendenl report! that a Temale ex 
prened her diwp (enie o( tha benefit ibe had received from retultnc 
Tncti, eipecially one on tht Sabbalh. " By reading that Tract,'' 
laid ihe, " Ibe Spirit of Goil conitaced me that 1 oa* a linser, and I 
trnd h liaibBcn Ihe meina of bringing me lo the SaTiar." An iolc- 
refting Eteport wa* recelTed fhim ■ Diitribiiler who wai himtelf a 
few monthi ago ■ pro^e twearer. A ftmale Diitributer fonnd two 

Vol.. VI. e Whom: No. 66. 



110 MORTHIiT 0I8TMBUTIO9 [Sept. 

Sisters who had been recently hopefnUj converted, one of wbom en- 
gaged to be a Tract Distributer. She adds, that on Sabbath morning 
she went to the house of a colored family, and read the Tract to six 
anxioos listeners. 

The 4th Ward, says the Superintendent, has nerer been more 
faithfully occupied than during the present month. Reports hare 
been received from all the distributers. The number who attended the 
Bistributers' prayer meeting was greater than on any previous occa- 
sion. Several diririet prayer meetings have been established, to which 
families in the neighborhood have been invited — a plan which, if ge- 
nerally adopted throughout the city, iMrould be productive of incalcu- 
lable good. One Distributer says, *' several persons in my district 
are under serious impressions.'* Another says, '' I have never met 
so much open opposition, nor felt so deeply that we need the assist- 
ance of s()me hightr power to make men jccl that they must live for 
ever with God in heaven, or in the quenchless fires of hell." Another 
says, *' One woman who, when I first became acquainted with her, 
was thoughtless, and paid little attention to Tracts, now reads them 
with seriousness, and is anxious about the salvation of hei^'soul. 1 
conversed a few moments with a young lady who bad returned from 
seriousness to a state of indifference, and left her deeply impressed 
with a sense of her condition as a sinner against God." Another says, 
*' we have established a district prayer meeting in a house where there 
ar^e 12 colored families. A lady recently from England said, * I was 
thinking of you to-day, that it was lime to see the Tract — we have 
long been engaged in the same good works in our native land.' To 
a Quaker, who at first refused to have Tracts left in his house, I gave 
the Tvact Putnam and the Wolf, saying that as it was on Temperance 
he might tie pleased to read it. He took it assuring me he would, 
and that it might also be read by his family. The Tract for this 
month was received by him and his wife very cheerfully. Another 
says, *' I offered a Tract to a man in a store, who spoke very lightly of 
it, and at length inquired how much pay I received for distributing 
Tracts ! I replied nothing ! But this he could not believe until I told 
him I did it from love to my fellow-beings. We conversed some time, 
and I left him reading my Tract, which was the Strange Thing.^* 

In the 5th Ward, a Distributer says, '* I have engaged 6 children ' 
for the Sabbath school. One colored family refused the Tracts, say- 
ing they could not read ; but 1 found the truth was they were very 
wicked, and I spent near half an hour talking with and warning them 
to flee from the wrath to come. I aOerward heard that the man was 
very sick, and called on him. He said he had thought a good deal of 
what I said to him ; and be thought that God had struck him. I prayed 
with him, And he asked me to come again and read to him." 

In the 7th Ward, a Distributer says, " since my last Report there 
has been a Sabbath school established, which now registers about 
70 scholars, and we have had two prayer meetings in my district, 
which are encouraging." 

In the 8th Ward a Distributer says, *^ The prayer meeting in my 
District was so well attended that we felt no hesitation in appointing 
another. One sick man is fast declining-; but his hopes appear to be 
brightening. Two old ladies, who seem just on the eve of their de- 



USl] IN THE CITT OF NEW-YORK. Ill 

paiture, appear ready and waitiqg to enter on the heavenly Canaan, 
They receive the Tracts with expressions of heartfelt gratitude.*' 

In the 9th Ward two Individuals were found who bad been mem- 
bers of churches in the country, and have now lived six years without 
transferring their connexion to any other. A Distributer, who kept a 
grocery store, aAer reading and distributing Putnam and the Woff^ 
came to the resolution of dispensing with his decanters and every 
thing of the kind. Another Distributer writes, ** Had an interesting 
interview with a woman who thinks she has submitted to God since 
I saw her last month." Another Distributer says, *' Our district 
prayer meeting was very pleasant; our number is not great, but we 
are all of one mind. A woman, now a member of the Baptist Church, 
thinks Tracts one of the means the Lord made use of in bringing her 
io see her need of a Savior." 

in the 10th Ward, a Distributer says, " I found, some time since, 
two young females rejoicing in the hope of pardoned sin. A Lady 
also, whom I fo«nd weeping for her sins, has engaged to attend an 
inquiry meeting with me next week." 

In the Uth Ward, a Distributer says, " A man living in my Dis- 
trict, who was once a preacher of the Gospel, but for several years 
has been addicted to strong drink, has, through the influence of the 
Tracts and visits made to him^ been induced to promise entire abttp- 
nemu, and to commence family prayer. A prayer meeting has been 
appointed at his own house.^' Another says, 'V There are many who 
appear to feel deeply that a change of heart is necessary," 

In the 13th Ward, a Distributer says, ** Of 68 children mentioned 
in my last report that did not attend Sabbath schools, 13 now attend, 
and one of them is hoping in Christ." Another says, ** I found but 
3 professors of religion in my district, which much astonished me, and 
convinced me of the necessity of prayer. I found 15 children who 
did not attend Sabbath scliool, several of whom have promised to go 
next Sabbath." Another lays, ** For more than two years I have 
not been deprived of the privilege of myself delivering the Tract 
monthly throughout my District.*' Another saySf ''I found one 
woman in the same state of mind as tvas the Smts Peasant when 
found bj the stranger. I pointed her to the same Savior, and left her 
reading the Tract with intense interest." Another sa^s, ** I found 
many willing to hear what I had to say upon the necessity of repen- 
tance; and some with much agitation and tears acknowledged them- 
selves to be sinners and out of the ark of safety." Another says, " I 
was informed of 4 individuals who have recently indulged a hope in 
Christ." 

In the 14th Ward, a Distributor says, <' I believe I have not &iled, 
when opportunity offered, of speaking pointedly on the sotject of re- 
ligion. I have found this month several persons anxious about the 
salvation of their souls, one of whom, when I first conversed with her, 
some months since, was thoughtless of eternity, but now appears 
ready to make a full surrender of herself to God." 



lis PROGRESS OF THE [Sept. 

PROGRESS OF THE MONTHLY DISTRIBUTION 

IN VAUIOVS FLACKS. 

BozrahtiUef Con. — The monthly distribution is in successful ope* 
ration, and promises mach good. In a season of unusual interest 
on the subject of religion here, I have found some instances in which 
the attention was first arrested^ and others in which it was deepened, 
by Tracts. 

Westjield, N,J. — About 260 families are supplied monthly, in 
some of which the family altar has been re<^ently erected, and the 
Sabbath school has been increased. One Distributer says, ** 1 think 
I feel more love for. souls since engaged in this work than ever 
before." 

Harmony, ChaiUauque county , N, Y, — ^This town, which is nearly 
16 miles by 8 in extent, is divided into 12 districts. One devoted Dis- 
tributer goes eleven miles out and occupies a whole day each month 
in supplying 30 families. He finds the work very encouraging. 

AshvUht Chautauque eountt/, N. F. — 192 families supplied. The 
hearts of the distributers have been made to rejoice, though this 
blessed cause is opposed by some. One woman, not pious, said, '^ she 
could not read Poor Sarah without laying it down a number of times 
to suppress her tears." 

Niagara counti/f N. F.—" The Tract cause is held in high esteem 
in this county ; the system of monthly distribution is undoubtedly do- 
ing immense good." 

HarpersviUe, N. F. — A small Auxiliary in the vicinity of this place 
says, *' About one half of our monthly Tracts are distributed in fa- 
milies which rarely, or never visit the House of God, and in many of 
which the voice of prayer perhaps was never heard." 

BdrrUburg, Pa.--'" The system of monthly distribution has been 
fouiid, by the experience of 18 months, to be decidedly preferable 
to the former methods of distribution. About SCO Tracts are here 
circulated monthly ;> and there is good reason to believe that, in se- 
veral instances, they have been made the direct instruments in the 
hand of God of awakening sinners to their danger, and leading them 
to the hope set before them in the Gospel." 

Pori Bayj N\ F.— " Tracts have been distributed to every family 
in town for 6 months. I think this one of the best means of gaining 
access to impenitent sinners. Many families scattered around us 
will never have the Gospel unless it is carried to them. We are now 
enjoying a precious revival season." 

Orleans county, N, F;— This county, embracing hot far from 3,000 
families, is supplied for IS^iponths by the nohieliberaUiy qf a single 
individual, so far as means shall not be raised in the county^ a large 
portion of which is very destitute. On May 1st, the distribution had 
been performed for five months. In Barre, in this county, the month- 
ly Tract, Heaven Lost, was t&ken up by a man to be read, because he 
had nothing else to do. Before he had proceeded many pages he was 
brought into deep distress for his sins. In another family a woman 
by the same Tract was stripped of a hope she had indulged for three 
years, and was brought as is now believed, by herself and others, to 
build upon the Rock of Ages. At a prayer meeting in the same town 



IZSl*] MOKTBLY DISTRIBUTION. lid 

V 

a man arose and asked forgiveness of Christians, and particularly of 
one individual, for the abuse lie had heaped upon them ; condnding 
bjs remarks by saying, " Tkt Tractt hone led nu to do tkU." 

Penfield, Mmroe cowniy, N, K^A clergyman says, *' The good 
effects of the monthly distribution in promoting the late revival of re-> 
ligion in this place, in which about 80 souls were hopefully converted, 
have been so apparent, that the pious regard it with great interest. 
Two dged men have been hopefully converted by Tracts; onb of them 
by To-i)0j/— the other by Heanen Lest, 

DayUm, Ohio.'^A. monthly distribater in this township says, ** The 
Tracts are doing good in my district. One man, who received a 
Tract and read a few lines, became angry and threw it down; but his 
conscience smote him — ^he took it up, and read it again, became much 
distressed in mind, ai^d found no peace until he trusts he was enabled 
to give himself to Christ. 

Central OAio.— An Agent of the American Tract Society, laboring 
here, says^ '* A few days ago, afcer preaching to a country congrega- 
tion, and explaining the plan of monthly distribution, I called for 10 
pious distributers that would devote at least half a day every month 
in tbis service. Ten ladies and 6 gentlemen immediately arose and 
agreed to supply 150 families, spread over a large extent of country. 
After preaching in another congregation, I asked who would procure 
the Tracts to supply the township for the first month. Mr. M— — 
said he would do it. Rev. Mr. 0-~ — then agreed to supply for the 2d 
month. I asked for the 3d month, when the same Mr. M— -~ said 
he would furnish Tracts for the 3d month ; and in this way means 
were provided in two minutes for 13 months. In a place 7 miles dis- 
tant, on making a similar proposal after preaching, the same Mr. 
M— — - agreed to supply 100 families for the first month and paid his 
money. I have found the system of monthly distribution to succeed 
admirably. It is now in successful operation in numerous places in 
this and the adjacent counties." 



IMPORTANT TESTIMONY TO THE EXCELLENCE OF THE MONTH . 

LY DISTRIBUTION. 

Mr. William Tonos, Agent for the American Tract Society in the 
South Weatem pmrt of Omo; having directed his efforts for eight 
months primarily to the monthly distribution, says, " I rejoice to in- 
form you of the prosperity of the Tract cause in m^ field. The plan 
of monthly distribution is regarded as roost happily adapted to the 
wants of this country. What brother Allen has said of the usefulness 
of this system, in UUnois, is equally true of the field where I am la^^ 
boring. Its utility- and adaptation to the state of the country, is ap- 
parently seen, and felt by all the intelligent and decided friends of 
Zion ; the people say, * it is just the plan we want here.' " 



VALUE OF TRACTS IN INDIA. 
At a time when an unusual interest is beginning to be felt in the 
work of f applying Pagan options with Tracts, the fi»Ilowing testimony 

9* 



}14 VALUE or T&fCTS IN 15DIA. [Sept. 

from one wl^o has been twelve yean a faithful mifsioBary in India, 
WiU no^ Im deemed unimportant. 

A letter from Rer. Miron ffinslow, American misgionary in Ceylon, 
under date of January 81, 1831, after mentioning the gracious rethal 
pf religion with which the mission was then visited, thus proceeds: 

'* I must say a word about the usefulness of Tracts at this time. 
There is so much ignorance an^ darkness of mmd, eren in those whp 
are partially instructed, among a people born and bred in heathenism, 
that the progress of truth, with every •aflvantage, is but slow. The 
whole of the Scriptures, or even large portions of them, if distributed, 
will not generally be read; Single Gospeb, and small portions of the 
Bible well selected, are found exceedingly useful. But after all, in 
connection with the preaehitig of the word, and ' teaching, it in the 
schools, and from " house to house,*' a very principal dependence for 
the dissemination of light and truth among a people like those around 
nifis on Rdigtous I^mIs, They can be extended ftir and wide; they 
can be adapted to the existing state of things ; they can be made very 
|>Iain, and pointed,* and powerful; they can travel where the mis- 
sionary can seldonk go, and preach night and day without being faint 
or weary ; and if one Is worn out in the service, another u easily sent 
to fin the place. They, in fact, perform a more important part, in 
the enlightening and converting of the people here, than of those in 
Christian ^ands, who have more reverence for the sacred volume, and 
tfiore opportunity aqd desire to hear the word of salvation from the 
mouths of its preachers. Tour Society, therefore, deserve and re- 
ceive our warmest thanks for their aid to our efforts in this depart- 
ment of our labors. 

'* Tracts are put into all our schools, and the children read then 
both in school and at their homes. As different Tracts come from the 
press the schoolmasters read them, and generally give somr account 
of their contents. Suitable Tracts are selected and put into the bands 
of children in our boarding and other schools to be committed to me- 
mory. The Tracts are also read in our meetings at different times, 
especially those held in our schools in the villages." 

Divine blessing on 'Draets in India. 

A Tract lately printed and designed as an earnest cali-to the un- 
converted to consider their state, was given to all the schoolmasters 
after one of our quarterly meetings with them, wiUi a request that 
each one would read it prayerfully, or at least attentively, two or 
three times for /bur succeedinjgp Sabbaths. This wps, I believe, gene- 
rally done ; and the effect was very salutary. 

A boy in a school at this station, who was anxious about the con- 
cerns of his soul, received a little Tvact called the ** SmiVs DesHfuc* 
iionf* and carrying it home to his mother and sisters, who ridiculed 
his seriousness, and forbade his attending meetings, and praying, 
read it to them with weeping ; and then said, " Will you, by opposing 
my becoming a Christian, expose my soul to this awful destruction r* 
The appeal was not withctut some effect ; and the lad continues among 
those who profess^* pray. 

One of your Tracts in English wa« given to Crood^, n lad &o» 



18S1.] itefiXTS FOR TBE WEST. llSi 

the seminafy, now emp|ojed at Manepy, which was the nwaDS of 
awakeaing him, aAer he had kmg reaisted other means of grace. He 
now appears in an encouraging state ; and we eren hope is trul/ con* 
Terted. 



abetter fnm Bugtmio Kineaidt ktUt^ addnwwd to Ike BepUtt General 7V«CC 
5«ctety, amd dotted near the moiah »/ the H^^Uf, NifveMtTt 1890. 

This. letter States that « warm discussion, andevtan a public debate, 
Respecting the daims ot M^lhi9mtdmMni^ h»d taken place in the neigh- 
borhood of Calcutta, which was occasioned by thtte Trocfo, showing 
the absordities of that delusion. He also nientipus the baptism of 
three natii^es at. Ckitpons, when a missionary announced to the as* 
aembly that he had Tracts for distribution. ** The crowd gathered 
around, each one anxious to. procure a Tract, though he had not one 
for every tea persons. JNewr did men famishing with hunger plead 
more earnestly for bread. The impression it le(l on my mind will 
acTer be erased. I wnh erery Christian in America could have wit- 
nessed the^cene; I am sure it wduld have awakened the sympathies 
of every Christian bosom. TradB cannot be ditptnaed with in this 
country if a missionary would be useful ; for there are multitudes to 
whom he cannot give religious instruction in any other way." 



TRACT CAUSE IN THE CUMBERLAND PR£8BYTERUN CHURCH. 

Mr. Moses H. Wilder, Agent of the American Tract Society, who 
was present at the Gkneral Assembly of the Cumberland Presbyterian 
Church, at Princeton, Kentucky, in May last, says, ** Never was I 
received with more perfect cordiality. The Assembly, hmmediiately 
after its organization, invited me to address them on the subject of my 
mission) and nnanimonsly recommended to their Presbyteries to or* 

f anise Tract Sodeties, to establish De|>ositories, and attend to the 
istribution of Tracts within their bounds ; and to report at each 
stated meeting of the Assembly. A Society w^ts immediately formed 
at Princeton, and I have confidence that mvch will be done within 
the limits of this numerous and respectable branch of the Christian 
Church. I iWund that the attention of many members of tlie Assem- 
bly had already been turned to the sul^ect, and one devoted and po- 
pular preacher assoired me thal^ if he should prove an efficient and 
successful Agent, he would be ready to devote his life to the service 
of the Tract Society. 



WAN?r OF TRACT AGENTS AT THE WEST. 

An Agent of the American Tract Society at the West says, <' I do 
beg for wont fiuthful labeKioas Agents for the Tract cause to be sent 
into this vast Valley. It woald be wise in the Society to send preacliers; 
or laymen, if men can b^ iband whose hearts are deeply intetested in 
the work. We must not cease our efforts .until Tracts shall be seen 
flying threughout all th» destitute places of this great oountiy^ dis-^ 
petting the darkness and soaMering the rays of juTiae truth wbrnre. 



116 AGENTS PaR THE WEST. ' [Scpti 

« 

ignorance, prejudice, bigotry and sin, have so long, and to so alarm* 
ing an extent reigned, and do still reign.'^ 

Another devoted Agent at the West says, *' I have learned with 
surprise that the American Tract Society have now bat five Travelling 
Agenta employed in the United States. Dear Brother, are the pi|9« 
sent generation of hateni of the Bible,, opposers of Sabbath schools, 
and careless worldlings, to go down to perdition, and not be supplied 
with this only means which will now reach their case? It cannot be. 
A host of men of apostolic zeal and faith must be sent out into ev^ry 
part of the land. Traets must be placed in eVery family througl^out 
this whole country, and repeated monthly by the hand of Christian 
benevolence ; or the hosts of infidelity in its difierent forms wiU reign 
and oppose themselves against all Ather Gospel means. I never till 
engaged in this service knew the full worth of a doUar. But when I 
see to how many families the Gospel message may be presented from 
month to month by means of Tracts, (especially by loan,) I think I see 
the worth of a dollar. And then wiien I see a family of Sabbath' 
hrtaken reclaimed by means of the Tract distribution, and induced 
constantly to attend on a preached Gospel; and an abandoned btat^ 
phemer determining, by the grace of God, that he will no more take 
his name in vain, 1 see that the first fruits have overpaid all the ex- 
pense. 

Another Agent at the West, whose time of service for the Society 
was about to expire, says, " No part of this state probably needs an 
Agent more than the counties I have not yet visited. I hope one will 
be immediately appointed for this region. . There are thousands of 
souls here on the road to hell ; sinners that never hear the sound of the 
Grospel, or see a Tract. Without you do this, dear brother, the day 
my agency expires will be a sorrowful day to me. Tracts, I believe, 
are doing ten times more good in this poor county than in your ffroat 
city. XAey are read here, and when they make an impression it is not 
so apt to be erased as, in cities. Though I have had a very difficult 
field to labor in, the last has been to me the most pleasant month 
that I ever spent in the ministry. I have visited 10 Tract Societies ; 
organized 4; travelled 327 miles ; preached 21 times; obtained sub> 
scriptions to the amount of 4^114; and made arrangements for sup- 
plying 1690 families with the monthly distribution. 

If some of the good brethren in our large cities, says Mr. Moses 
H. Wilder, Agent for the Ahierlcan Tract Society in Indiana, could 
go with me a few days, and see with what gratitude Tracts are re- 
ceived by almost every family on the road, and then go into a meet- 
ing where a little church is collected to hear something about the 
Tract Society, and get some answer for an opposer in their neigh- 
borhood; and see that by f 1,000, or $1,600 help, 60,000 families 
would have their monthly Tract, and some hundreds of public ser- 
mons and addresses be delivered where the Gospel in its purity is 
rarely preached, and thousands of families be visited by the Agent 
and told of a Savior's love— surely the money would not be wanting. 



1831.] AMELIA GALE. 117 

I read the Tract 'Queneh not the ^rit, in a meeting, and it seemed 
that the Holy Spirit applied it directly to the hearts of six or seven, 
who came forward in great distress, and sought the prayers of Chris* 
tians. It was a season of great tenderness. 

^ Wbm4m in Shelby county, he adds, ascribes her conversion to the 
reading of a Tract. 

TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF ** AMELIA GALE." 

We leant from the London Tract Magaaine for April, 1831, that a 
number ofindividuals who enjoyed the Christian friendship of Ame- 
lia Gale," whose simple history constitutes Tract No. 21 7 of th^ 
American Tract Society, not long since proposed that a plain stone 
should be erected at her grave ; and that as many as possible might 
have the opportunity 4>f testifying their regard to her worth by con- 
tributing for the object, k was decided ^that no person should be al- 
lowed to subscribe a sum exceeding sixpence. As soon as the design 
was known contributions were sent in, even from remote parts of the 
kingdom, so that this tribute of Christiaa esteem was shared at least 
by 200 persons. The poet Montgomery kindly complied with a re- 
quest to furnish her Epitaph ; and on December 31, 1830, a plain solid 
stone was put down at the head of the grave of this excellent woman, 
with the following inscription : . _ 

^ Beneath this stone are deposited^ 
(In sure and certain hope of a joyful resurrection,) 

the Remains of 

AMEI.IA GALE, 

fiedeemed at an inestimable price, and created by Divine Grace an 

Heir of eternal Glory. 
She entered upon her everlasting rest, August 23d, 1827, 

Aged 72 years. 

Alive when all her kin were dead. 

Atone in tbis dark world she stood ; 
Like the scath'd oak that lifts its head, 

Where floarish'd once, a mighty wood. 

Yet ere the sinner pass'd Arom earth. 

Who lonr had drawn unhallow'd breath, 
The Gospel gave her second birth. 

To save her from the second death. 

Then liv'd she to herself no more ; 

But loving much, since much rorgiv'n, 
Her Savior's Cross she meekly bore, 

And took the Catvary-road to Heaven. 

And ttillshe lives to Him, though dead; 

For, while her tnemory survives. 
Others, by her example led, . 
. Jfay show Tut living in their lives." 

The righteous, says the Psalmist, *' shall be in everlasting remem- 
brance." In Africa, when alive, the bright example of this poor wo- 
man, who dwelt in one of the humblest hovels, kindled a flame of mis* 
•ionary seal, and was instrumental in forming a Missioi^ary Society 




118 . TRACTS FOR THE HEATHEN. [Sept. 

in the colony of Sierra Leone. Her history is now read in <u? difler- 
ent European languages, namely, English, Welsh, French, German, 
Polish, and Bohemian ; the perusal of it has excited intense interest 
in America : and what is still more delightful and most interesting to 
the heart of the Christian, Gpd is continually blessing this little Tract, 
not only to the stimulating of many to increased exertions in the cause 
of missions, but also to the conviction and conversion of precious 
souls. Several instancea have been communicated in which the read- 
ing of those few pages has been blessed in turning sinners from " the 
power of satan unto God.'' 



AUXIUARY OP UNION THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY, PRINCE ED- 

WARD, VIRGINU. 

The Annual Report was presented in April. Receipts $62 70. Cir- 
culated 52,842 pages, of which 10,750 were gratuitously distributed 
in North-Carolina, and 5,000 sent to the mission station at Brainerd ; 
9nd many others have, been distributed by students in different j^r- 
tions of the country. 

Four Conversions by Tracts given to a Female Servant, 

About four years ago several members of the Seminary, in going 
down the Appomattox, sent a boatman up to a house near the river 
for some refreshments, which were brought by a servant girl, by 
whom they returned two Tracts to her mistress. A few weeks since 
one of these young men providentially called at the same house, and 
was told by the lady of Uie bouse that those two Tracts had been 
blessed, as she hoped, to the conversion of herself and another member 
of her family, and also of two of her relatives in Kentucky ^ to whom 
she sent them by mail. 

Tract blessed to a Lady, 

A member of the Society sent a Tract to a Lady in the vicinity, who 
was in great distress on account of her ftins. She read it over and 
over till late at night, and retired and meditated on it till she was en- 
abled to submit herself entirely to Christ, and accept of Him as her 
all-sufficient Savior. 



$50 FOR TRACTS FOR THE HEATHEN. 

We pray God to incline many of his children to come forward, with 
the anonymons writer of the following note, and lekid their aid in the 
great work of supplying the pagan world with Tracts. 

** The resolution of the American Tract Society, passed at the last 
anniversary, to supply American missionaries in foreign countries 
with Tracts, must commend itself to the friends of Zion, and meet 
their hearty co-operation. Deeming it a privilege to aid in such a 
wprk, I request the application of the enclosed (^y dollars) to that 
object. " A Frzsno in Virginia." 



1831.] 



RECEIPTS. 



119 



RECENt PUBLICATIONS. 

No. 256. Romanism Contradictory to the BiBCZi By Rev, T. 
HarlweU Horn, Author of the Introduction to the Bible, Sfc. — pp. 36. 
The able and excellent Author of this Tract has, in the most kind and 
masterly manner, taken up each of the more prominent errors of 
popery, and shown their plain inconsistency with the Oracles of God. 
The Tract is worthy of the careful examination of every Minister and 
Christian, and especially of all whose attention is by any means awa- 
kened to the destructive influence exerted by the papal system upon 
the souls of men. 

FiKB*8 FxRsuAsiTES TO Earlt Piett Abridoed. — pp. 256, 24mo. 
The stereotype plates of this excellent work abridg^ed were presented 
to the American Tract Society by the Religious Tract Society in Lon- 
don. 



RECEIPTS 

INTO TH^ TREASURY OF THE AMERICAN -TRACT SOCIETY 



During the month ending Augutt 15, 1831. 

FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 

VERMONT-^Shoveham, Levi O. Btrchard, Af . ... 

MASSACHUSETTS.— Springfield, Heary Kirkham, Tr. . ' 

RHODE-ISLAND.— Providence, Israel H. Day, Sec. 

CONNECTICUT.— Brooklyn, (Windham County Auxiliary,) Ed- 
win Newbury, A^. . . 

DarieD, Charles E. Whitney, Tr 

Huntington, William Mills, See . 

Lyme, uharlea GriswoM, Sec. • . . . 
Do. First Society, William Noyes, Jun. Tr. 

New-Haven, J. L. Cross, Af 

North Greeawich, Rev* Mr. Wilcox, Tr. . . . , 

Norwalk, Alfkred Mallary, Tr. . . . ., ^ 

Saybrook, 2d Society, Female, Mrs. A. P. Champlin, Ag. 

Stonlngton, Rdv. Joeeph Whittlesey, Sec 

NEW-YORK.— Albany, Central Branch, D. M'Kerchery Sec. 

Auburn, Clark B. Hotehkiss. Ag 

Bedford, Female, Mrs. Susan S.Nichols, Sec 

Bridgehampton, Long-Island, Rev. Amzi Francis, Pres. 

Cambridge, Thomas B. Fairchild, Sec. '. . . . , 

Catskill, Female, Miss Jane G. Sayre, Tr 

Dashville Falls, Female, Mrs. Jane Ann Butler, Tr. . 

Delhi, HermaA D. Gould, Ag. . ... 

punkirk, Chautauqua county, T. Farnham, Sec. 

Durham, Female, Mrs. Eudo^ia Booth, Tr. . . . 

Ellington, Chautauqua oounty, Dr. William Ware, Seo. 

Fishkill Landing, Female, Miss M. W. Tbller, Sec. 

Huntington, Loag-Island, Rev. Nehemiah Brown, Ag. 

Lockport, William L. Parsons, Ag 

Marbletown, Ulster eounfy, Lewis J; HaabrouckfTr. . . ' . 

Newburgfa, R. B. Williams, Tr 

New- Windsor, Silas Corwin, Tr. . . . . 

Rochester, Levi A. Ward, Tr 

Saratoga Springs, G.M.Davidson4Tr 

Southold, Long-Island, William Fniler, Sec 

Troy, Charles L3rman,Tr. . . . . '. 

Vtica, Edward Vernon, Sec 

Do. by their Female Auz., Genoa, for foreign distribution, 

WestFarmsiJttvenile, Horatio W.St. John, Tr. . 

NEW-JERSEY.— Baskingridge, Horace Sheldon, Sec. . 

Bioomfiehl, Juvenile, Robert R. Kellogg, See. 

liberty Corner, WiUvtm Annin, Tr 

Faterton, in Presbyterian Church, Henry Van Honten, Tr. . 



ForTr. 


30 00' 


50 00 
75 00 


90 00 


64 


12 00 


4 56 


7 62 


S7 00 


86 


1 83 


608 


7 72 


50 00 


32 23 


8 64 


2 12 


6 42 


1 20 


10 00 


3 54 


5 74 


6 48 


700 


700 


23 40 


5 14 


2 49 


1 07 


100 00 


24 00 


2 99 


50 00 


250 00 


27 


273 


1 47 


1 00 


10 00 



Don. 



4 36 



4 34 



00 



52 



18 86 



277 
53 



120 



R£C£1FT9. 



FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 
Princeton, Female, lIiMF.W.Morford,Tr. .... 

Sparta, Female, MiM Beach, Tr « 

Springfield, AbyahL. Bunnell, Tr 

Washington, Femhlfi,Fhd>eS.lIiHer,Tr. .... 
Wcatfielii Female, Mi«« Mary Fieraoo, Sec. . . • 

White Houae, in Readingtown; Dr. William Johnson. Sec. . ^ 
PENNSYLVANIA<-PlnladelpbiaBranch,FrederickErringer,Tr. 

DISTRICT COL.— Alexandria, Female, Mrs. E. S. Lad£, Sec. 
VIRGINIA.— Bttflftilo^ Prince Edward county, . . . - 
Fredericksburg, Aux. Dep- WiUiam H. White, Ag. 

LemngUm, John Leybiim, Sec 

Lyntmburg, Young Mens', B. C. Wherry, Ag. 
Petersbura, Thomas H.Boewell, Sec. • * »* 

Prince Edward, Union Theological Seminary, J. B. Spotswood, Sec. 
fit. George's Parish, Ace omac county, Fern., Bliss S. P. Sttchell, Sec. 
Winchester, Daniel Gold, Esq., Tr. . . . • ^ • 
NORTH-C AROLINA^Raleogh, Rev. P. W- Dowd, Sec. 
GEORGIA.— Ebenezer, Effingham co., Rev. C. F. Bergman, Pres. 
MISSISSIPPI.— Natchez Branch, Gabriel Tichenor, Tr. 
OHIO.— Granville, ReV. Jacob Little, Pres. . . 
Jefferson, (Ashtabula Co. Aux.) Rev. P. Prait, of Harpersfield, Sec. 
INDIANA.— Vincennes, (Knox Co. Aux.,) John Bruner, Tr. . 
MISSOURL— St. Louis, Miss, and Ills. Branch, N. Ranney, Ag. 
Tracts sold at the Depoeit<Mry to individaals, . .- . 



FwTr. 


44 


30 00 


243 


S62 


4 08 


250 00 


83 00 


11 68 


50 00 


10 00 


16 00 


40 00 


38 32 


15 00 


30 00 


26 50 


5 00 


185 00 


30 50 


.53 00 


75 00 


1.14 35 


281 07 



10 OO 



60O 



lUruiori for Life. 

NEW-YORK.-«laTerack, Co- 
lumbia county. Rev. Richard 
Slujrter, by Fem. A. T. S., (in 
fttUof$50,) ...... $1500 

Geneva, Rev. Henry Dwight, . 125 00 
NEW-JERSEY.— Lebanon, Rev. 
Jacob J. Schttltz, in addition to 
$32 12, (in part df $50,) ... 50 

Members for Life. 



VERMONT.— Rupert, Rev. Da- 
vid Wilson, by himself and Con- 
vrngation, 20 00 

C )NNECTICUT.— Bridgeport, 
Mrs. Ellen Porter, (in fuUof $20,) 5 00 



Other Dorujttions. 

NEW-YORK.— Salem, Richard 
Tiffany, ..,..<..-. 

COPINE'CTICUT.— FairfieH, Wil- 
liam Mwehouse, . , . . • 

New-London, L. W., .... 

NEW-YORK— Dutchess county, 
G. E. Delevan, for Tracts grant- 
ed 

Newport, Baptist Church, . . . 

New-York city. Anonymous, for 

printing Handbill No. 29, • . 

, for premium for Tract to 



Students in Colleges, . 

A Friend, 1 00 

Five individuals, by J. M. C, for 

foreign distribution, .... 10 00 

^hv**AnrJr^VsSt? ^"■*'"*^' '^ Jwi^loJiry SociWof Free'Pml ^ ^ 
by Aux. Tract Society,_._. . 30 00 K„»a..ionf«h,.r..h j,.Hwa I 



Norwich, Rev. Cornelius B. Ever 
est, by Ladies of Ist Ecclesias 

tical Society, 20 00 

Do. BelaPeckWUUaras, . 20 00 

Stamford, Mrs. Phebe Reed, by 
Fem. A. T. S., Bedford, New- 
York, (in full of (20,) . . .8 001 

NEW.YORK.^Albany, Charles 
G.Clark, 20 00| 

Bridgewater, Oneida county, Tru 
man Benham, 20 00 

CUBA.— Havanna, Stephen H. Go- 
mez, Esq., . 20 00 



1 OO 

75 
363 



1 70 
1 00 

200 

50 00 



by terian Church. Jofab S. D&veu- 
. port, Tr 50 00 

NEW-JERSEY.-flanover, Wil- 
liam O.Ford, ...... 5 00 

Springfield, AbijahL. Dunnell, . 10 00 

VIRGINIA.- A Friend, in aid of 
the foreign distribution, . . .'-50 00 

KENTUCKY— Princeton, Rev. 
F. R. Cossitt, 1 00 

ILLINOIS.— Galena. Rev. Arattts 
Kent, for Tracts granted, . . 15 00 



Annual Membert. 

NEW-YORK.— New-York city, 
Archibald C. Brady, . . . 

LeanderMead, 2 00 

Mrs. Ann Eliza Sheppard, ... 2 00 



The above list contains donations— 

For premium Tract, 50 00 

For Tracts for foreign countries, 62 77 



Whole amount of donations, . $561 96 
2 OOiReceived for Tracts sold, . . 2,235 22 



Total, $2,797 18 



THE AMERICAN 

DL. TI. OOTOBBB, 1831. NO. II 



'Crii,ciai[D£i of Feter.— ae« Bpwiiab Tract, rfg. 13^ 

THE AOED BAPTIST ELDER IN ONE OF ODR 

NEW SETTLEMENTS. 

An A^eat of (be Ameriean Trici Soeietj in Chaulaiique Countir, 

which ia tktj hew>indpaar,wlien,Bner laying berore them ihe nature 
tiad ctaimt of the Tract cause, nn aged Bapliil elder aroie, and niili 
cyet filled oilb lea|^, ipoke m rollowi: — 

" Mf deir rriendi and neighbor), I know and feet that thit object 
i« Imparlnnt. I know Ihet these nieiiien(;*ri nf mercy and ■alvitton 
luTe been the ntenni, in the hands of God, of Ihe convenion or ihou- 
■andi; and 1 vonid rejoice in {ending them to everj liiTntly in this 
town, that al every 6reaide they might letl Ihe ttory of redeeminc 
lo*e. But what can we do T Wearepoor! WhatcanldoT lam 
poor! lamindeht. I must be honenl before T nm liberal, irlhare 
a tiipence in my pocliel more than will buy my daily bread, I should 

Si»e that liipeoce to my creditors, who haTe waited long with me. 
ul while I haTe been sitliog here.hearing ofTrScti and th* bleBsingof 
God uponlhein, 1 haie been lliinking how I could help on this good 
cause, and not injur* aif creditors; and I haie at teneth ihougbt of 
the plan. 1 will go home to night and go lo bed without my supper, 
rot. VI. 10 Wliole No. 67. 



122 AGEJfT IV I59IA5A. - [Oct. 

and will do the same to-morrow night: this will enable mt to give 25* 
cents for Tracts. O my friends, let us all do this, and we can send 
^e Gospel to every family in this town; and then we can with confi* 
dence lift our hearts to God for his blessing oit the labor of out 
hands.*' 

After this^ says th;^ Agent^we formed a Society ; nearly all In the 

house joined, young and old ; about ^ vas subscribed ; and our aged 

Baptist elder was' unanimously elected Presidents 



THE TRACT "POOR SARAH." 

> Having called, says an Ageift of the Ameirican Tract Society, on 

the family of Mr. W , in Indiana, where I was very hospitably 

entertained, I presented them some Tracts. Soon, parents and chil- 
dren all were reading ; and a young lady present began to read Pocr 
Sarah aloud to M^ W She had not proceeded far, when it 

was evident the Tract was productive of a powerful effect, and Mrs. 
W retired from the room in silenc^. The young lady proceeded 

with the Tract by herself. Suddenly, however, she turned her back 
upon all present, wiping away the streaming tears.' Confused, and 
with her mind apparently absorbed with the subject of the Tract, she 
then left the room, to weep, without restraint, I trust, in view of her sin- 
fulness, knd to breathe forth her prayer to Him whose spirit alone 
can sanctify the heart. 

AN AGENT AND HIS TRACTS IN A FAMILY IN INDUNA. 

I have read, says a Tract Agent in Indiana, of affecting instances 
of Christian love manifested to Agents ; but never saw them till now. 
My way is filled with such tokens. One I will relate. Last week I 
arrived in the evening at the house of a Methodist fa^mily. After some 
conversation they wished to see my Tracts. A son took the Tract 
Poor Sarah, and read it with difficulty, on account of his tears flowing 
so freely. His father told me h&had been rather an oppos^r for some 
time; but this Tract took hold of his feelings^ and he spent die evening 
in reading Tracts; In the morning, as I was about departiof^, the aged 
Christian said he had never seen but three or four Tracts before : he 
knew they were good*; ** for,*' said he, '^how they took bold of my 
son ! I will distribute to every family in the neighborhood," he added, 
*' and if you come this way again, you must come and make my house 
your home." As I took those aged friends by the hand, and bade 
them farewell, the tears flowed down their furrowed cheeks. 



Having given a Tract to a traveller, says this Agent, I waS asked, 
ten days afterwards, and at a distance of eighteen miles, if I gave a 
Tract to a man on the road on such a day. I found that the family of 
the traveller could not read, but the neighbors were often asked to 
read it to them, and it was thought a great treasure. Another man, 
who was noted for his opposition to Christian ministers, and for his 
profanity and drunkenness, was recently seen very solemn, and fre- 
quently shedding tears. On the third day after, his distress was so 
great that he called on a neighbor to pray for him. He had never 
been at meeting, had no Bible, and would have none in bis house* 



I8S1*] JATtSA TRACT SOCIETY. 123 

The instrumeat was supposed, by the friend who related to roe these 
facts, to be a Tract left in his house. 

JAFFNA RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY, CEYLON, INDIA. 
A copy of the Annual Report oi this Sodefy, f^sented May 1830, 
has been kindly forwarded to the Committee of Ae American Tract 
Society in manuscript, of which the foltowiogis a brief abstract. 

Puhticatiatu in Tamul, during ike Year. 



kppendix fo r^o. V, . . A 

So. 5 True Doctriae (addresiBed to the Brahmiiu,) * 3100 



Appendix to No. 9, ; A 500 



ISObaervaaoeortlieSmbbatli, .13 900 

15 The Marriage of l»riecU, ...... 90 200O 

10 The Hon. fVaaeifl Newport, 19 9070 

17 8in4 advice, (Swearer's PntywoBlarged,) .13 6177 
ld-21 The Mind way, (FoUy of Idolatry, 4 parts, 16 pp. each,) ' 19900 

ISS liicantationB (dieir absurdity as practiced by the' Heatheni) 8 4000 

94agod]uowlodfe<or£zceU«iicyofChristiaaity,) 4000 

Total 35,447 
TotafpafaCahedaincethAfomuktioaoftlMSodety. .... 100,737 

Amount of subscriptions reeeived dturiog the year, rix dollars, 

802,7,3. 

It has been found important to establish a depository, from which 
copies of th^ different pufoircations may at all ti|nes W obtained ; alt 
tlie Tracts printed, until recently, havings l^een divided among such 
subscribers as have desired jthem lor distribution, or sent to friends 
«ad agents dispersed throughout the extensive Country where tlte 
Tamul Language is spoken. From those individuals, numerous and 
interesting commuaicatiohs have been received, extracts from which 
are presented in the Report. 

Bev. Mr. George, of Xrincomalie, writes, after spcndiag an entire 
yreek in visiting and distributing in three villages, that by far the ma- 
jority received the Tracts cordially, and several expressed their grati- 
tude t6 the Society. Tbe Rev. JVfc. Uanhma,-af Taiyare, writes, that 
a remaHcabie change had there taken place among the Roman Catho- 
lics; that wliole eoBgregations ■ had applied for instructions in the 
Protestant reltgion; and begs for further supplies of Tracts for them. 
Within the district ,of Jaffna, dtstributiops liave been faithfully per- 
formed by members of the Society, and by native assistants in the 
work. Those engaged in the Pearl fishery have been supplied ; and 
many adjacent Islands, pari8hes,jiJAd villages visited, in which Tracts 
have met with a cheering reception. 

At a time when the Society's etock of paper was exhausted, 82 
reams were granted to it by the London Tract Society, the whole of 
which had been used at the time of presenting the Report ; and an 
appKcation had been made for increased assistance. 

^id from tKt Amtrkan Tract Society^ 
.An application having also been made to the American Tract So- 
ciety, an appropriation of $200 is very gratefully acknowledged, 
from that Institution, for the distribution of such Tracts as agree with 
itsmlel, anddevont acknowledgments to God are expressed in the 
Beport for the aid thus afforded. 



1S4 TEACT IN CH£E01^E£. [Oct 

The Committee feel greatly encouraged iiLtheir work. The dense 
population around them are becoming more and more able and incli- 
ned to read. The Tracts visit the needj and unsatisfied Idolater in 
his retirement, away from the evil communications of bis compan-< 
ions, and speak to his reason and conscience, " of sin, of righteous* 
ness and of a judgfojent to eotnt.**" 



TRACT IN CHEROKEE. 
We are happy to. annouaca that 9000 copies of a Tract, in the lan- 
guage of this suffering nation of the Aborigines of our'Country, was 
some time since printed under the direction, of the Missionaries labor- 
ing among them,with the approbation of riie Committee of the Ameri- 
can Tract Society, and at that Society's expense* It comprises the 
history of the Creation and the Fall, fVom the first chapter of Gene- 
sis; the ten commandments; the history of the l^rtb of Christ from 
Luke 2 ; the parable of the Prodigal son ; our Lord's conversation 
with Nicodemus, John "3.; ta which are -appended appropriaie re- 
narks, of which atmnslatioB into English has been s«nct$eMed.bytRe 
Committee. These Tracts Inay remain with the Indians at their 
home, or be carried with them wherever they shall go ; and. will 
preach to them the gospel, whatever objection may be raised, to the. 
labors of the Missionary for theis good.. 



GRANT OP TRACTS IN ENGLISH, |*0R SAULT St. BIAKIEi 

The Rev. Abel Bingham, Baptist Missionary at the Sault de St. 
Marie, in a letter dated May 16, expresses his thanks to the Commit* 
teebf the American Tract Society, for a grant of 20,000 pages Tracts^ 
and states that they are favorably received by a respectable portion 
of the Soldiers and many of the Citizens. A charch was formed last 
fall) consisting of four members of the MissiOB. and twe converts, one 
of thiMn a native ; and some other natives appear ta be inquiring. A 
decided staAd has also been taken in favor of ihe Temperance cause,, 
which it is hoped will prove a permanent benefit to the Indians^ whok 
are generally poor and wretched. 

TRACT IN CHIFPE WAY. 

A letter fromf TH* E. James, dhted l^wlt 8t. Marie, May 12, acw 
knowledging the reception of copies \of the Tract printed by the Ame> 
rican Tract Society in Chippeway, says, that children who can read 
English and who understand Indian, read and understand the extracts 
from the Bible contained in the I'ract altoost immediatety. 

** A young half breed, a member of my family,^* he adds, ^'^eixeil 
with great eagerness upon the Tract, and in the course of two or. 
three hours study completely mastered the whole, and is now teack* 



IB51.} »oft£lts^^ \^ 

ittg it to a class in the mission school. I was not a little gratified to 
find that> though she has often read and heard the same passages in 
EngHsh, she gained at oace fron.the Indian version a far better un< 
derstaMdingoftbemtfaail she evei bad before. 

" It is indeed not at' all ^rprising^ that children sbould remain many 
years at a mission school, and even learn to read English pretty 
well, without being able to understand it^ Their mother tongue is that 
which they use in all their interc^rse with eachother, and in all the 
hours when tbeyare out of school; so that they acquire a foreign tongue 
but slowly. ' 

" I have good reason to believe that all the children in the Mission 
School here who can read at all, will in a very short time be able to 
read the whole of it. One of (he assistants «t the Mission proposes 
«oon to visit tht Mackiiiaw station and attempt to introdace it there. 
The Episcopal Missionary, whom I believe I before mentioned to you, 
has arrived; and if he should succeed in making an establishment, I 
have reason to believe that it will without delay be introduced into his 
school, as also at Magdalen' Island au^ several other places in the 
country of tho Chippeways. 

''t have been thus particular, as, I doubt not, you must take an in^ 
terestin any thing which may tend to enlarge your acquaintance with 
tho state of instruction among thesie destitute and most miserable peo- 
ple. Their situation appeals most loudly to the sympathies of the 
Christian world f and I cannot but hope that, through the efforts of 
Institutions like the American Tract Society, and the praiseworthy 
exertions of individuals, mucli may yet be d.oue for them." 



FORSZGN COHHIiSFOirDifaKOB. 

f^m the Secretary of the Rdigiovu Tmct Societt/ at Gldsgotc, Scotland^ 
dated 101 Buckamnstreet, July 22, 1831. 

My dear Sir — I have now before me your much esteemed favor of 
Ih^ 17th January, for which) along with its accompaniments, allow 
me to return, in the name of the Comniittee of Glasgow Religious 
Tract Society> my best thanks. 

After receiving your letter, our Committee appointed a mornings 
which we set apart esjiecially for prayer for a blessing upon the efforts 
of the American Tract Society, and for thanksgiving for your success -: 
may the Lord almndantly pour out his blessing, in answer to the many 
prayers which are offered up continually for your prosperity! Wo 
hope you do not forget Britain, the land of yoUr forefathers, wlieri 
you go to the mercy seat of your God and our God, to implore His 
blessing : this is eminently a land of privilege, but O, it is a land 
where iniquity abounds, and where deeper guilt is perhaps contracted 
than in almost any other country under heaven* It is agonizing to a 

10» 



126 BOStOK, XNftLAND. fOct« 

mind at all concerned for the glory of God, and alWe to the Tahie of 
gouls, to see the multitude goin^ blindly on to ruin. To behold the 
Sabbath profanation — ^the intemperance, and all the open immorality 
of 9uch « comitry— -«o privileged — 19 distinguished*— m honored, is 
deeply painful. How Sataii rules as the god of this world ! What 
willing slaves be finds ! how hia votaries toil and labor in the very 
fire to accomplish his purposes ; and how feeble are the eflbrts, how 
cold the afiections, how languid the zeal, of the great proportion of 
professing Christians of the present day, fat their Master's service f 
How different the conduct of the peophe of this world in pursuing 
thtir objects. We seldom find them inquiring how far they may be 
religious and ye't retain their adherence to mammon ; no, no, they 
«jiter with all their heart into his service, and it is reserved for pro* 
jessing Christians alone, to attempt a compromise betwixt God and 
the world^to try !40w far they may g» with the world, and yet be 
Christians stilL Miserable inconsistency ! 

I wish I could send you good news of our progress^ but,, alas,, we are 
slumbering ; we need td have our seal enlivened, and to be stirred 
up to renewed activity. O that there were a revival in all the hearts 
of Go(Vt people hertf then should we see better days; but the Chris* 
tian church in Britain has allowed aspirit of slumber to steal upon her,, 
and the amalgamation of the church and the world has deadened her 
sensibilities, and is wasting her energies. It is difficull to draw any 
line betwixt the j^ople of God and the if orld, and how can we have 
revivals so long as this continues ? Pray for us^— pray for quicken- 
ing to the British churches— pray for the outpouring of a spirit of ' 
grace upon Rritish Christians-^ray for a spinit of humiliatioD under 
existing evils, and that we may b^ awakened frm» our letliar^ t 

I write in much haste, and have just time to send you a few Tcaets 
lately published. Can you send me as many Tracts as you have re* 
lative to the Sabbath — or pamphlets on the subject of its sanctifica- 
tion7 With ClHistian^ regarde to yourself and -theCommittee of the* 
American Tract Society, believeme,. 

yours in our-common faith, 

Wit. WardlaW, Secretary. 



From the SeerfiUay of the AuxiKary Tract Society , Botton, tlnglcmdr 

dated \9thJeanMry,\99i^ 

My dear Sir — I have plessure in acknowledging the receipts of 
the Report of the American Tract Society and of several numbers 
of the American Tract Magazine, As Secretary to the Auxiliary 
Religious Tract Society in this place, the intelligence contained in 
these publications is very acceptable, and as a Christian and a Chris- 
tian Minister, I cannot but feel deeply interested by the progress 
of religion in your favored country. It is indeed delightful that the 
Lord's people are an increasing, people, nod the measure of divine 
blessing which has so bountifully rested on Araerica, demands the 
praise of the entire church. Many in this country are looking and 
praying for a general and copious outpouring of the Holy Spirit^ and 
some of our churches are blessed with the heavenly shower. Still 
there is no general nor even extensive participation of the blessing, 



1891.JI 



CAITABA* 1S7 



and many of us aigh over the barrenness of our Christian profession, 
and the coldness with which appeals to our people for vigorous exer- 
tion and united prayer are received. The place wheuce 1 date this 
is, as to the bulk of the population, deplorably destitute of vital piety. 
Infidelity, and a mere profession of religion, covers the mass of our 
population and leaves them to the indulgence of the carnal mind. 
Yet there are to me some interesting considerations connected with 
Boston in Old England. Within a few years, it has pleased God lb- 
raise the Congregational church, which I serve, and collect a numer- 
ous congregation ; so that now our little one has become a thousand, 
and we have, by his blessing, some useful persons who are engaged 
in works of piety with holy pleasure and-zeak' We have a large 
Sabbath School with about twenty-fiv^ teachers, a goodly host of 
Bible Society collectors, a Sick Society, and the most important and 
interesting of all our institutions is a loan Tract Society, connected 
with which the members jof my church and congregation visit about 
1200 families ever i/ fortnight. Some other denominations have sepa- 
rate institutions for lending Tracts, and we cover nearly the whole 
population of the poorer order. The county (of which Boston is the 
chief town) has been blessed with an extension of religious privileges 
daring the last ten years. In that time nine new churches have been 
formed or revived of the Congregational order, and many of them 
are flourishing under the blessing of God on a faithful ministry. 
These things are cheering to us ; but we want the Spirit of holy faith 
and earnest prayer more abundantly, that the hills of our Zion may 
be more refreshed. 

I indose you a few of our Heports for the last and present year, and 
I shall be happy to receive from you such publications and intelli- 
gence as you may think proper to communicate. 

With best wishes and prayers for the Messing of God on your im- 
portant labors, I am, my deer Siri 

Yours in the bonds of the Grospel, 

Thomas Hatnxs. 



WANT OF TRACTS IN CANADA. 

In behalf of the Brockville Female Religious Tract Society, writes 
the Secretary ,1 beg to return our thanks to the American Tract So- 
ciety for their generous grant of Tracts. Canada presents a wide 
field fi>r Missionary and Tract operations, though it has shared com- 
paratively but little of either. We still, however, keep hoping for 
better days, when we shall see and hear more of the living messengers 
of the Redeemer, and more of your swift-winged heralds of the gospel 
visiting every settlement, and taking up their abode in every family. 
We doubt not but the American Tract Society will be an efficient in- 
strument in the hand of God to accomplish his purposes of redeeming 
love in Canada, as well as the most distant parts of the ^obe. 

A few friends who recently met here, on considering the wants and 
usefulness of your Society, resolved to transmit something for its aid, 
and it affords me no ordinary satisfiiction to be the medium of for- 
warding the enclosed sum, ($10,) as a donation. I wish it was ipore 
worthy of the sacred cause to which it is contributed. 



IftS NEW-OBLEANSt [Oct* 

TRACT CAUSE IN NEWORLEANS. 

From the Report of Mr. Stxphsh Tra.t!cmi»ui, agent at New>Or*- 
leans, it appears that there have beea grcUuUotulif diilributcd during 
the past year, under the direction of the Board of Agencjf of that city, 

In the monthly distribution in New Orleans, • * 864,228 

XJ0a the Levee, and among the shipping aniS steamboalt, 138,029 

In the prison and hospiuls, 23,468 

Miscellaneoua distributions, • . . . . . -43,464. 
Distributed in different parts of Louisiana»&<u ^ -,• ' ■ 349,017 
Distributed in Mexico, - • * • • * ^ 61,470 

Total, 979,676 

The Monthly Distribution in Netv-Orleans has been encouraging, 
there having been but about one hundred ref\isals ; and arrangements 
were early made with an individual who has become habituated to , 
the climate, to continue it during the warm season. TJie distribution 
on the Levee and to the shipping, has been chiefly performed by 
Rev. Mr. Winslow, the Seamen's Agent, and has evidently been the 
means of bringing many within the sound of the gospel. In the hot- 
pitals and prison, tl'ie distribution has not been without encourage- 
meht ; many opportunities (br religious conversation have been im- 
proved ; and profaneness and gaming have in some instances, in the 
miscellaneous distribution been checked. Correspondence from dif- 
ferent parts of Louisiana, Mississippi, Arkansas Territory, and Mex- 
ico, exhibits a very deep interest in the Tracts received. The agents 
for the Sabbath school and Bible cause have taken part in the distri- 
bution as opportunity has presented. 

Effects of a Handbill and 7\act on Intemperante. 

A shoemaker at the Belize, who had long been intemperate to the 
ruin of his property and disgrace of himself and family, has become 
radically reformed through the influence of a handbill on Intempe- 
rance. He was so mooh interested with it, that he fattened it upon 
the wall opposite his seat, wishing to have the considerations it pr(^- 
sected coptinually before liiiQ> 

An Ovrteer in Mississipiuwas arrested in his course of inteflipe< 
ranee and ruin by the blessing of God upon Kiltndgt'a Addrut, read 
to him by his pious wife ; and has become, it is hoped, a child of 
God. 



■•i^ 



A TRACT AGENT IN A FAMILY OF NEW LIGHTS. 
Having called on a family of New Lights to get breakfast and feed 
for my horse, s^ys a Tract Agent, I explained to them in a few words 
ray business, hearing, meanwhile, occasionally, a laugh from a young 
woman in an adjoining room. As her mother came iq soon after, she 
evidently observed on the countenances of those present an expression 
of the estimation, in which they held me and my employment. I asked 
them if they had ever read the Tracts I was laboring to circulate ; and 



1831.] LIBERAL DONATION* 12^ 

presented to the mother the Tract " Maiemai Duly;" to a young man 
Pause and thinkf Am J a Christian f to the daughter another ; and to 
an aged man another. Soon all were reading their Tracts, and beibre 
I left the place, aolemn looks, plaintiye tones, and deep-drawn sighs 
had succeeded to the loud laugh and the contemptuous smile. 

LIBEKAL DONATION. 
Trad ** Importance of CoMtdertMon^^ Uessed to a Young GertUeman. 

A letter from an Episcopal Clergyman in Ohio, enclosing $70, 
raised by a special effort for the American Society, says: ** It affords 
me great pleasure to state, that the Tract on The Importance of Con- 
siderationf was recently applied by the Holy Spirit, with power, to 
the heart of an Jiptelligent and respectable young gentlettian of this 
place. He was convinced * of sin, of righteousness, and of a judg- 
ment to come.' He anxiously inquired ' the way to Zion with his 
ihce thitherward'-— was directed to ' the Lamb of God, who taketh 
away the sins of the world' — was enabled to accept him, as he is re- 
vealed in the gospel— and now indulges a trembling hope that God is 
his reconciled father in Christ Jesus. ' Bless the Lord, O our souls/ '' 



$2 FOR CECtt'S TRACT TO MOURNER'S. 

I enclose two dollars; ^ays a Clerjg^yman in Tennesee, to aid in cir-, 
culating The Friendly Visit to Die House of Mourning* God has sud- 
denly taken from us our oldest son, about 21 years of age, of pro- 
mising talents, just completing his studies at Centre College, Ky. I 
have found this Tract so pecuUarly seasonable in presenting a 
ground of support in an hour of such pressing affliction, that i wish 
to contribute something to aid in sending it as a messenger of spiritual 
consolation to others. 



FROM A PRATING FEMALE FRIEND. 

1 would tender my heartfelt thanks to the American Tract Society, 
and to God,for the extension of your ^bors into the Valley of the Mis- 
sissippi, and to the Heathen. . 1 have long felt an intense interest in 
the Tract cause. I hailed with joy the formation of your Society, t 
felt that in its rise, many- earnest petitions that I had put up to the 
Throne of Grace, that some efflcient measures might be adopted for 
supplying the world with these messengen of mercy, were answered. 
My breast is agonised and my eyes are filled with tears, when I con- 
template the moral condition of the human race, and the apathy of 
Christians. I hope soon to complete the subscription of $60, to con- 
stitute our pastor a life Director ] and I wish I could increase my 
efforts for your Society a thousand fold. 



SUBJECTS FOR NEW TRACTS. 
A number of subjects for Tracts, says a Clergyman of South Caro- 
lina, have occurred to me, which I think it my duty to suggest If I 
had means, I should iiot hesitate to offer a premium on each of them. 



ISO TWO HUMDRXD AND FlFTr DaUiLARS PBCMIUM. [Oct. 

1. On the Ten Coramandmenti. 

2. OoDoiiigrGood. 

8. On the Use of the Tongue; 
• 4. On the decision of Joshua: (24: 15. "As for me and my 
hoase we wiilsenw the Lord/') as an ifsampU to Rulerr. 

^ $250 iPremiimi. 

The Committee appmnted to award the premium of $50 for the best tract oo tA« 
^UgvUqma wtoiiptd maprofitmiBn^t the MUlagiom of Oknstf to Mdfce ejfWte omd 
oacri^eofortAe aolvatum ofmeHf and the wuumer m wAtcA tiUy mu$t be duduanteA 
to tviatce a reai tmion loitft Okriotf axuBOunoe, thai at a mvtting held oo the loth 
July, tweoty-two tracts havini^ been received and examined, it was unanimoitdy 
ajlTeed, that though some of them possess considerable excellence, not one is of suf- 
ficient merit to be ree<muaeaded for publication. The committee woold h&ve made 
an earUor decision had it not b«en that OBsidnif in diflSBTent cities, they coald not, 
coofiistentlywith-frtherdttttBSjCome aeonertofraier. - ^ «>. ' 

Exteiuion «f the Hmu and Imcreiue ef ike Premium. 

The Committee are authorised by the gentleman who offered the premium* to an* 
nounce th«t,ibr thepurpdse of obtaimog a Tract of high excellence, he increases the 
nnremiaia to $250, and extends tile time ftir the reception of Manuscripts to tl^e 1st of 
December 1831. The subject of the desired Tract will JMueeforth b0 considered as- 
expressed in the following words: '* The maimer in wkieh ChrietUm* ehnid them 
ike ^irit of their Matter^ in ^orta to promote the convereion of the tsorM." The 
manuscripts should be each accompanied by a sealed enyelope, containing the name 
of the writer. They maybe addreased to WvuA.Hallock, 144 Nassau street, New- 
York, or o<Hnmitted-to the care of the ReVp foelT. Benedict, comer of Fourth and 
Arch Streets, Philadelphia, or of Mr. A. Russell, No. S5, Cornhill, Boston. 

The object of the gentieman proposing the premium is, to have a Tract which 
shall present a test of Christian character; showing what manncir of spirit a profes- 
sor of the mipdof Christisbbuadtopotsessinrelationtotfaespreadof tliegospel,and 
bow such a spirit will show itself in efforts and saorifioes for the conToraion of the 
world. Particularly as to the manner in which this spirit should be maniiested in 
eibrts and sacrifices, is indispensible. It is hoped that the eminent importance of 
the subject and thejgraat good to be effected by a Tract of superior merit; will kn* 
gfigo the attentioQ of the boit writers among theChristians of this country. 

CHAs.F.M*lhrAjiimfdhairmantftheOom, 

We cannot better express our sense of the importance that this sub- 
ject should engage the attention ofWbla Evangdical writers, than by 
inserting the following notice from the Chairman of the'Examining 
Committee; addressed to the Editors of the New-York Observer. 

** I request permission to call the attention of the readers of the Ob- 
server to the offer of $S&0 for the best Tract on "the manner in 
which Christians should show the spirit of their Master in efforts to 
promote the conversion of the world." ,The desire to obtain a sntta- 
bJe Tract on this subject is based upon the belief that much more 
light is needed to make professors of religion generally aware of the 
obligation they are all under to live for the promotion of the gospel 
in the world ; makii^ it their daily business to bring all their influ- 
ence and means to concentrate in this wQrk. It is believed that the 
meaning and solemn application to the whole life, character and effort 
of a professor of religion, of such passages as : " Ye are not your 
own, for ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in year 
body and in your spirits,.which are God's" — "Present your bodies a 
living sacrifice" — *' Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ 
Jesus" — ^<' If any man have not the spirit of Christ he is none of his; ' 



ft 



1831.]' 



CHRISTIAN ALHABTAC FOR 183%. 



131 



ke. are very littld undertsood^ and much less felt and obeyed in the 
diurches. A Tract, in the spirit of these dedarations, showing plainly 
what manner of man a Christian should he in reference to the conver- 
sion of the world ; urging, on scripture grounds, the duty of effort and 
self-denial knd sacrifice for this cause in all Christians, whatever their 
station or means ^ entering into particulars as to the way in which the 
right spirit will manifest itself, and should^ in general circumstances, 
employ itself in adaptation to the character and movements of the pre- 
sent day; such a Tract, written in a style appropriate to general use, 
so that it might be presented to every professor of religion, ai^d espe- 
cially to knch persons, as are just making a profiession of obedience to 
Christ, is an actj^uisitbu exceedingly to be desired, and would proba- 
bly be blessbd greatly to the promotion of the gospel. Will not some 
principal men in literary and spiritual furniture^ be induced to employ 

their force upon this object ? - ^* 

C. P. M'ltrAWB, CA«r«umo/lfie Commttfee. 



CHRISTIAN ALMANAC FOR 1832. 
This work is already printed in eighteen distinct editions, adapted to 
the Meridian and Ltftit^ude of the fame number of our principal 4:itiev 
and towns. A list of Agents froih whom the respective editions may 
be obtained, will be found on page 2 of the cover of this number of the 
Magazine 



$10 FROM A YOUNG LADY FOR TRACTS IN GREECE. 

' As a portion of the yearly allowance granteni^ by a kind parent, 
the undesigned requestsyour acceptance of ihe enclosed $10, to aid 
in the distribution of Tracts in Greece ; and she prays that, humble 
as is the offering, the God of Missions wjil accompany it with his 
blessing. 

A Father, who has presented- tb the American Tract Society hia 
second annual donation of $5, on the recurrence of the Hrtk^day of a 
son, recommends the general adoption of a similar system of stated 
donations. 



RECEIPTS 

INTO the: treasury OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY 
DuriMg the wumth endUig September 15, 1831. 
FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 
MASS.— Borton, Amer. Tract Soc. S. T«ppan Esq. Tr, 
Hadley,Eli8haI>ickiinoD,Tr. ^ - ^ ' ',^ ,L ' 
New Marlborough, <Sottth Soe.> Dea. G. CanBeld, Tr. 

North Adams, Dea. Eli NorthaiUjTr 

Northampton, J. P. WillJston, Ag. 

Pittsfietd, Fern. Mias AmeUa Danforth, Ag. . . . ; 



SpriMfield, Henry RirkhaQi,Tr 

(^NN.— Hartford, Conn. Branch, Charles Hoamor, Sec. 
Lyme, (First Society,) Oliver J. Lay, Sec. . . 

NewHaTen, J. L.Croai, Ag 

Norwalk,S.J.Froit,Tr. 



For TV. 

960 00 

1 18 
11 00 
37 34 



17 00 
150 00 

8 86 
90 00 

1 74 



Den. 

5 76 
8» 



18 00 
1 00 

8 69 



ft£CEIFTS, 



Sharon, ChfvletF.fiMfwIck, Sec 

NEW-YOKK^BedfQrd, Fern. Mrs. Susan S. Nichols, Sec. 

Colchester, DeL Co., E. Downs, Sec 

Colombia in Walton, Del. Co. Darius Seely, Sec. • 

Harlaem,Feni. BIis8LfletitiaDoaglity,Tr. .... 
Hunter, Greene Co.. WUIiam W. Ed warda» Fraa. 
Middle District, Suffolk Co. SeldenHerrick,Ag. . . 
NewHochelle, Fem. Miss Sophia Brewster, Sec. 

New Windsor, Silas Corwin, Tr. 

New York City, St.tSeo. Church, Fem.Mi88 Ann Dominick, Tr. 
Piattsbory, William Weed, Ag. ... . . . 

Richmond, Stat. IsL Fem. Mrs. Miller, Tr 

B,{e, Fem. Ann H. Baddy, Sec. • « . . . 

Scotchtown, John McWilliam8,.Tr 

Sheldon, Geneaee Co., , 

Troy, Charles Lyman, Tr ' . 

Utjca, Edward Vernon, Sec. . . .' . 

NEW JERSEY-^-JOooaafield, Robert R. Kellogg, Sec. . 

Caldwell, Jonattian Provost, Tr 

Greenwich, Juv. Fem. Margaret McMortree, See. 

Hardwick Coiq^. Warten Cou, Fem. Miss Sarah M. Roy, Tr. . 

Newark, A. Woodruff, Tr. . . 

Oxford Fem, Mrs. S. Sheered, Tit 

Peterson, Henry VandSoutni, Tr. 

Princeton, Fem. Miss F.W.Morford,Tr< .... 

Someryille, Fem. Ann H. Griffith, Tr. 

Westfield, Fem. Misa Mary Pierson, Sec 

Woodbridge, Fem. H.B. Barton, Sec. . , . . 

MABaLAND.->-Worce8terCo. Fem. Mary Camnbelk Sec. 

VIRGINIA.--Farmville, John Rice, Tr. . . 

LOU-— New Orleans Board of Agency, Wm. W. Caldwell. Tr, 

KENTUCKY^DanTille, Michael G. Youce, Ag. 
Lexington, L. Stephens, Ag. .... 

MICH.TER^Tecttm8eh, Fem. Miss EmeMjie Holbrook! Sec 

UP. CANADA.— Brockville, Fem, Mrs. Philena Smart. Sec 
SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 

VERMONT.— Poultney, Jonathan R. Wheeler, Tr. 

NEW-YORK^Albany, N. York State Temperance Soc. 

N. JBRw— Peterson, in 2d Ref. Dutch Ch. Ralph Doremus Tr 

LOUISIANA.— New Orleans, Female, . . . \> 

Tracts sold at the I>ejpo8itory to Individuals,- (including*$50 for 
use of room, and $29, 79 received by an Agent of the Soc. for com- 
mission on Books sold, and for writing. . • . . 

Mtmbtrtfar Ltfe. 
MASS.— Reading, Rev. Jared Reed, 

by Ladies of his Soc. . . . $20 
FENNw— Wateborg, Rev. Absalom 

McCready, by Fem. Ben. Soc. 



! 



733 


577 


19 40 


432 


135 


loop 


20D 


2 40 


1 87 


3 52 


32 53 


3 73 


2 05 


54 


500 


-50 00 


50 00 


6 40 


8 80 


1 25 


4 00 


26 66 


75 


3 60 


3 00 


750 


369 


48 


10 00 


15 20 


115 39 


50 00 


158 62 


10 00 


20 00 


25 00 


1 50 



294 76 



00 



2?i.5"'J?l-^.n i • *, • l^ 1<> W PENN.^»hiladelphia, Ri)birt'Rils-' 



KEN.— Danville, Rev. Joseph Hn 



Aummal Directreu. 
NEW-YORK.— New-York Cit^, Mrs. 

Murray, 5 

JtnaauU Member. 
NEW-YORK.— New-York City, Wai- 
iamW. Jackson, . ... 2 
Other DinuUiona. 
VERMONT.— Kingston^ Solomon 

Bumham, Jnn 1 

CONN.— Coventry, G. Page, . . 1 
NewCanaan, Mrs. Rachel Weed, .1 



4 65 



3 44 



3 50 



40 00 



2 50 



IMymouth, Andrew Stoogfaton, 
NEW.YORK.-Merideth, Rev. 
William Fisher, . . . . . 2 12 
New-York</ity, Anonymous, for 
Foreign Distribution .... 5 00 



ton, for Foreign distribution, . 20 00 



ber, by himself, (inpart of $20.) 12 00 GE0.-Savannah, Geo. W. Coe E^. 10 W 
Anmud Direetreee. «. «„. McQueen, by W. C. w3- 

lace, 15 00 

00 LOU.— New Orleans, Sea Captains, 2 00 
The above list contains donatM>ns— 
For Tracts for foreign countries, $25 00 



00 



00 
00 
00 



Whole amount of donations, . $193 83 
Received for Tracts sold, . . 2,175 53 



Total, $2,369 41 



CorrsctMm.— The $50, acknowledged in die July Bfagazine as received from H 
Page, N. Y. for a premium Tract, should have been from H. P. of N. Y. and A. K. of 
Ohio. 



THE AMERICAN 



VOL. ¥1. Hr&WSXBSAj 1831. NO. 11. 



SKEYCH OF THE 

ORIGIN AND CHAjtACTER 

OF 

THE PRINCIPAL SERIEp OF TRACTS 

OP tax * • . 

AaCBUXOAW VmAOT SOOXXIV7. 

Note. — The figures following the title of each Tract show the nQih- 
ber of pages it contains, counting the covers of the Tracts ofS pages 
anH over as 4 pages each.— (1^) signifies that t\te Tract is reprinted 
from the publications of the Religious Tract Society in London. — (p) 
signifies th(|t funds have been contributed for keeping the Tract in 
perpetual drculatioi^. — The naiiie following the title is that of the 
writer of the Tract. Where the initials only are inserted, fhey are 
the reai initials of the writer*s name, which the Committee have not 
eonsidered themselves at liberty to publish entire. 

JCr' A REGIUEST. — Persons having authentic information 
relative to the origin of the Society's Tracts, which is not em- 
bodied in this Sketch, are respectfaUy requested to communicate 
it to Wu-LiAM A. Hal^ock, Corresponding Secretary of the So- 
ciety, New- York, to be used in such manner as they shall di- 
rect; and also to furnish data for the correction of any errors 
discovered, which the most vi^lant attention in the preparation 
of the list may not have been sufficient entirely to avoid. 



1. Address of the Executive Commit- 
tee of the American Tract Society, 38. 
Rev. Gerdiner Spring, D. D. New- York, 
lanird Jane, 1895, immediately after the 
formation of the Society ; sig-ned by the 
Rev. Dra. Milnor, Sprinf, Knox, and Ed- 
wards, and Rev. Messrs. Sommers and 
flimuBerfleld. Slioiirinir the principles on 
which the Society was formed, by a nnicm 
of pwsbns of diflTerent religions denomi- 
nauoos, and the excellence of the Tract 



System ; with Narratires of the uaeAil 
of Tracts. 



%. Work of the Holy Spirit, 90. (L.) 
Rer. Robert Hall, A. M., Bristol, Cnflr- 
land. Ably sbowinir the means by which 
we may hope to enjoy His Messed Jnflu* 
ences. 

3. Friendly Visit to the Hovse of 
Mnnrning, 3A. (L.) Rev. Richard Cecil, 
London. Rich, serious and tender, di- 
rectinir the afflicted to Hie true aoureea of 
consolation and spiritual improvement. 



Vol. VI. 11 jWholb No. 68. 



134 



ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF TRACTS. 



[Nov. 



4 Without Holiness no Man ihaU'see I the American Society's edition of each 

the Lord, 4. A pungent, awakeniDg ap- '»-- -• -^ »• -w-i— ^ 

peal. 

6. The Warning Voice, IS. (L.) Rev. 
Robert Stevenson, lute of Castle Hed- 
dingham,Eng. Powerfully portraying to 
the impenitent their danger, and way of 
escape through Christ. 

0. Traveler and YourseW; 4» (L.) Rev. 
George Burder, London. A serious, fa- 
miliar dialogue with one expecting salva- 
tion without the New Birth. ^ 

7. The Happy Negro. 12. (L.) The late 
Ambrose Serle, Esq. EUg. An affecting 
conversation between an English gentle- 
man and a pious American negro. 

0. On the*Lord's Day, 4. (L.) Rev. 
George BurdQr, London. A short, affec- 
tionate plea for the Sabbath. 



O. The Dairyman's Daughter. An au- 
thentic Narrative. Abridged, 32. (L.) Rev. 
Legh Richmond, late Rector of Turvey, 
Eng. Illustrating, with unparalleled beau- 
ty and interest, the triumphs of Divine 
/race. Written while the author was 
Curate of Brading Parish,. In the Isle of 
Wight, between the years 1798 and 1804. 
First published in the " Christian Guar- 
dian," then as a Tract, and in 1814 is- 
sued with the Young Cottager and the 
African Servant in one volume, enlitled 
« The Annals of the Poor." Rev. T. S. 
Grimshawe, author of the Life- of Rev. 
Mr. Richmond, in chapter 10, substan-. 
tiates these Tracts as being narratives of 
Ikcts. The testimony of a friend is ad- 
duced, who bad collated the letters of the 
Dairyman's Daughter with the original, 
and found them unchanged in any essen^ 
tial particular. The Rev. Dr. Milnor, 
chairman of the Committee of the Ame- 
rican Tract Society, in 1830, visited the 
cottage where the Dairyman's Daughter 
died ; saw her brother a;ad her Bible ; and 
followed the path in which her funeral 
procession went, to her grave, in Arrcton 
churchyard, where a neat monument has 
been erected by Christian friends, as a 
tribute to her memory. He saw the 
cliff where Rev. Mr. Richmond held his 
interesting conversation with the " Afri- 
can Servant;" went to the grave of the 
*t Young Cottager," in Brading church- 
yard ; and with these three Tracts in his 
hand, visited most of the scenery therein 
.described, and found it. delineated with 
inimitoble accuracy and beauty. See ex- 
tract from Dr. MUaOr'a Journal, Ameri- 
can Tract Magazine, Jan. 1831. Each of 
these'Tracts has 'been published by the 
London Religious Tract Society. In 



the descriptive parts are much abridged. 
See also Rev. Mr. Tyerman's testimony 
to the authenticity of No. 9, in Tract 
No. 80. 

10- Shepherd of Salisbury Plain, 38 
Mrs. Hannah More. Illustrating the ex- 
cellence of ibristian character in the 
humblest poverty. It is one of the *' Cheap 
Repository Tracts,^ published by Mrs. 
More and others at the close of the last 
century. Of this Tract Mrs. More said 
to a friend, that she believed it had been 
the most useful <^ all her jpublications. 
The subject of the Narrative is David 
Saunders, of West LavingtOn, England, 
who^as bora in 1717, and died Sept. 
1796. A tombstone was erected to his me- 
jnory in 1829 by the Vicar of the parish 
where he lived and died. The genUeman 
mentioned in the Tract was Sir James 
Stonefaouse, who much assisted the Shep- 
herd in his poverty. The Rev. George 
Bourne, of New-York, was acquainted 
with the Shepherd, when 72 years of 
age. In 1829 Mr. Henry Caswell- of 
Eng. visited the cottage where he lived, 
and had a very interesting interview 
with the' youngest son of the Shepherd, 
who substantiated all the principal facttt 
contained in the Tract. See Am. Tra(:t 
Magazine, Oct.1827 and Dec. 1829.' 



11. 'Tis all for the Best, 20. From the 
''Cheap Repository." See No. 10. A 
pleasing narrative, inculcating a cheerful 
and entire submission to the divpensatioDB 
of Providence^ 



\% Profane Swearing, 4. (L.) Rev* 
Dr. Newman and Rev. George Burder 
Eng. The evil of profane swearing illup- 
trated by a few anecdotes, and briefly en- 
forced by argument. 

19. To the Spectator of a Funeral. A. 
(L.) Rev. Dr. Newman, England. Show- 
ing how die funeral scene should be im- 
proved. 

14. The Poor Villager, 12. (L.) An au- 
thentic History. Ascribed to |lev. John 
Griffin, Portsea, Eng. Showing the pow- 
er and efficacy of Evangelicid religion, 
eon trasted .with a cold formality. 

15« The Progress of Sin, 12. (L.) Rev. 
Andrew Fuller, late of Kettering, Eng. 
Considerations showing tiie tendency to 
progression in iniquity, with an illustra- 
tion, by Dr. Witherspoon, of the steps in 
the downward course. 

11$. Pious Resolutions, 4. From the 
London Christiau Observer, 1802. Evi - 
dently made by one ripening in the 
Christian course, for the gmdance of 
his spiritual life and conduct.. 



1831.] 



ORIGIN AND CHABACTER OP TRACTS. 



Ida 



17* Parley the Porter, 16. From the 
*< Cheap Repository.** See No. 10. An 
inieresting alleijrory, showing the neces- 
sity of a steadfast resistance to the very 
beginnings of temptation. 

Phdip Doddridge, l>. D. A very serious, 
moving, and almost resistless appeal. 

19. Dialogues between a Minister and 
aParishioner, 24. (L.) Rev. Thomaji Vi- 
vian, late Vicar of Corn wood, England. 
Sho#inrg the necessity of regeneration 
in order to salvation. 

20* "Remember the Sabbath Day to 
keep it holy," 4.- A brief and excellent 
appear for the Sabbath. With the testi- 
mony of Ju^ge Hale. 

2U. A CioeetCoapaBion, 13. Serious 
directions for self-examination, and qaea- 
tions concerning faith and its fruits. 

2^ Repentance and Happy Death of 
the Earl oTRocheoter, 12. (L ) Abstract- 
ed (torn BiiUiop Burnet's Reflections, by 
Kev. i. Burder. Showring the triumphs 
of Dtvine grace in the conversion of an 
Atheist notoriously immoral. 

23. God a Refiire, 12. Rev. Moses 
Stuart, Prof.Theol.8em. Andover. Ten- 
derly portraying the necessity and the 
per^ction of this Refuge. . 

SM* On Keeping the Heart, 16. (L.) 
Rev. John Flavel. Seriously exhibiting 
the importance of this work, and the me- 
thod or i|s performance. 

25. Effects of Ardent Spirits, 12.Ben- 

e' unki Rush, M. D. late of Pfaihutelphia. 
xtracted from hia <* Inquiry into the 
Effects of Ardent Spirits on the human 
Body and Mind." 



30* Benevolence of God, 16. Paitiev. 
lariy as displayed in the work of Re- 
demption. From the "Evangelical' 
Rambler,*' a series of Tracts published 
in London, Und aaeribed to Rev. Timothy 
East, of Birminitbam, commencing in 
1822 ; in the advertisement to which it 
was the pledge of the author, that "truth 
should form the basis of every narrative, 
and of every scene of description." 

.w??: ®'^*"« ^»"y" ^^ ChUdren, 2«. 
(L.) Rev. Isaac Watts, D. D. Enuland. 
injmitable rrf their sunplicity and adao- 
tation tor the use of Children. * 

3a- Day of Judgment, 16. Rev. Archi- . 
bald Alexander, D. D., Prof. Tbeol. Sem. 
Princeton, New Jersey. A moving, prac- 
tical presentation of ihe solemnities of 
that day. 

33* Redemption, 36. Joseph John 
Giirney, Norwich, Eng. Member of the - 
Society of Friends, Containing an able 
urguincnt for the iiuthenxicicy of the 
Bible, and a clear elucidation of the doc- 
trine of Redemption. 

34. A Sabbath at Home, 16. From the 
" Evangelioal Rambler." See No. 30. . 
The meditations of a Christian detained 
from public worship, embracing Bishop 
Home's commentary on the 84th PsaluT. 

u 3 ^' '''?** Wj*'**'^*'' ®*»»» ^- Fvom tite 
** Evangelical Rambler .'i See No. 30 A 
narrative, showing the progress of a * 
young man, religiously e4ucated, in his 
career of dissipation and vice, and the 
power of grace in reclaiming him. 

*h?.?^ "^^ r^^fi* Funeral, Ifi. From 
the •• Evangehcal Rambler." See No. 30. 
A narrative of the define, death, and bu- 
rial of a pious wife and mother, with the " 
reflections occasioned by the scejxe. 



ft6. Sin no Trifle, 4. (L.) Rev. Dr. 
Newman, Eng. The great folly and dan- 
ger of makiug light of sin. 

27- Parental Putins, 16. (L.) R«v. J. 
Tovvnsend, lateof B«;rmond8cy, and Rev. 
Dr. Newman, England.* Urging the im- 
portance and best methods of imparting 
religious instruotion to children. 

S^Q. Instruction of Rising Generation, 
20. (L.) Rev. Mr. Bogue,late of Gosport, 
Eng. Showing the necessity and best 
methods of universally diffusing the 
means of religious knowledge. 

15^&v^?«!?i' W»«"iy??*'r" ^'■^''®''' *»»• •"'"«' "' ^niiaren, lo. Ably prfe 

12. Rjv.Isaac Watts, D. D. Eog. Con- senting the obligations of chHdren to th«^r 

siderations to induce prayer, and advice parenu, and sliowing iu wh^t e^^iS 

as tcrtiie mode of its performance. they should be discharged. 



i.-^7l^^ Sabbath a Blessing to Jlan- 
Kind, 20. Rev Gardiner Spring, D D 
Originally addressed to the citizens of 
New York. Showing the advantages at- 
tcadaut on the observance of the Sab- ^ 
bath. 

r r?^* 2'"f ^ Doudney 24. Rev. John 
Griffin, Portsea, Eng. A simple and af- 
fecting narrative, iUustrating the excel- 
lence of early piety. Mr.Tappan, who 
W!i8 acquainted with the family of Dinah. . 
and the author of this Tract and No. 109 
states that they are accurate narratives of 
facts. 

39. Duties of Children, 16. Ably pr6 



196 



ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OP TRACTS. 



[Nov, 



/ 



• AA Address to Young Christians, IS. | D. D. Eng. A ftrnfliar CatocWim on sfe. 
(tJpiatiS^Uhe meSis of spiriioal •g«to*God, onrneightor andoiupwlvej^ 



and on the frailties and foUles of yout^ 
with the author's Minor Catechisms ftr 
children under six or seven years oM. 
Recommended by the Committee to pa- 
rents and teachers, as the basis of their 
daily instnictiotts to their vcbildren and 
pupils. 

k%, Letter ftom an Aged Mother t» 

her Only Son, 4. Botfa-of New England. 

I A serious and earnest iqH»^ '^^'"^ 



improvement and growth in grace 

41. Persuasive to Public Worship, 12. 
(L.)lUv.Oe«geBurder,London, raith- 
fiiliy and tenderly presenting th^ reasons 
for the duty. 

4i% ImporUnce Ot l^lpeaking Truth, 
12. (L.) The enormity of tte sin of Lying, 
th& temptations to4t, and the means of 
gui^ding agunst them. 

43. On TemTOrance, 4.^Condenarf I" ^-~j- j^^-^^^ leave the 

tfom a Tract, 0^.) with this tiUe, present- "«rf. .^K ^...A- 

ing the testimony of able Physicians on 
the e0tets of Intemperai^ce in the use of 
Food, and flrom a Tract on the effects tif 
Strong Drink, entifled '* Reasra's Plea 
for Temperance, by a layman of the 
last century.*' 

44. Addrett to Tootii, 10. Rev. Daniel 
D«na,D. D.Newboryport, Mass. Found- 
ed on the text, **My son, give me thy 
heart," and showing the claims of God 
oh all, and especially the young, to give 
their hearts to him. 



world, to an ungodly son. 

48* "The AfKoaa Servant. An Anthentie 
Narrative, 20. <L.) Rev. LeghRiehmond. 
See No. 9. Illustrating with unparalleled 
sweetness and beautythe adapU^on of tho 
Gospel to iSie humbleet mind, and the tri- 
umphs of grace id traaslbrmiag the cha- 
racter of the poor African. 

Solenm b^driea and Cownsel to 
Sinners, 4. (L.) 



jtanSen 



• 44. The Christian Atonement, 16. 
(L.) From the Edinburgh ReLTr. Soc. 
Ascribed to Rev. Dr. Campbell, of Edin- 
burgh. A very rich, scriptural and prac- 
tic J presentation of the doctrine. . 

I 44. Subjects for Consideration, 13. 
(L.) From Reynold's Compassionate 
Address. Holding distincdy to view the 
great subieeu pertaining to our rela- 
tidns to God add eternity. 

47. To the Afflicted, 12. (L.) B.ev. 
Dr. Newman, Eng. How afflictions should 
be improved, that they may become our 
richest blessings. 

44. To the Aged. 12. (L.) Rev. John 
Townsen^ late of Bermondsey, Eng. A 
serious and affectionate address, adapted 
botii to the penitent and impenitent. 



49. Lilh of Rev. John Cowper, 20. 
(L.) By his brother, William Cowper, 
Esq. Author of " The Task," with a brief 
memoir of the writer. An affecting narra- 
tive of his conversion, after preachingten 
years without having at heart any saving 
knowledge of Christ. Transcribed aha 
pfiblished by Rev. John Newton. 

40. The Sufrearer's Prayer, 4. (L.) 
Waiiam Rust, Esq. late of Hull, Eng. 
A terrific and heart-rending appeal to the 
t^rofiine, which 1ms been blesMd without 
apardUel. 

411. Preservative againft the Sins and 
FoBiesof Yottth,24. Itev. Isaac Watts, 



6^. The WeU Spent Day, 16. From 
Doddridge's " Rise and Progress." Show- 
ing by what methods, in our daily coM- 
duct, a life of devotion and usoAilness mur 
be most happily mahiiained and secwed. 

54. Blind EUen, 12. <L.) Am Authentic 
Narrative, by pn English Lady. See 
Proceedings 1st 20 years, Lou. Tr. Soc. 
p. 102. Exemplifying the power and 
excellenee K>f the Gospel, in the frugal. 
ity, industry, cheerfhlness, su hmi s si oa 
and gratitude to God of an aged Chris- 
tian, blind, and in abject poverty. 

47. Duties to Relatives, 12. (L.) R«v. 
Mr. Bennett, -of Romscy, Eng. Motives 
for Seeking the conversion of impenitent 
relatives, and the means to be used. 

94. Elizabeth Loveless, 12. (L.) By 
some attributed to> Hannah Mere. A 
simple narrative of the industry, econo- 
my, patience, and filial love, exemplified 
by a daughter put out to service, and the 
smiles of Providence on her endeavors. 



99. To Mourners, 40. Rev. John Fla- 
velT Eng. Admu^ly adapted to admin- 
istor consolation : showing how &r grief 
may be indulg^ ; when it becomes im- 
moderate ; dissuading from its excess ; 
tenderly reftating the mourner's pleas ; 
and pointing out the remedy for excessivh 
grief. 

40. Growth in Grace, 16. Rev. Tho- 
mas Goodwin, D. D« Eng. Showing with 
much discrimination what are not, and 
what are, evidenoes of growth in grace. 



I831.J 



OBIGIN AND CHARACTBR OF TRACTS. 



137 



_01. Ob PariQriBj the HJBart, 16. Her. 
Thomaa Goodwin D. 0., Englaod. Tke 
aeaii% hy which God purifies bit chH- 
dr«D, and the evidencee a Christian may 
have, that Gc»d is, or is Bot,pnrifyinf his 
heart. 

68* Twenly-two Reasons for not be- 
inf a Ronian Catholic, 38. Each of them 
Mbetautiated by an appeal both to the 
Received and to the Uraay, or Roman 
Catholic Version ;. the proof passafes be- 
ing presented in parallel columai, with 
appropriate remarks. From the Dublin 
edition. 

69' The Cottager's Wife,. S8. By a 
Clergyman of the Church of England. 
Vrom die London ChrisUanObserrer, for 
1813. AdelightAil narrative of the de- 
cline and. death of a devout servant of 
Christ in very humble poverty. 



^__ The Interpreter's House, 12. 
(L.) Extracted froi^ "Banyan's Pil- 
grim's Progress." Containing variova 
iwHtructions as from the Holy Spirit, to 
guide the Christian in bis pilgrimage to 
a better country. 

6S. To a Youth at School, 4. (L.) 
^•v. Dr. Newman and Rev. Joseph 
Hughes,- Enaland. Directions as to moral 
conduct, and persuasives t6 early piety. 



__ On SpirKnal Declension, 80. 
Rev. Charles P. Mc'Dvaine, Brooklyn, 
New-York. Showing in a movingmanner 
die symptoms of spiritual decline among 
the nmmbers ct a church, and the causes 
by which it is induced. 

^7* To a Married Couple, 33. Rev. 
James Bean, A. M. England. A very val- 
uable treatise, proper to be presented 
to every married couple; showing the 
dangers to which they are exposed, their 
relative duties, and the influence of true 
religion on their own happiness and that 
of their household. 

68* Poor Joseph, 4. (L.) Rev. Dr. 
Cwuny, Londottr A narrative ot the 
conversion of an individual of Uito hum- 
blest capacity, through the simple story 
Ihnt *« JesMs Christ oatte into the world' to 
Mve sinners.** 

09. Religion of the Closet, 90. Rev. 
James Bennett, D. D., President of Ro- 
tfaerbam College, Eng. A most valuable 
treatise, describing the various duties of 
■eeff«t devotion, the manner in which they 
should be discharged, and the motives for 
tkair ptrformaace. 

70* DoelriMt aad DatsM, in ten- 



ffuage of the Bible, 34. (L.) Extracts 
fW>m tbe BiUe, substantiating the pro- 
minent doctrines and duties of Christia> 
nity. 

71- The Bible above all Price, 90. 
Rev. Edward Payson, D. D., late of Port- 
land, Maine. An admirable Trsct, show- 
ing the excellence ot the IMrie, viewed 
as a human composition, and as a reve*- 
lation fhmi God. 

78* Sixteen Short Sermons, 94. (L.) 
Rev. Mr. Biddulph, Bristol, Eng. Very 
serious and pointed, on the principal 
doctrines cf religion, clearly unfolding 
the way <tf kaliration throng a Redeemer. 

73* FashionaUe Amusements, 16. 
Prepared by Rev* E. W. Baldwin, of 
New- York, and revised by Leonard 
Woods, D. D., Andover. The arguments 
in fiivor 4^ such amusemnrts met, and 
their inconsistency with oar best good in 
this worid, and with the Bible, portrayed. 

7^ Great EifocU Resaltfrom Little 
Causes, 16. Rev. Ebeneaer Porter, D. D., 
President Theol. Sem., Andover. Bean- 
tifttUy illustrated by facte in sacred aad 
proHue history, and applied to the res- 
ponsibilities of common lilb, and onr dwty 
and encouragements to labor for the coa- 
versiou o^ the world. 

78. Life of WillUiia Kelly, 90. <L.) 
Rev. Hugh Stowell, of the Ue of Man, 
Eng. An antbaitie narrative of a poor 
native of that island, who at 30 was an 
habitual drankntd, but became a new 
man, aad for the Inst 40yeaEs of bis life 
delightfully etempUlied . the Christian 



76- To-Dny, 19. (L.) WiOiamRast, 
Esq., late, of Hnll, Eng. An alwnnty 
appeal, urging the impenitent immedi- 
ately to surrender themselves to Christ. 

77* Historv of a BiUe, 16. Ascribed 
to Rev. J. W. Cunningham, author of 
the Velvet Cushion. In tbe form .of an 
adto-biogra|diy, describing, with sinfufar 
vivacity, the happy-influence of a Bible 
on the members of different fanalies into 
which i| gained admission. 

78' Abigail Hvtchinsoa, 19. By Pre- 
sident Edwprds. A particular nanraavo 
ot the reugkNiii exercises ot a young 
woman, hopefolly converted und^ the 
author's ministry, in the great revival of 
religion in New England about the year 
1740, with the histoij of her subsequent 
life and death. 

78' The YoQSg Cottagar, 40. (L). (p) 
Rev. Legh Riehaoad «MNo.t. Am 



:uT.c; 



clilldintln lalnblry ctf iIhi Omp*!- 

80 Thu Diinwr of DbIbt. 18- (!■) 
Kov, JnliB C«iiii>l«n. D. n_ BdtBbi>rf h. 
Seriou.ly ihd tWiU/ nr^Df the AXly 

?1. Thd Swnwii'i BpT-filM^ SO. 
Ret R. MarlM, OreB Ml-Mnd™. 
EiiB,>fopn»Hf "IJwiwnMiliiitheRajHl 

0''. Sin ind r>*njrBr of De^iBop n 
Pnaehud Q«pfl. 19. Ri>-«rilb<n b^ 

tnn in oH Hlhiir. Tit —-'- 



J CBARACTER OP TRACTS. [NoT. 

GrCQl MIsHndm, Eng.. AniHrlr m Lle^- 
WBii' I in IhaRoyil Naif. Siitliiined 
ihrmifhov -iih imertu, in m Siilort 
lOrle ) one o( lh«in. wha t> (K JntdliBf nt 
Chrlnlwii, |[r»*m1ly nuftiWiiij to hts 

tlOD lij Jout ChiiM. 




tpaiiia.34,(L.) ABvp- 

Bun, kul bwD blessn) in dn 
- IheUiourblleK Bailor. BRl 

Dtirymui, as^ Rsr D 
iwinR.I.k' of Wi^htjEnj.. 

wA a™.. A oarnilire sf 
lhe«[Mrfmaii'>DaIlg1ltwl> 

iailHq^erj ond di«l, agcrt 



(3e» No. >.: 

iJi-efly Ihronrh Ihtf pi< 
juKiiplDofl----- ^ 
frS, enjoj-injl 

90. AWordiiiSaMl.ia. AKrteli 

"1. airininn iji' view of DoUll, IS. 



S5«WMehnin)i»r (ItH hi! Family, M 
(L.) Tlii. T«ct, llM Tw. OkJ M-n, No 


0!>. Tbe Gr«l QufilioB Aniwered, 


SO. (L.) Ip) Rc>. A ndren Fullar. Iste nf 
» ■»*« lo Ific iaqidry, " WhU niiM 1 


m and diF Bwin Pfosul, No. I»l, were 


>r.nd.»d from lb. f r.«* «f 5«»- r-" 


•u Malan, of fitmera, tor lbs Rrlipona 


>la lo be ..nd ?■ Bbiwioi nu't noiia 


Tract Socioiy. I jindon, who bale " lull- 
ritnt ..kh.n» ihal Oil]' >re t«M^i^ <m 


oTwlTWioB; llie pcoyUM Budetor Mb 
hfCbrin. and hftduly lo enbiua il| 


IkOM. nad MTiuliilly corrMl r^t-""- 


■lib warBliifi afainit Ibul emn to 


Uona of irhnl netuiny oceomd."— An 


.hieh the iuyuriBf noBor i. eipoKd. 


Sd. Hi»on sfMrt Toolj. an emi- 


BHilCkn.liar'Lady In London, la. For- 


Trail Boeiely. Narrating a ploaiinj inci- 












flfl.' To ■ Fenwn rM«t«n1 IVDin 





ila aiwa], ut^B% 



1831.] 



ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF TRACTS. 



189 



M- The Sftilor^s Friend, 13. A serioiu 
addren to Seamen on the danger of losing 
the mul, and the way of ralvation by 
Christ. 

97* Parting address to a Sabbath- 
School Child, 12. (I^ Rev. Dr. Newman, 
Eng. Urging him to consider what he has 
been taugl^t ; what is expected of hhn ; and 
his prospects for this life and that to come. 

.98« The New Birth, 16. An able, prac- 
tical treatise on the nature of Regenera- 
tion, its evidences, and its fruits. 

99* Sanctified Afflictions, 20. The 
benefits to be derived from afflictions^ and. 
the evidences that they are really sanc- 
tified to us. 

100* Advice from a Master to his 
Apprentice, 12. (L.) Valuable counsel and 
cautions to gaide a young man, when clo- 
Bing hjs apprenticeship and entering on 
life for himself. 

XOl. True Believer BountiiUl, 16. 
Rev. Daniel A. Clark. A Premium Tract. 
Urging, from the most weighty considera- 
tions, ^he duty oif professors of rdigion 
to consecrate their property to the spread 
•f the Goepel. 

lOfiU Saturday Night, 16. (L.) Rev. 
J. Haslock, Kentish Tows, Eng. A Dia- 
logue, in very fhmiliar style, between two 
laboring men, on receiving their wages 
on Saturday evening; containing a plea- 
sing argument for keeping holy the Lord's 
Day. 

103> Every Han the Friend or En- 
emy of Christ, 12. An alarming appeal, 
showing what it is to be for Christ, and 
what to be against him, and that there is 
no middle ground. 

ICMk* Anecdotes, illustratingtbe Use- 
AilnessofTracts, 32. Comprising a great 
variety of interesting incidents, commu- 
nicated from unquestionable sources. 

105* Happy Waterman, 12. (L.) 
From the <' Cheap Repository." See No. 
10. — ^A narrative of the rigid economy 
and stirioC integrity of a poor waterman 
and his family, and the smiles of Provi- 
dence upon them. 

106' Pause and Think, Am I a Chris- 
tian f 28. Rev. Joseph Alleioe, Eng.^ 
From his '* Alarm to Unconvierted Sin- 
ners.** A most .awakening treatise, show* 
ing the nature,, necessity, and eii^idences 
of saving' conversion, and the isarkt and 
misery of the unconverted, with motives 
to the immediate re<*^ption of Christ and 
his salvation ^ 



^ 107* Little Henry and his Bearer, 96. 
Mrs. Sherwood, Enr. An entertaining 
narrative of a child lelt an orohan in In- 
dia ; the course of instruction mipart^ to 
him from the Bible by a pious friend, and 
blessed to his conversion ; his efforts to 
enlighten and save his Hindoo Bearer ; 
and his early death. 

108- True Prophecras, 16. (L.) The 
late W.Shrubsole, Esq.<Eng. Describing 
the votary of vice, the Sabbath-breaker, 
the formalist, the contemner of religion, 
Sec. and foretelling the ends to whieh their 
various courses, persevered in, will 
lead. 

109- James Covey, 4. (L.)Rev. John 
Griffin, Portsea, Eng. See No. 38. An 
authentic and striking < narrative of the 
conversion of a vile blaspheming sailor. 

no* To the^ick, who are without 
Hope in Christ, 4. (L.) An earnest ex- 
postulation, urgmg an aceeptance of the 
terms of mercy through a Redeemer. 

111. Sinner directed to the Savior, 
12. (L.) Rev. John Flavel, Eng. Showing 
the all-sufficiency of Christ as a Savior, 
and tenderly persuading the sinner to 
"Behold the Lamb of God,*' that he 
may live. With "a Specimen of Welch 
Preaching." 

lift- Peter and John Hay, 16. From 
the " Dmhkard's Lookir" fsiasg,** byM. 
L. Weems, author of the LJe of Wash- 
ington ; communicated to him by CoL 
Thomas Taylor, fhther of Col. Taylor, of 
United States Senate. A narraave show- 
ing the blight of intemperance on the 
fiiirest earthly pronpects, and ihe Drunk- 
ard's miserable end.. 

113* Questions and Counsel, 4. Rev. 
Asbbel Green, D. O. late President of Nas- 
sau Hall, Princeton, N. Jersey. Brief and 
Scri|>tural directions **fQr those who hope 
a work<^ saving grace has been wrought 
upontheurtearts.'' 

114v Serious Thoughts on Eternity, 
12. (L.) From the Treatise of Rev. Job 
Orton. • An alarming, pungent q;>peal. 

\ 116- Decay of Spiritual Affections, 
12. Rev. John Owen, D. D. pescribing 
this state in a professed f<dlower of 
-ChrfiK, its danger, audits remedy. 

1X6' Sabbath Oocnpations, 16. <L.) 
The late Rev. Hans Hamilton, Enmid. 
The aneedotM intbe middle from aTract 
of the Ameriean Tract Society, Boston, 
by Rev. J. Edmurda, .D. D. Meeting the 
exevses urged ior die vieladon or the 
day ; relatiig tutfmwu hutaaces of the 



1^ 



(AI6IN AND CHARACTEB 01? TRACTS. 



[Nov. 



aaddan daath and miMralile end of Sab- 
bMh-braakera, with directiona for the 
rig hi ifli|irovemeBt of the day. 

XX7* Important Qaestiona, with an- 
swers from the Bible, 16. (L.) Rev. J. 
Townaend and Rev. J. Bull, Newport, 
Pa{rnell, Eng. Embracing a series of 
practical questions pertaining to the sal- 
vation of the soul, aud the great truth* 
aiid doctrines of the Goopel. 

XX8* Friendly Conversation, 4. (L.) 
Rev. Mr. Mljinn, Eng. Answering the 
inqoiries, ** What are you? What oucht 
you to be 1 What must you be, in order 
to be saved ?" 

1 1 9. A Strange Thing, 16. Rev. Jacob 
Ide, Medway, Mass. Showing that if the 
doctrine of Universal Salvation be true, 
it is *' Strange'* that the apostles roani- 
ftsted so much wrficitude, lued such lan- 
gfiage« awakened so>mucb alarm, and ex- 
cited so mnch opposition, and that GcrI 
treats Ins creatures as ha does in thia 
world. 

X ^01. Heaven Lost, 90. From Baxter's 
8aint*s Rest. Showing, in a most awaken- 
ing .manner, what the ungodly lose in 
this world, and what<. they shaU lose in 
eternity. 

XdX* On the Lord*8 Prayer, 12. (L.) 
From the Yilli^e Skrmons of Rev. Geo. 
Barder, London. Exidaining the import 
of the several petitimia in the Lord's 
Prayer. 

X22* The Criminal Court, 13. (L.) 
The lirte Robert Steven, Esq. London. 
The scenes of a Criminal Court made the 
occaAion of contemplating the«oremnlties 
of the Day of Judgment. * 

X^. Leslie's Method with the Deists, 
94. (L.) Condensed by the Rev. Francis 
Wrangham, Eng. An imanewerable «lr- 
gament for the truth of Cbrirtiauity ; lay- 
ing down inilnbitable marki <^ the truth 
•f matters of fact in general, add showing' 
that these are applicable to the matters of 
fact of ihe fiible, and to those related of 
no other religion. 

Xft^ A Traveller's Farewell, .4. (L.) 

Rev. Mr. H , Eng. Inquiring whedier 

lieehall meet the reader in heaven, or hell ; 
and urging with great seriousness the 
iniportance of a preparation lor death. 

X2Ck> Fatal Effects of Ardent Spirits, 
3S. Rev. E. Porter, D. D. Pres. Theo. 
Sem. Andover. Its effects Ufion indnslry, 
health, property, reason, social life, and 
the general t haraeter ; with an appeal to 
the various classes of the community to 
withstand its ruinoo* iaiiuenoe. Enforc- 



ed by a retistleaa amy of *' Stnbborn 
Facts." 

Xd6« Susan Ward, 16. (L.) By an 
English Lady. A substantially authentic 
narrative of the conversion of a po»r wo- 
man in Leicestershire, Eng., whoeonld 
uot read ; showing that the want of hu- 
man learning ia no excuse for a rejection 
of Christ. 

XS7- Obligations ofaGnaidian, 13. (p) 
Simon Greeulaa^ Esq. Portland, Maine. 
Occasioned by an appr<mriation of $100 
by " an Old Judge of Probate," [Hon. 
William Walker, Lenox. Mass.) for per- 
potuating such a Traict. Urging, from tha 
sanctions of the Bible, the respouaibili^ 
of Guardians to he Wttiful to their wards, 
not only in respect to their [property, 
Irat their religious education and whole 
course of life. 

X28* Poor Saroh; or the Indian 
Woman, 12. Blrs. Phebe R. Brown, Mon- 
son, Mass. An authentic and affecting 
narrative, beautliully illustraflDg the in- 
fluence of the Gospel on a poor Indian 
woman in Ellington, Con. See Am. Tract 
Magazine, Nov. 1831. 

X29. The Two Apprentices, 12. (L.> 
From th^ Ikacts of the ** Cottage Libra- 
ry,'* paUishnd in London. A fhmiliar dia^ 
logue, showing the excellence and impor- 
tance of the Scrq>iures. 



X30t Theatrical 
Rev. Samuel Milii^r, 
Sem. Princeton, N. jf. 
ruinous consequences 
on the Theatre, both i 
xent and a future life, 
of the conflagration 
Theatre in 1811. 



Exhibition*, 16. 
D. D. Prof. Theol. 
The unhappy and 
of an attendance 
IS regards the pre- 
With a narrative 
of the Richmond 



^9X- Walking by Faith, 20. Rev. An- 
drew Puller, Kettering, Etig. Afull,plain, 
and scriptural view of tliia grace; its 
application to the various circumstancea 
of life, and its unspeakable importance. 

X3<^* The Progress of Grace, 90. (L.) 
Rev. John Newton, London. In which 
the words **F^ri«t the blade, then the ear, 
after that the full com in thenar,'* ara 
ilhistrated as api^icable to Christian ex- 
perience. 

X38. Converstoo of Mrs. Eleanor 
Emerson, 24. From a Narrative' by her 
own pen. Showing the oppoatimi of her 
heart to the truth, her resistance of the 
strivings of the S)>irit, her mental anguish 
and despair of God*s mercy ; and the joy 
of her flnal surrender to be wholly tJie 
Lord's. 

X34> Future Punishment Endleas, 



18310 



OBIGIN AND CHARACTER OP TRACTS. 



Ul 



IS. ReT. Andrew Fuller, KetterinfiEng. 
Shown by four distinct reasons, flilly sne- 
taiaod by the lanfuace of the Bible, in 
Um plain and undeniaMe inteqp'etatioo. 

135. Life of CoL James Gardiner, 34. 

Sb) Abstracted Arom lAe Narrative by 
ev. Philip Doddridge, D. D. A military 
ofllcer, and intelliffent and accomplished 
f entlemao, who, after a career of fashion- 
able vice aJnd dissipation, was in a snrpri- 
•ing manner converted, and became as 
xealoHs a servant of Christ as he had been 
nf his pleasures and of the adversary of 
souls. 



*' fiwm tfte relation of a penonal witness 
of the facts.** See particulars of the histo- 
ry of this Tract in an early volume of the 
London Gentleroan*s Magaaine. See also 
Christian Advocate for April and May, 
1838. 



«9SU. 



X3C' The Two. Old Men, 90. (L.; 
Rev. Casar Malan, Geneva. See No. 85. 
The Author's cwversation, in the form of 
Dialogue, with two aged men; the first a 
lukewarm formalist, trusting in his own 
fluicled good works ; the other an humble^ 
evangelical disciple of Christ: presenting 
the two characters in contrast. 

137. The Chufch Safe, 30. Rev. 
Daniel A. Clark. PowerAiIly shown from 
what God has dnne and is doing for the 
church, the stabilitv of his operations, his 
promises and prophecies. 

138- Conversion of the World, 34. 
Rev. Gordon Hall and Rev. Samuel 



On Early Religious Educa- 
tion, 30. Rot. Daniel Huntington, North 
Bridgewa^r, Mass. Cautions against the 
abuses of parental authority, and direc- 
tions for the conduct ofteligious educa- 
tion. 



Newell, late American Missionaries to 
India. Urging, in an awakening manner, 
the claims of six hundred millions of hea- 
then, and the ability and duty of the 
churches to send them the Goepel. 

139. Memoir of Thomas Hogg, 30. 
FVom the London Christian Observer. A 
pleasing narrative of an individnal in ab- 
ject poverty; his contentment and cheer- 
ftilness in suffering; his superior qualities 
of mind; and his conaistent and ardent 
piety. 

14lO« The Seaman's Chnrt, 16. 'Rev. 
Edward Payson, D. D. late of Portland, 
Maine- An address to Seamen, admirably 
adapted to arrest their attentidil, and di- 
rect them to the Bible as their Chart, and 
to Christ as their Savior.^ 

141- The Sabbath at Sea, or the His- 
tory of Samuel Newman, 32. A narrative 
of his conversion through the influence <tf 
Bfith'.! Meetings In Ldndon; and of has 
two subsequent voyages, particularly the 
mode of conducting religious worship on 
the Sabbath, the burial of a pkras saikv, 
and the Bethel meetings in a foreign port. 

149* The Last Hours of the Hon. 
Francis Newport, 30. (L.) From ** The 
Second Spira.** " Abridrrd,** save the 
London Skwtety'k edittoa, ^Traet No. 160 



Conversion 'of President Ed- 
wards, SIO. From an account of his re- 
ligious exercises written by himself, and 
found among his papers at his death; 
presenting very clear views of tiie work 
of Divine grace in the conviction and 
conveseion of » sinner, and his progress 
in the Christian liib. 

149- On hearing the Word of God, 
30. <L.) Rev. Robert Hall, Bristol, Eng. 
Showing the peculiar honor God has 
conferred on the preaching of the Gospel 
as a means of suvation, with extoided 
and impressive directions >* how w#" 
should ** hear'* to receive tho richness-of 
the blessing. 

14:6. Helps to Self-E»n^nation,,18. 
A series of plain practical questions for 
testing the religious character. 

t,4l7. The Gospel Blinistry entitled 
uppwt, 34. Rev. James Bennett, D; 
D., Free. Rotherham CoHege, Eng. Abl]^ 
showing tiie Divine appointment that tho 
Church sh<kld support its ministers ; and 
the extent to whum thia duty should bo 
carried, to promote the highest interests 
of the church and the conversion of the 
world. 

143. The Barren Fir-Tree, IS. A 
conversation between a Minister and • 

Cariihioner, who theoretically acknow- 
jdged the reality of religion, but brought 
forth no fruits meet for repentance. 

140. Christ Formed in the Soul, tho 
only^wndation of Hope for Eternity, 
30. (p) JLev. Philip Doddridgo, D. D. Ad- 
dressed to the young ; showing on iriiat 
they are liable to build a fal^e confidence, 
and what it is to have Christ formed In the 
soul. ^ 

130* Memoir of William Churchman, 
16. Rev. Thomas Bingham, near Over- 
ton, Eng. An authentic narrative.of tho 
auUior's conversation with a poor crip- 

Iile, whose only means of reUgfeus know- 
edge had been Us Bible ; but who had 
treasored it in his Memory, andaoiuired 



11* 



142 



ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF TRACTS. 



[Nov. 



from it 8Url>risiugly clear views of Evan- ; " Ways,'* the narrow way of life and th« 



gelical truth 

IQ^ . Important Disco^ery» or Tem- 
per is Every Thing, 12. (L.) Rev John 
Philip, Aberdeen, Scotland. An amus- 
ing narrative illustraiinir the iiuportunce 
of 8weetne«if> of temper, both from iiH^i- 
dents in human life nud from the Bible. 

1$<2- Sin and Danger of Neglecting 
the Savior, 2Qk (L.) Rev. John Owen, 
D. D. Seriowtly enforced f^om the 
greatntMis and glory of the work Chriiit 
baa perfoniie<l, andtlie unreusonableness 
of all the exciuii. urged for neglecting 
the offers of his mercy. 

15^^. Eml of Time, 16. (If.) lUv. 
Ihaac Wfeitts, D. D., Eng. Affectionately 
presenting the importance of improving 
the perio'1 of probation ; the rapidity of 
its night; the manner in which it is idly 
consumed ; aiMl the happiness of those 
who are prepared for its cud. 

154. Meinoar of {Ir. Bateman, 16. 
From a London period icul. His in- 
teresting converMOQ fVom infideHtjr to 
a joyful hop6 and {i8>ttred truA in Christ 
for salvation, whi<:h cheered him in sor- 
row, and suslained him in death. 

15(>. 0« Vnlversalism, tfi. Rev. 
Elihu W. Baldwin, New- York. A uar- 
rative of. one Universaliec who died in 
horror, and wiotlier, who, kelievkig death 
near, fled to Ciirisi A>r mercy, and Uved 
to give evidence of hia afncerity ; with 
Script >ral proolhthnt the future -punish- 
ment of the wicked will be endless. 

3.5^. Search Tlie Scriptures, 12. (t»,) 
Rev. William Marsh, BirmnigtlHm, Eng. 
An interesting and attractive presenta- 
tion of the excellence of the Bible, as 
claiming to be searched by aU» 

X57> Address to Parents on Sfibbath 
Schools, 4. (li.) Prom the VViH.^ge 
Tracts,*' Eng. Affectionately urging 
parents to commit their children to these 
nurseries of piety. 

X'58- Examine your Hopes for Eter- 
nity, 12. (h.) Refuting the various 
fallacious grounds on which men hope to 
continue in impenitence aud sm, and yet 
be saved. 

X59. Rewards of Drunkenness, 4. 
(L.) Presenting, in a manner thnt can- 
not but arrcHt attention, the thousand 
plagues induced by this vice. 

ISO^ The Two Ends, and the Two 

Ways, 4. (L.) Rev. T. K , Eng. 

The ••Ends" are heaven and hell; the 



broad road to. perdition. 

161- To the Keeper of a Turnpike 
Gate, 12. (L.) Showing the hindrance* 
to devotiNl piety attendant on his Mtua* 
tioii, Hgaittft which bo sitould guard, and. 
how the cumnion incidents of his life may 
be improved as instructive religious 
monitors. 

1612* Commov Errors, 16. (L.) By 
L ■ ■ , Eng. Specifying nine plausible 
and soul-destroying errors, whereby the 
impenitent persunde themselves to rest 
securely while neglecting the concern* 
of eternity. 

16 3* History of Thomas Bfown. 4/ 

(L.) Mr M-^ , Eng. An amoeing 

history, in ver^e, of a Sabbdth-brcaker 
induced to attend public worship ; listen- 
ing to the Gospel message, and embrac- 
iug the Savior. 

X "^4. Bethel, or tbf Flag Unftirled, 20. 
Rev. G. C. Smith, o|[ Peu2ance, Eng., 
formerly a naval officer. A narrative 
of the establishment of Bethel meetings, 
for the benefit of Seamen on the river 
Thames; Cheir rapid progress and nn« 
exampled uscfhincss and success. 

X^ff* True end False Conversions 
Dihtinguished, 16. Rev. Setb W.HIiston, 
.Durham, N. Y. Showing the dagger of 
resting on dehtsive hopes of acceptance 
with Clod; many wuys in whiih men 
ffeceive themselves ; and the means of 
determining whether a saving, work of 
grace has been wrought in the heart. 

l6^- Christ the Only Refuge, 1». 
(L.) Rev. Jamee Itervey. Relating a 
scene of confusion occasioned in a eon- 
gregaliuo by a sudden alarm ; contrasting 
it with the Day of Judgment, and exhibit- 
ing Christ as the oKly Refuge for sinners 
in that day. 

e 

X^7. The Single Talent Improved, 
4. Rev. Alexander Proudfit, D. D., Sa^ 
lem, N. Y. Showing how those who have 
little of this world's goods may render 
themselves nKMt usefid in advancing the 
kingdom of Christ. 

X'8* To a Person engaged in a 

Lawsuit, 12. By S , G , Esq., 

an eminent Counsellor at Law, still in the 
practice .of his . profession. Being im 
admirable persuasive, in view of the sore 
evils resulting in this world from legal 
strife, and of an approaching eternity, to 
clo.'^ the contest, by beinir first to propose ' 
a reconciliation, and subduing the oppo 
nent by kindness and Christian love. 



1831.] 



ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF TRACTS. 



145 



1$9* Memoir of Mrs. Harriet Newell, 
a Missionary to India. Condensed Arom 
the volume with this title. Her early 
life and conversion, progress in religion, 
consecration to the work of a Missionary, 
severe trials, and early and triumphant 
death. 

170* To. Christian Femalei, on Shn- 
plicity in Dress, 4. By Miss Ep 
K — — *, of J—, N. H. Urging sim- 
plicity and economy of apparel as in ac- 
cordance with the spirit of the Gospel, 
^d a means of doing more for converting 
the world to Christ. 

171. Parental Faithfulness, le. Pre- 

Sared by the Monadnock Associatiop in- 
few-Hampshire, and re*-writCBn by Rev. 
John H. Church, D. D., Pelham. Con- 
taining valuabli^ . hints to parents re- 
specting their own example, and the 
government- and religious instruction of 
their offspring.' . • 

172. A Time to Dance, 4. Rev. 
Lyman Beecher, D. D., Boston, Written 
iu reply to a challenge to preach from the 
text, '* A time to dance ;" tiiseusfsiug the 
import of that text, and presenting the 
Bible view of dancing. • 

173. The Cross of Christ, 20.. (L.) 
Rev. Johu Fawcett, late of Brierley, 
Eng. Presented in a most able Tnen- 
her as the sum of the - Gospel, the salva- 
tion of 'sinners, the display of tlte Divine 
perfections, and the grand incentive to 
itoliness. - 

174. Quench a«t the Spifit, V. Rev. 
William Torrey, Buenoe Ayres. A nar- 
rative of " fiicts which occurred neitr the 
author's former residence*' in Pennsvl- 
vania. See letter in Philadelpfaian, 1831. 
Being the alarming h^plory of a man who 
resisted the strivings of the Spirit to 
extreme old age, and.died despairing <jf 
raercy. 

175 To Mothers, 13. 0; Rev. Ho- 
ratio N. Brinsmade, Hartford, Con. Nar- 
rating the history of a mother eminedtly 
successful in the early education of her 
children } tenderly enforcing the respon- 
sibility of mothers, and giving- them 
important practical directions im their 
solemn charge. 

176- Well-conducted 'Farm, 16. 
Rev. Justin Edwards, D. D., Boston. 
A simple narrative of the facts connected 
with the total exclusion of iirdent spirito 
from a farm of 600 acres in Massachusetts; 
the reluctance with which it was first dis- 
peoaed with by the laborers ; their gra- 



titude at length for the change ; ineieased 
strength to labor, sobriety, cheerfulness, 
efficiency, and regard for their eternal 
welfare ; with striking anecdotes - of 
drunkards faired to adopt the system of 
total abstinence. 

17 7> Institution and Observance of 
the Sabbath, 20. Rev. Daniel De Vinne, 
of the Methodist Episcopal Church. 
Proofs of the Divine iBstitution and per- 
petuity of the Sabbath ; its change from 
the seventh to |he ^fit4lay of the week ; 
and the manner in which it should be 
ofwerved. 

17 9> Joy in Heaven over the Peni- 
tent, 16. Rev. Justin Edwards, D. D., 
Boston. Because he is born of God, de- 
livered from hdl, God is his portion, and 
his influence on the kingdom of Jeliovafa 
is for ever changed. 

179. The Way to be Saved, 16. (p) 
Rev. Justin Edwards, D. . D., Boston. 
The sinner's dai^er ; Jmquiries what he 
has done to be saved, wfiat he is willing 
to do, and when and how fong to do it ; 
with plain directioufe for complying with 
the conditions of the Samor's mercy. 

180* The Swiss Peasanr, 16. (L.) 
Rev. Ctesar Malao. See No. 85. A 
narrative of a poor and ignorant aged 
woman in the valley of Bagnes ; the in- 
struction given her concerning the way 
of salvation by Chriflt, and her cordial 
reception of Him a9 her Almighty and 
only Redeemer. • 

ldl> Duration of Future Punish- 
ment. 16. Rev. Timothy Dwight, D. D., 
late President of 'Yale College, New- 
Haven, CoAn. From his Theofogical 
Discourses. The obstacles to a fair' 
discussion of the subject ; proofs IVom 
the Bible that future punishment will be 
endlesa } and objections answered. 

182* To the inhabitants of New 
Settlements, 16. R«v. Alexander Proud- 
fit, D. D. Salem, N. Y. The blessing of 
a Preached Gospel and its ordinances ; 
and the various means to' be adopted, in 
their absence, fi>r promoting the best in- 
terests of the soul and of true celigiou. 

183* On Repentance, 12. Rev. Jo- 
seph S.. Christmas, late of New- York. 
Showing its necessity, its nature, the 
•ncouragements to Uie duty, and the 
danger of delaying it. 

184- The Chimney Sweeper, 12. (L.) 



By L 



En«r. A narrative of the 



profligacy, in early life, of a poor Chim- 
ney Swecoer in London, hie cooversiou 



144 ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OP TRACTS. 

Co Christ, and tNe delightful manner in 
which he exemplifieil the excellence of 
the Chritftiau character. 

185' Doetrine of the Trinity, S8. 
Rev. £lta« Cornelius, D. D., Boatou. A 
plain and practical treatise, explaining 
the doctrine ; showing the prnu& of it 
from the Bible j answering the principal „„„ whm.™ * a ■■ 
objectio.ui urged against it; a-d enfore-JsiVelJ ^1^!^? 
ing its great practical importance. sS^ISlT'irn I"*** 



186- The Worth of the Soul, 12. 
Rev. Charles P. M(i*Ilvaine, Brooklyn, 
IT. York. A moving appeal, coaunenci% 
with a brief narrative, and showing the 
value of the soul from its eternity and 
the price pai4 for it by Christ; and the 
unspeakable importance of complying 
with the terms of his mercy before the 
day of pro{»ati0n shall be closed. 

187- The Sabbath School Teachers' 
Address to the Parents of their Pupils 
12. From the Sunday School Union! 
London. Sbonuug the duties of parents 
in respect to SaDb«tli schools, and to their 
ehil>4ren who attend them. 

188* A Word to Mothers, 4. Rev. 
Alexander Proudfit^ D. D^ Salem, N. Y 
Urging upon Mothers their religious du- 
ties and obligafions to their children. 

189* A Word in the Ear of the Pro- 
fessed C^istian, 4. .The late Rev 
Robert Gibson, Princeton, N.Jersey. Ail 
awakening appeal to the lukewarm pro- 
fessor of religion to arouse from his slum- 
bers and seek the salvation of himself 
and others. 

190' Death of Hume and Finley 
compared, 16. The late Rev. John M. 
Mason, D. D., New-York. Originally 
published in the *• Christian's Magiusino " 
Contrasting, with great abiUty, the death 
of Hume, as related by Dr. Adam Smith 
with that of Rev. Dr. Pinley, formerly 
President of the College of New-Jersev • 
being a powerful vindication of the truth 
and excellence of the Christian religion. 

191. A Warning to Sabbath Break- 
ers, 4. From « the Evangelical Rambler." 
See No. 30. A narrative jof the death of 
a young lady by drowning, who sailed, for 
pleasure, on the Sabbath, contrary to ber 
fathers wiltj with important pracUcal 
reflections. «- »« 

X9% Bible of Divine Origin. 36 
Rev. John De Witt, D. D., Prof! Theol! 
Som., New-Brunswick, N. J. A premium 
Tract, obviating, in the most convincing 
manner, the trite objections against the 
Bible. In the form of a Dialogue between 



[Nov: 

hree gentlemen, two of whom an mdro- 
cates for InfideUty. • 

_ 193- Village in the MoancaiBa. 94 
Dictated by 8. V. 8. Wilder, E^i/Prel 
Jfl"? "fi^ American Tract sSdetys 
S^? w .t P^~ C1-) '"itte- by Rev. 
R^ v?^n ''**\*^.f ^> ^ rema-iler by 
Rev. Wilham A.Hallock,8ecreury of the 



f„ • -'r.~A **y ^c^- Gardiner 
pring, D. D. A most entertaining and 
athentic narrative of the visits of • 
Chnsuan gendeman in a retired vlilago 
o^ praying, persecuted Protestants in 
the mountains of France: the Mrikitttf 
incidents of his journey; hjs couversa- 

.•.?fi Ki'*'' *'"J ^"PP*y"f them with 
the UiUe j attending one of their meet- 
ings, whchwas mtemipted hy the civU 
authorities? ^ith letters received from 
them at Paris, copies of which, in th« 
original French, are retained ia the ar- 
chives of the American Tnet Society. 

194. Christian Education, 16. Rer. 
Charles B. HadAick. Prof. Dartmouth 
College, N. H. Particularly urging th« 
adaptation of religioux instnrctioiX not 
merely to prepare chrldntn for fatartt 
useAdness, but to raise them to the high- 
est degree of present perfection which 
their capacities admit. 

,-195- The Seventh Commandment. 
16. Rev. Timothy Dwigbt, D. D.; New- 
Haven, Conn. An able and eloquent 
enforcement of this command in a manaer 
which can justly give oAbc« to none. 

_ 196- Advice to Young Converts. 4. 
President Edwards. Origmallyaddreied 
to a young lady at S-L-. 6o7;S^ 

grtiiVchrSSKe?^''^"^^^^" 

^R*^J' I'2*«" on Christian Education, 
36. Birs. Mary HjCorhelius, Boston,* 
Mass, A premium Tract. Containing a 
full, interesting and practical exhibition 
of the subject ; chiefly addressed to mo- 
thers, (^1 havug the direction of education 

198- Scriptural Morality, 12. Re- 
written by Rev. James Milnor, D. D.. 

iJ®*!^"!?''^* Describing the morality o> 
the Bible in various particulars in which 
it IS most strikingly distinguished from 
the morality of the world. 

A *^^?i 7"i"** *'™ye' Meeting, 4. 
As-.nbed to Rev. R. Mark., SJjfoJw 

roerly a lieutenant in the Royal Navy.. 

A simple narrauve of an evangelical 

prayer-mecting held by a littl» ciJeteTr 



1831.] 



OBiaiN AND CHARACTER OP TRACTS. 



145 



devour if^bigvn, at the house of » poor 
widow, <Ni Satordmr ereniny. 

. SOO* RttinottsCoiMequenceBorOaiii. 
blmg, 90. Rev. Timothy Flint, Cincin. 
Hati, Ohio. A premiuia Tract. The 
•larminflr prevalence of this vice ; its in- 
fluence on the individuni and society, and 
in promoting other vices ; its fascinating 
power over the mind; with the ternSc 
histoiy of three confirmed g ambterstT 

,^aOl. Friendly Hints to the T^urtg, 
13. Rev. John Kaox, D. D., New-York. 
A serious and earnest expostulation with 
youth, urging them to forsake the paths 
of the destroyer, and embrace the religion 
ofChrist. * . 

,^2M- Importance of Consideration, 
• • «?S^* ^'»>^'« P- Mc'Ilvaine, Brook- 
j? ^'^t^* *'*>*" *^ mort weighty 

and moving considerations, as an imwe- 
diaXe duty ; %vith the manner in which it 
•bouJd be performed. 

^303* Conversafioa with a Voung 
Traveller, 18. The late Rev. John M. 
llason, D. D., New- York. An authentic 
narrative of a conversation in a stage 
coanh, in which a skeptical young mili- 
tary oAtrer avows his disbelief of Christi- 
*nity on account of the nature of its 
proofs ; his objections are ably and irre- 
rifltibly met, and salvation through the 
Redemption of the Son of God pro- 
claimea to him. See Sequel on the cover 
of the Tract. 



the duty of praying morning and evening 
with their children, if family worship u 
neglected by the father. 

„ 908 • Worth of a Dollar, 4. Rev. 
Silas McKean, Bradford, Vt. An authen- 
tic and striking narrative of a pious man 
on a journey, who expended his only 
dollar to procure a Bible for a destitute 
family, which was the means. hopeAilly, 
of the conversion of the mother, and of 
an extensive revival of religion in a very 
destitute neighborhood. 

2C9* Why God employs feeble Means 
to producegreat Effects, 16. Ascribed to 
Rev. Mr. T- . From a Tract pub- 
lished in the state of Maine. To 



.SM*. A Scripture Help, 88. (L.) 
Abridged from the treatise of Rev. Ed- 
ward Bickerxteth, London. Inculcating 
the value of the Bible; the importance 
and manner of studying it ; the necessity 
of D vine aid to understand it ; and urg- 
ing on aU the duty of studying it habitually 
and prayerfully. 

905- A Strange Incident, 4. (L.) By 
Rev. T — ■• M -, Eng. The ab- 
surdity of a condemned criminal in 
chains sleeping under^the offers of par- 
don, presented as illustrating the sin of 
sleeping in the house of God. 

^^S- Conversion of Sinners, a com- 
mon Christian Duty, 30. By Rev. Philip 
Melancthon WhelJley, late of New- York. 
Urging upon all Christians the duty of 
laboring for the salvation of their fellow 
men ; and showing the occasions, the 
motives, the requisites and the encou- 
ragements for engaging in the duty. 

907- The Praying Mother, 18 Rev. 
Alexander Proudfit, D. D., Salem, N. Y. 
Affectionately urging on pious mothers 



httmanj»ride and lead Christians to ascribe 
their saceess to God and trust in him, to 
intimidate his enemies, and display his 
glocy; applied as a motive to employ 
the humble means God has appointed for 
doing good. 

&10> Jonathan Brown, the Barge* 
man. 16. (L.) The late Rev. Dr. Calamy 
lx»ndon. From his " Historical Account 
of his own Life and Times." A narrative 
of the conversion of a plain aged man. 
who had known nothing of Christ ezce|it 
from the oaths of the profane ; and gave 
a bright evidence of his smcere r^nt- 
ance, in his subsequent life and dea^T 

aXl- To Parents, 80. Rev. Ebene- 
sec Dickey, D. D., Oxford, Penn. A 
sound, praeticaJ, instructive Tract, show- 
ing the importance and best methods of 
training up the young ; with the obsta- 
clcs and encouragements. 

SIS- A Serious Inquiry, 13. Via. 
"Are you ready to die, and app^ar before 
«»pd ?" A moving practical presentation 
of the principal tests of Christian cha- 
racter, solemnly urged upon the reader 
that he may not deceive himself in his 
tiopes for eternity. 

213. The Sinner Forewarned. 12 
(p) Rev. John Woodbridge. D. D. New- 
York. Showin;? the impenitent man how 
he hss been *< reproved'* by God»8 Word 
his ministers, works, judgment*, Spirit! 
and by conscience; hus " Rardened his 
neck" under these reproofs ; and that, 
continuing impenitent, his destruction is 
■*' without remedy." 

-?14. More than One Hundred Scrip, 
turaland lucontrovr-rtible ArjiumeDtsiSr 
the Divinity ofChrist, 38. Rev. Samuel 
Green, Boston. Presented in a compress- 
ed <brm, well arranged, clear and con- 
vincing. 

2 IS* Importance of Salvation, 13. 



146 



ORIGIN AND CHARACTElf OP TRACTS^ 



LNov. 



Rev. Archibald Alexander, D. D. Prmce- 
tou, N. J. A pangreat, soiemo appeal, per- 
•aadioff the reader, chiefly by the' *' ter- 
rors of the Lord," without delay, to for- 
sake his sins and lay hold on eternal life. 

216- A Word for the BiMe, 4. (L.) 

Rev. t: — W , Euj. A brief 

and glowing apiieiO for the Bible, fur- 
nishing common readers with a beautiful 
digest of the arfiamenis with which they 
may encounter Infidelity. 

217. History of Amelia Gale, 12. (p) 

(L.) By Re?. W B . A poor wo- 

manjn Lincolnaliiri*, England, who lived 
56 years in '* ignorance, misery and sin," 
when by the power of Divine grace she 
became ^ a new creature,'* andso devoted 
to the spread of the Gospel, that, though 
entirely dependant, she contrilmted, an- 
nually, besides supportini^ herself, about 
six pounds (f26,) to Missionary and other 
benevolent institutions. By the contribu- 
tions of thttse who knew her worth,a grave- 
stone waA erected to her memory^ Dec. 
lc>3U, with an epitiu>h by the poet Mont- 
gomery. See Am. Tract Mag. sept. 1831. 

2X8* Li^<^ ^^ Rev. John Bunyan, 16. 
(L.) A brief and valuable sketch, compil- 
ed chiefly from his " Grace abounding to 
the Chief of Sinners." 

-219- John Robins the Sailor, 12. (L.) 
By Mr. L— . ** Embotly ing in one narra- 
tive what Jias occurred in several cases;" 
illustrating the power apd permanency of 
early relixioiis impressions made on the 
mind in Sabbatli Schools. 

22 1>* Bible the best of Books, 4. A 
short and impressive appeal for the ex- 
cellence and authenticity of the Bible, 
from it'H internal character, especially the 
character of Christ. 

221- Kittredge's Address on Elfects 
of Ardent Spirits; 24. Jonathan Kit- 
tredge,E8q.Lyme,N H. Perhaps the most 
effective Tract yet published on Intempe- 
rance ^ showing, in a way that speaks to 
the consciousness of the intemperate, the 
character and prospects of the drunkard, 
the process by which he became sucli, the 
prevalence and ruinous influence of the 
vice on indiviiluals and the community, 
and irresistibly urging total abstiuf nee. 

2(2t^> A Sermon for the- whole World, 
12. (p) Being our Lord's Sermon on the 
Mount, Matth. 4 : 23—25, and chapp. 5 ; 

6; 7. 

2^d* The Sanctuary, 16. Rev. Daniel 
A. Clark. The necessity of sustaining 
the public worship of God in His house ; 
because it is the place where hia honor 



dwells, and of prayer, the radiating point 
of sanctifying truth, the grand organ in 
forming public sentiment and sustaining 
healthful iastftutions, and because from it. 
God selects the subjects of his grace. 

224" Reasons against Universal Sal- 
vation, 64. (p) Rev. Joel Howes, D. D. 
Hartford, Conn. A rich treatise, showing 
rea»ons which should prevent any prudent 
man from embracing the doctrine ; the tea* 
timony of the word of God ; how Univer- 
salists «vade this testimony, with an exa- 
mination of their alleged proof passages 
and more plausible and popular argu- 
ments ; and presenting «n aflfecting view 
of the ruinous consequences of this error. ' 

225* Do yon want a Friend ? 4. <L.) 
Rev. C. Friend, late English Missionary 
at Benares. Directing the sinner to 
Chriitt as the Friend who claims and who 
alone deserves all hia confidence.' 

.226' Female Influence and Obliga- 
tions, 16. Rev. Nathan 8. S. Beman, D. 
D. Troy, N. York.- A premium Tract. 
Showing the extent of femsde influence ; 
and the obligation to exert it in favor of 
Christianity, especially in the present 
state of the Christian world. 

227- ^^ ^^ Objections urged Against 
the Bible, 44. Rev. William C Brownlec, 
D. D. New -York. A premium Tract. — 
Designed to obviate the trite objections 
against the Bible. Being an interesting 
narrative of a conversation, (which in sub- 
stance actually occurred) l)etween a Pas- 
tor, a General, his daughter and two infi- 
del soQs, a young Cadet, and a Farmer, a 
disciple of Paine ; in which the principal 
objections of Infidels -are adduced and 
ably answered ; and an outline of the au- 
thenticity of the Bible is given. Time 
rolls Oil ; the scene changes, and the con- 
versation is closed around the death-bed 
of the General. 

228- Moral Dignity of the Missionary 
Enterprise, 24. Rev. Fnincis Wayland, 
D. D PrcKldent of Brown University, 
Providence, R. I. A masterly discourse, 
founded on the text, **The field is the 
world-,/' showing the grandeur of the 
Missionary object ; its arduousness ; the 
simplicity, benevolence and efficacy of 
the means by which it fs to be cfiected ; 
and the encouragement and facilities all 
now have fur aiding io the enterprise. 

229 Self-Communion, 16. Rev. An- 
drew Fuller, Kettering, Eng. Furnishing, 
with the author's characteristic serious- 
ness and force, a number of searching 
tests of Christian character, and urging 



183L] 



ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF TRACT&, 



147 



Ihe great importance of jKtrsooally and i Commended because it in Scriptural, the 
practically applying them. most rational kind of reH^nfth'e i,Sy 

source of true Christian enjoyment, ad- 



230- The Domestic Altar, 20. Rev. 
Edward Bickersteth, London ; extracted 
from the Author'a Treatise on Prayer. 
Showing the obligations to Family Wor- 
ship, Its advantages, and the unreasona- 
bleness of the excuses for its neglect ; 
with instructions for its due performance. 

9ZX' Defence of the Use of the Bible 
in Schools, 1^ A Letter from Benjamin 
Rush, M . D., Philadelphia. Showing the 
'^'tppy influence of rendering children, in 
all the stages of education, familiar with 
the Bible. 

23**. Do I grow in Grace? 12. Ex- 
tracted from Doddridge's Rioe and Pro- 
gress. Pointing out some of the false, 
and some of the more prominent scriptu- 
ral marks of growth in grace. 

?33* Appeal to American Youth on 
Temperance, 16. Rev. Austin Dickinson, 
New-York. A premium Tract. Urging 
total abstinence from Ardent Spirits, be- 
cause its use is unnecessary, a waste of 
property, offensive to God, has a debatsing 
influence, forms an evil habit, and roun- 
tersu:tB the influences of the Holy Spirit ; 
while temperance promotes vigor of l)ody 
and mind, and is urged by all true patriot- 
ism and philanthropy. 



vances the soul in the life and Jikeness of 
God, renders its possessor useful, and. 
sustains him under evil. 

^ 238« Disappointed Hope, 12. Rev. 
Chauncey Eddy, Pennyan, N. Y. Show- 
ing the terrors of a disappointed hope in 
the day oi" judgment i and the danger of 
deception from a false view of thn nature 
of religious exercises, of the Christian 
life, and of the doctrines of the GospeL 

239- Alarm to Distillers and their 

1 ^T ^^' ^^^' fia*'®' Dickinson, New- 
w-k, N. J. A premium Tract. Showinir 
that the production of Ardent Spirit con- 
fers no benefits, is the occasion of great 
evd, destroys the bounties of Providence^ 
18 in opposition to great light, and is oflfen- 
sive to virtuous men and to God. With 
a reply to the apologies urged by dis- 
tillers. 

24'^. l^utnam and the Wolf, or the. 
Monster Destroyed, 24. Rev. John Marsh, 
Haddam, Conij. An Address originally 
delivered at Pomfret, in which the peo- 

{)le are reminded of the bravery of their 
athers in expelling a wild, beast; and of 
the more hideous monster Intemperance, 
they are now called to expel ; on account 
of the wajste of property it hai> occasioned, 
the pauperism, the crime, the destructioa 
of intellect, of health and life, of human 



23 V. Advantages of Prayer, 16. Rev. 
Thouias H. Skinner D. D. Philadelphia. T* ■■"°"«=»-«» "» ntjuiia ana me. oi numan 
Showing that it improves the powers of f»PP>ness and of the soul. With a mas. 
the soul, counteracts what is injurious, ^ ^"^ answer to the arguments urged ia 
gives efficai:y to the Word of God, makes *>PP*>"<»on to total abstinence, 
providential dispensations a blessing, and 
has an influence on God himself. 

2'*5- Honest Waterman, or History -^..^,.„.,j „,«. 

of Thomas Mann, 24. (L.) Compiled *»? the unmediate surrender of the heart 

under the inspection of the late Joseph to God, as the only ground of safety. 
Butterworth, Esq., M P., London. An 



^ 241- Hope of Future Repentance, 
4, Rev. Enoch Pond, Boston. A letter 
from a father to a son. Poweirfiilly urg- 



authentic Narrate of an obscure Water^ 
man of London, who happily exemplified 
the Christian character, and from the 
proceeds oif his surprising industry and 
economy, afteK having been very charita- 
ble through a long life, gave at his death 
100 pounds to each of ten benevolent in- 
stitutions in Louilon, and 5(1 pounds to 
each of five other kindred Institutions. 

235* Memoir of Ljndia W - . 
From the London Christan Observer. 
A pious female, who was, to advanced 
years, in the midst of afiliction, a pattern 
of Christian humility, submission and 
confidence in God. 

237- Spiritual Religion, 16. Rev. 
Thomas U. Skinner, D. D., Philadelphia. 



2^ 2* Argument against the Manufac- 
ture of Ardent Spirit, 28. Rev. Edward 
Hitchcock, Professor, Amherst College. 
Mass. AddressecT to the distiller and the 
fyrnisher of the materials. In this Tract 
which strongly contested the premium 
awarded to No. 239, the author appeals 
to the persons addressed, as a chemical 
philosopher, as a physician, as a patriot, 
as a neighbor and a parent, in behalf of 
the drunkard's wife and children, and as 
a Christian. 

243* A voice from Heaven, 4. From 
the Baptist General Tract Society. Show- 
ing, by select portions of Scripture, man's 
depravity, condemnation by the law, the 
provision made for him by Christ, and ♦* e 
guilt of rejecting him. 



148 



ORIOI!! AND CHARACTER OF TRACTS. 



[Nov. 



Mf. TotiieYoangMenof theUni- 
tad States, oo Temperance, 84. Rev. 
CharleaP.Mc*Ilvaiiie,BrooUyD,N.Y. Por- 
irayinf the borron of the acourge of In- 
temperance; the neceaaitjr for a great, 
mnited, and universal effort for its expul- 
mon ; and showing that Total Abstinence 
is the only remedy, and one neceasaiy for 
safety, and involving no pain* no coer> 
ekm, no expense. 

9M- TIm Children of the Forest, 90. 
Hie late Mr. Solomon Carpenter of N. J. 
Re-irrttten by Rev. Jacob T. Field, Pat- 
terson, N. J. An interesting and authen- 
tic narrative of the cooversioQ of two only 
diildren, together with the father and mo- 
ther, of a family in a New Settlement ; 
iUustratIng the prominent doctrines of the 
Gospel and the operations d the Holy 
Spirit. 

^<ft5* Joseph Archer, the Converted 
Sailor, 16. Mrs. Mary H. Cornelius, Bos- 
ton. An authentic Narrative of a promi- 
sing youth, who at 16 fell into vicious 
company, became an abandoned sailor, 
kwas excited to attend to religion by 
neans of a Tract read at sea, submitted 
his heart to Christ, and became as emi- 
nent for piety as he had been for wicked- 



M7- Who Slew all These f 4. By 

H- " * An authentic narrative of the I 
downward progreas and miserable end of 
the reepectrve members of a large, and 
•nee respectable family, through the ra- 
vages of Intemperance.' 

94^8* Zuinglttts, the Swiss Reformer, 
96. From Blackwood's Magazine. His 
early life, conversion tram Popery 
through the study of the Scriptures, and 
the commanding influence he was enabled 
to exert for the diffusion of the pure and 
precious light of the Gospel. 

240. Effects of Inte.mperance oh the 
Intellectual, Physical, and Moral Powers, 
34. Thomas Sewatl, M. p. Prof. Colum- 
bian College, Washington, D. C. Being 
chiefly a discussion, in t'4e light of medi- 
cal science, of its effect^ on th^ physical 
powers ; the breath, skin, stomach, liver, 
brain, heart, lungs, the system generally, 
the predisposition to disease created. See.' 

fiSO* '^^^ Scape GoKt, 12. From the 
edition of M. Goodwin, Dulitin. Showing 
the import of the transaction recorded 
in Leviticus 16 : 21, 82 ; iu typical refo- 



renee to Christ^aad the instractiott eon- 
ceming the way of aalvatioa it impres-' 
sively conveys. 

9SX* Conversion of Peter Biu^ssiere 
from the Romish Church to the Protes- 
tant Faith, 33. In a letter to his children. 
Translated from the French. An into-, 
resting and well substantiated [See p. 1 
of the Tract,] narrative of the steps by 
which he was led to see the dwurdity of 
the rites of the Romish Church, particu- 
larly masses for the dead, ami by diligent- 
ly comparin^i them with the New Testa- 
ment, to reject them, and emlM'ace the 
pure Gospel revealed in tb» inspired vo- 
lume. 

S9j|. The Necessity of Repentance, 
4. (L.)Defining Evangelical R aentance '^ 
as distinguished from the sorrow of the 
world ; and urging its necessity, as the 
command of God and essential to the in- 
terests of the soul, and the danger of 
grieving the Holy Spirit by delay. 

999- Appeal to the Patriot and Chris- 
tian on the Imjportance of the Gospel, its 
Minivtiy, its Ebbbath, and its Ordinances 
to the Well-being and Perpetuity of our 
Free Ijastitutions, 33. Rev. William C. 
Brownlce, D. D. New-York. A premium 
Tract. Showing that free Institutions 
flourish only whmv there is intelligence 
I and virtue ; that the latter flourish only 
where a true Christian principle is ch»> 
rished} and that this is produced and che- 
rished only by the means of God*s appoint- 
ment. , 

954- The Mountain Miller. An au- 
thentic Narrative, 24. (p) WiUiam A. Hal- 
lock, Cor. Sec. American Tract Society, 
New- York. A premium Tract. Being Aa 
simple story of a Miller on the Green 
Mountains of New England, who con- 
fided in his own righteousness for salva- 
tion tin middle life, when he was led to 
see that he "must be born again;*' con.- 
secrated himself to the service of God« 
and became a lovely example of humble 
and devoted piety. 

25 S* Romanism Contradictory to the 
Bible, 40. Rev. Thomas Hartwell Horne„ 
author of the '* Introduction to the Bible," 
/kc A very rich and valuable treatise, 
distinctly presenting each of the more 
prominent errors of Popery, chiefly as in- 
culcated by the Council 6f Trent, and 
showing their palpable inconsistency with 
the Oracles of God. 



1831.] 



ORIGIN kSH CHABACTER OF TRACTS. 



149 



OOOASZOKAXi^T&AOTS. 






(1.) 8hip*B StAret, 10. The Pint IS 
ifea by William Ladd, Emi. Minot, Me. 
ting ** Ab Old Mariner's Mrice,Uf Sea- 
men.'* The reaainder etammniag of ahort 
articles on su^ects of interest to Seamen, 
compiled by Rer. John Truair, late Cor- 
responding Secretary of tbe American 
mmen's Friend Socie^r, N«w-York. 

(9.) Prayers for Female iSchools, 20. 
By W , a Lady of MasMshuaettB.. In- 
tended particularly for the use of such 
F^nnale Teachers as feel « rtiuctance to 
oogaging in- extemporanedus |^yer with 
their pupils. 

O.) The Prisoner's Compmion, 3SL-t 
Rev. John Stanford, D. D. (Chaplain to 
the Humane and Criminal InatitutiiMiSf 
New-York. Embracing Ch« followinf 
heads: Causes of confinement; entering 
into prison ; the penitMit ; tlto thought- 
less prismier ; the duties of pri^oaers ; ad- 
vantages of labor under confinement ; the 
prison, hospital ; prison mercies ; libera- 
tion. 

(S.) Instructicm for Young? Inquirers, 
56. Rev. William Innes, Scodand. Ex- 
hibiting the natnral state of man, charac- 
ter of the Divine Law, way of salvation by 
Christ, work of the H(dy Spirit, olMdacles 
to Christian fidelity,- and the godly man's 
happiness in this life, and prospects for 
eternity. 

(6.) On Sailing Vessei^ out of port on 
the Sabbath, 16. Mr. Edward E. Ford, 
Morristown, N. Jersey. A premium Tract. 
Presenting the claims of Seamen in view 
oi th^tr hardships and usefulness ; and 
mppealing particularly to merchants and 
ship owners to regard their iuoral wel- 
Ihre, and as a requisite thereto, to cease 
em^ag ^em to violate the Sabbath by 



sailing out of port on that day. With a 
reAitation of the arguments by which the 
practice in question is vindicated. 

(7.) The City of Refuge, 20. A Di^ 
logne between a learned Ralibi and a sick 
penitent. ' In which the sick youth be- 
wails hl« violation of the Divine Law, and 
is led to feel the need of pardon through 
a Redeemer, whose coming is so predict' 
ed in the Hebrew Scriptures as distinctly 
to describe the Lord Jesus Christ. Adapt- 
ed for circulation among Jews. 

(Q.) Scripture compared with Scrip- 
ture, 19.. Showing, the correspondence 
betweeab the truths of the Hebrew Sfirip» 
tures, especially the predictions of a 
Messiah, and the trudis of the New Tes- 
Ument, particularly die history of Christ. 
Adapted for circukt^on amcmg Jews. 

(9.) Cecil's Ftinndly Advice to tho 
Servants V>f his parish, 12. Rev. Richard 
Cecil, London. A brief direc$oiy founded . 
00 the plain instructions of the Bible. 

- (lOO Remarkable Testimonies from 
Rabbinnical Writers, 16. Compiled by 
.Marianne Nevill. On the following s>ib- 
jects : a Trinity in Unity ; the Word was 
Ooil ; a Son in the Godhead : incarnation t 
the Shekinah who was the Son of God, to 
be the Messiah ; Redemption and Atone- 
ment by him ; his office, to be miraculoas- 
ly born of a virgin in Bethlehem, to give 
another and more excellent law, to rise 
from the dead, jkscend into heanrMi, aikl 
cofne a second time to judge the world. 
Adapted for circulation among the Jews* 

(XI.) Letters to Students, Sft Rev. 
Baxter Dickinson, Newark, N. J. A pi^ 
mium Tract. Showiug the importance of 
a fixed belief in the Divine -revelation and 
a cordial reception of its truths, and of aa 
elevatad religious character. 



TRACTS IN FOREIGN lANGUAGES. 

Aa English translation of all Tracts issued in Foreign langaages, is 
eiamined and approved by the Publishing Committee. 

The Genaan series have been prepared under the supervision of 
the German Committee of the Pennsvlvania Branch Tract Society 
at Philadelphia. The French, Spanish, and Italian, under the supe^ 
vision or revision of Rev. Prof. J. C. Rostan, late (wm France, with 
the assistance of other gentlemen skilled in those languages. The 
Welsh Tracts under the direction of Rev. Robert Everett, Utica. 



TO TAB 

SUBJECTS OF THE TRACTS. 

[Principal Series to No. 265.— Occaaional to No. 11.] 
TheBiUe. 



Nfl«. 70, 71, 77, 129, 150, 166, 
904, 822, 231, 253. 

JUdemption, EivinUy qf Christ, tmd 
the Trinity, 

Nos. 30, 33, 45, 111, 166, 173, 
225, 250, 214, 185. 
Warning to the Impenitent. 

W<». 5, 15, 17, 26, 32, 46, 52, 
54 76, 80,90, 95, 108,114, 117, 
118. 120, 122, 124,152, 153, 
160, 174, 186, 202, 212, 213 
215, 218, 241, 243. 

J^WElityintujgiicient vnthmit the Jfew 
• Birth. 

Nos 4, 6, 19, 49, 89, 103, 136, 
148, 168, 162, 178, 183, 198, 
237, 252, 254. ' ' 

The Way to he Saved. 
Nos. 72,93, 98. 106, 133, 144, 179. 

Self'ExaminaHon. 
Nos. 21, 113, 146, 165, 189, 229, 
238. 

^rt6ia^ DediMkm and Growth in 

Grace. 
Nos. 66, 116, 2, 16, 24. 65, 60. 

61, 64, 131, 132. 196, 232. 
AWolwei of Itilligion ckteOy m 

HunlbU Life. 
Nos. 7. 9, 10^ 14, 63, 56, 68, 

63, 68, 76, 78, 79, 83, 92, 94. 

107, 109, 126, 128, 139, 180, 

184, 199, 210, 236, 246. 

Prayer. 

Nos. 69, 121, 234. («? occ.) 
The Sabbath and the Lard^s Supper. 
Nos. 8, -JO, 34. 37, 85, 102, 116, 

177, 191, 84. 

PtMc and Family Worship. 
Nos. 41. 82, 145, 182, 206, 22% 
18, 230. 

Christian Education and Helative 
Duties. 
Nos. 27, 28. 127, 143, 171, 194, 
. 197, 211, 67,67. 



Female ObligaHms. 
Nos. 176, 188, 207, 226. 

For the Young. 
Nos. 29, 31, 38.39,40.44,61,66 
100, 149, Ids, 201, (Voce!) 

Spread of the Gospel. 

^^.'i.^\3 ^^^' 104,137, ISSii 
147, 167, 169, 170, 206, 208, 
209, 217, 228, 235, 

Sabbath Schools. 
Nos. 97, J 57, 187, 219. 
For Mourners, the Sick andjmieled. 
Nos. 3, 13,36.69, 86, 110, 91. 
47, 99, 11, 23. ' * 

For Seamen. 
Nos. 81, 87, 88, 96^ 106, 140, 
141, 1 W, 246. ( I occ.) (6 occ) 

For the Jged, Prisoners, Sertanis^ 

and Keeper of TumpOfe-Gate. 
Nos. 48, (3 occ.) (9 occ.) 161. 

Infidelity. 

Nos. 22, 128, 135, 142, 154, 190, 
192, 203, 216, 220, 227. 

UmversoKsnu 
Nos. 119, 134, 155, 181, 224w 

Pupery. '^ 

Nos. 62, 248, 261, 265, 193. 

Judaism. 
Nos. (7, 8, 10. occ.) 

Intemperance. 
Nos. 25, 43, 112, 125, 169, 176, 
221, 233, 239. 240, 242, 244, 
247, 249* 

The Theatre, Dandhg, GamhUng, 

and^Profaneness. • 
Nos. 36, 73, 130, 172, 200, 12, 

Olif. 

Seventh Commandment^ ^V^^^y Laic- 

suits aand Temper. 
Nob. 195, 42, 168, 161. 



1831.'J ADAPTATION OF THB TRACTS. 101 



USE OF THE ABOVE SKETCH IN SELECTING TRACTS. 

It is believed the above sketch will be especially acceptable to 
such persons as are yet unacquainted with all the Society's publica- 
tions, but wish to make selections appropriate to the state of their 
own minds, or the wants of others. A momentary reference to the 
description of the particular Tracts that may come under considera* 
tion. will show them what is their general character, and enable them 
to judge with essential accuracy of their appropriateness to the ob 
jecis they have in view. 



ADAPTATION OP THE TRACTS TO ALL CLASSES OF 

THE COMMUNITY. 

Np impression can be more erroneous than that the Society^s pub- 
lications are adapted only to the capacities and wants of the weak, and 
ignorant, and poor. A very cursory examination of the above sketch 
will show that the subjects discussed arc the most momentous with 
which man lias any concern, and that a very large prop<;niob of them 
are treated in a manner which gives scope to the exercise of the 
highest human powers., *Ihe character and standing of the etuthorA 
are also such that no sober man can regard them, in general, but with 
veneration for their talents, the purity of their motives, and their lives 
of active beneficence to their fellow men. About 190 Tracts in the 
above sketch, of which the authors' names are given, we find ascri- 
bed to the following individuals ; viz. 

Rev. J. AUeiae 1, R«v. Dr. Alexander 3, Rev E. W. Baldwin S, Rev. Richaid 
Baxter 3, Rev. Janes Bean 1, Rev. Dr. Beecker I, Rev. Dr. Beinan 1, Rev. Dr. Ben- 
nett .% Rev. E..Bickftr8tetIi 2, Rev Mr. Biddulph I, Rev. Thomas e(infham I, Rev. 
Dr. Bogue 1, Rev. H. N. Brinsmade 1, Mrs. Brown 1, Rev. Dr. Brownfee 2, Rev. J. 
Bull 1, Rev. John Bunyan I, Rev. Georse Burder 4, Rev. Dr. Calamy 2, Rev. Dr. 
Campbell S, Rev. Richard Cecil 3» Rev. J. S. Christmas 1, Rev. Dr. Church 1, Rev. 
Daniel A. Clark 3, Rev. Dr. Cornelius 1, Mrs. Corn^ius 2, William Cowper, Eeq. 1. 
Rev. J. W. Cunningham 1. Rev. Dr. Dana 1, Rev. Daniel Dc Vinne 1, Rev. J. Do 
Witt, D. D. 1, Rev. Dr. Dickey 1, Rev. A. Dickinson t, Rev. B. Dickinson 2, Rev. 
Dr. Doddridge 4, Rev. Dr. Dwight 2, Rev. C. Eddy 1, Rev. Dr. Edwards 3, President 
Edwards 3, Mrs Emerson 1, Rev. John Fawcett 1, Rev.- J. T. Field 1, Rev. Mr. 
Flavel 3, Rev. T. Flint 1, Edward E. Ford I, Rev. C. Friend 1, Rev. A. Fuller. 5, 
Rev. Robert Gibson I", Rev. Dr. Goodwin 2, Rkv. Samuel 'Green I, Rev. Dr. Greene 
T, R. Greenleaf, Esq. 1, Rev. JMnn GriiBn 3, Rev. Henry Grove 1, Joseph John Gur- 
ney 1, Rev. Prof. Hadduck 1, Rev. Gordon HaH 1, Rev. Robert Hall 2, William A. 
Hallock I, Rev. Hans Hamilton I, Rev. J. Haslock I, Rev. Dr Hawes I, Rev. James 
Hervev 1, Rev. Prof. Hitchcock 1, Rev. J. Uartwell Home i. Rev. Joseph Hughes 1, 
Rev^ V. HiMMt|Mf'^>> 1, Rev. Jacob Ide 1, Rev. W. Innes 1, J. Kittredge, Esq. 1 Rev. 
Dr.Knnz iTWm.Ladd, Esq. I. Leslie I, Rev. C.P. Mc Ilvaine 4, Rev. 8. Mc Kean 1, 
Rev. Mr. Mc Lean 1, Rev.'C. Midan 3, Rev. R. Marks 4, Rev. J. Marsh I, Rev. Wm. 
Marsh 1, Rev. Dr. Mason 2, Rev. Dr. MUler I, Rev. Dr. Milaor 2, Mrs. Hannah 
More 3, Rev. 8. Newell 1, Rev. Dr. Newmau 4, Rev. John Newton 2. Rev. Job Orton 
1, Jlev. Dr. Owen 2, Rev. Dr. Payson 2, Richard Pearsall 1, Rev. J. Philip I, Rev. E. 
Fond I, Rev. l>resiHent Porter, D. D. 2, Rev. Dr. Prondfit 4, Reynolds 1, Rev. Legh 
Richmond 3, Dr. Rush 2, Wm. Rust, Esq. 2. A. Serle, Esq. 1, Dr. T. Bewail I, Mrs. 
Sherwood 1, Rev. Dr. Skinner 2, Rev. G. C. Smith 1, Rev. Dr Spring 2, Rev. Dr. 
Stanford I, Robert Steven, Esq. 4, Rev. Robert Stevenson 1, Rev. Hugh Stowell 1, 
Rev. Mose^ Stuait I, Rev. Wm. Torrey 1, Rev J Townsend 3, Rev. J. Truair ], 
R«v. D. Tyermaa I, Rev Thomas Vivian 1, Rev. Dr. WatU 4, Rev. Dr. Wayland 1. 
M. L. We^ms I, Rev, P. M. Wheiploy I, Rev. Mark WUkea 1, Rev. 8. WUUaton 1 . 
Rev. Dr. Woodbrii^ 1. 



m AUTBBSfTiCITT OF TRMm. fKoV. 

These publications are among the happiest practical efforts pot 
forth by tnese individirals for the moral and spintual welfture of their 
race : some of them in a style inimitably chaste and beautiful ; 
and many of Ihem, at the same time, like the Holy ScriptureSi com- 
bining a simplicity and clearness of illustration, that adapts them to 
the comprehension of the humblest minds. 



AUTHENTICltY OF THE SOCIETY'S TRACTS. 

If some have considered Tracts adapted only to the capacity of 
the ignorant and poor, others have imbibed an impression that they 
are hai fietUioua ttories, hamngnofowtdalioninfaeL This impression, 
» the minds of many, eitends even to a denial of the evidences 
which the most authentic Tracts afford of the reality of the New 
Birth, the influences of the Holy Spirit and the efficacy of ^atoning 
bfood ; and lies in fuH force a^inst the most valuable truths of the Bi- 
ble. It is not expected that the above sketch will remove objections 
from such minds ; but it is hoped that the facts it presents of the oriein 
and character of this Society *s publications will convince every in- 
genuous friend of religion, that, so &r as re^rds their authenticity, they 
are essentially unexceptionable. Two Tracts, having been ascer- 
tained to be fiction, and a third of which the authenticity was ver3r 
questionable, have been recently expunged fh>m the series. Of the 
965 Tracts now remaining and embraced iff the above list, about 
160 are didactic presentations of christian doctrines, and duties ; about 
20 are directed against infidelity, Universalism, Popery, and Juda- 
ism ; and about 20 against Intemperance and other prevalent vices. 
Only about G6 are narratives ; of which a few are palpablv allegori- 
cal, as Parley the Porter and tbe Interpreter's House ; and notwith* 
standing the great variety of sources from which the remainder have 
been derived^ and the difficulty of 'obtaining definite information 
eODcerning the oricin of a few, the evidence of the authenticity of 
most of them is abundant ; and not one is retained of which the 
Committee have decisive evidence that it is not, so fisur as it imports 
to be, a narrative effects. 

The general indiscriminate charge that Tracts are fiction, deserves 
not a moment's consideration ; and it is a curious (act that, so far as 
such a charge has-been made de/imle, it has been directed promi- 
nently against Tracts whose authenticity is established by the most 
unquestionable evidence. 

One of these Tracts is the DmrymanU Dmt^hier. And yet its la- 
mented Author states, at the commencement of the Narrative, that it 
is given ** /h>«fi reot l^t m^d etreionttanee." The Rev. Mr. Tyerinan, of 
the Isle of Wiriityin his sketch of the liie of the Oairvman, explicitly 
corroborates tnis testimony, not oiflv as respects the nMeet of the 
TVact, but the $emury described. The same testimony is given in 
the Life of Legh Richmond, by Grimshawe, and confirmed by a 
maltitode of -the most credible witnesses, and amoi» them, the 
Chairman of the Committee c^ the American TV^ct £»ciety, who^ 
have themselves visited the former residenee of the Dairyman's 
Ihuighter, with immediate reference to ascertaining the truth of tibe 
Narrative which has been so much admired and blessed. 



1S81.J AUTHENTICITY OF TRACTS. ' I6i 

It may be proper here, to say of this and the two other incompara- 
ble Narratives from the same author, that, though this Society's edi- 
tions are considerably abridefed, especially in the descriptions of rural 
scenery, they are most faithful abridgments, embracing all the sub^ 
stance of the religious history of the individuals, and exclusively In 
the language of the lamented Author. 

The Honest Watermanj or Hietory of Th^me Mann, (No. 235,) it 
another Tract which has been alleged to be fiction. Of which it la 
sufficient to say that it bears, on a careful examination, every asDect 
of truth; it was prepared under the inspection of a gentleman of dis- 
tinguished piety and benevolence in London, and published by the 
London Tract Society, one of the Institutions which shared with 14 
others in his liberal bequests at his death ; and we have also direcl 
Sntelligence, in a letter from the Secretary of the London Tract So- 
ciety, that it is a truly authentic Narrative. 

We mention but one more Tract against which the charge of fic- 
tion has been brought and accredited by many, viz : Poor Sarak, 
(No. 128.) 

The following is from the reply to a letter addressed to the Author 
of this Tract. *' To your inquiry," she says, ** I answer withoiA 
hesitation, that the Tract is simply a Jfarralwe of facts. Sarah was 
introduced to me by a friend in March, 1814, from which time till the 
summer of 1817, 1 had opportunities of frequent interviews with her, 
and I felt it to be a privilege to sit and converse with her on the sub- 
ject of personal, experimental religion. To me she unbosomed her 
feelings with perfect confidence and freedom. I observed her con- 
stant attendance on public worship, and frequently at the conference 
room and prayer-meeting, and her unassumins;, meek, and pious, de- 
portment ; and indeed until the time of her death I never heard of 
any one who questioned her piety. 

'*ln those years I kept a kind of Diary, in wh'ch I noted down 
such events as were interesting to me, and there I wrote the varioua 
conversations I had with Sarah, as sOon as convenient after their oc- 
currence, without the most distant idea of their ever being seen by 
any human eye. 

** Some time after her death, I was attacked with sickness which 
was supposed to l>e a rapid decline, and while ' setting my house in 
order/ I looked over my papers with a view of destroying most of 
them. Oameeting with these notices of Sarah's piety, I was reluctant 
to bum them, and copied them briefly into a separate manuscript 
This was seen by a confidential friend, who recommended its publica- 
tion, and it soon after appeared in the Religious Intelligencer at New- 
Haven, all names of places, &c. being suppressed. On seeing it in print, 
I pereeived that the language was4n some respects more broken than 
Sarah used. I believe she always said, * My Good Mis' instead of 
* Misse,' but there was nothing which really affected the authenticity 
of the Tract. 

'* She lived, while I knew her, and died in a little hovel on the 
bank of Snipsic pond, near the line between the town of Tolland^attd 
Elllagton, Conn. Which side of the line I do not know. 

"I receive abundant testimonies of the usefulness of the Tract, alid 
often retire and on my knees thai^k God for naing it to bis gkMf ." 



w 



NEW TRACT. 



I Not 



AUTHENTIC NARRATIVE TRACTS. 

The Committee of the American Tract Society, believing this to 
be among the most useful class of the Society's publications, and 
ipeciaHy adapted to arrest the attention of the great body of the com- 
munity, earnestly invite the preparation, by competent persons, of 
Narratives of the operations of Divine grace in individuals whose his- 
tory, in the providence of God, has come under their own observa- 
tion. 



New premium tract. 

Occasional (No. 11.) Letters to Students. A Premioh 
Tract. By Rbv. Baxter Dickinsoit, Newark, New Jersey. 
pp.32. Showing the importance of a fixed belief in the Divine 
revelation, and a cordial reception of its truths, and of an elevated 
religious character. The author having declined receiving the pre- 
mium of $50, it has been committed to the American Tract Societv 
for the purchase of a supply of this Tract for the Colleges of our 
country, to be delivered gratis, on the order of their Faculty respec- 
tively, in the proportion of one copy for each student, 

POCKET J^IANUALS. suitable for kew years' presents. 

pocket-book 
_, PP* size. cts. bindinr. 

Daily Texts, containing a Scripture 

Text, and verse of a hymn for each day 

in the year 128 64mo. 12i 

Diary, being Daily Texts interleaved 
with ruled paper for memorandums, &c. 128 64mo. 18 

Daily Food for Christians, being a 
text, a verse of a hymn, and a Scripture 
promise for each day in the year. [The 
texts in this are unlike those in the Daily 
Texts.] 192 64mo. 12i 

Dew Drops, containing a text for each 
day in the year . , . . 123 128mo. 8 

Gems of Sacred Poetry . . . 256 64mo. 18 

Mason's Crumbs from the blaster's 
Table 176 64mo. J2i 



3t 
37* 



31 

22 
37i 



31 



RECEIPTS 



INTO THE TREASUaY OP THE A.MERICAN TRACT SOCIETY 
During the mtmth ending October 15, 1831. 

FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. ForTr. Dm 

VER.— Bridport, Wm. B. Ilamblin, Tr. ... 

Burlington, H. W. Catlin, Sec 

Fair Haven, Artemas S. Cushman, Sec 

Marlborough, Fem. Huldah C. Newton, Ag. 

Middlebury, E. Brewster, Ag. 

New Haven, Rev. Joel FtiduAg. . . . 

St. Albans, Vem. Theodore w. Smith, Depositary, . . 

E. Roberts, Tf 



Vergenne8,John E. 

West Rupert, KeT..Oavid V^ilaoai Ag. 



For TV. 


35 37 


9 00 


28 80 


7 00 


76 34 


5 34 


15 00 


16 50 


708 1 



3 50 



HECEIPTS. 



MASS.— Boftton Amer. Tr. Boc. Jolm Tappaii, Esq. Tr. 
HooBon, YouBff Men's* W. O. Norcross, Sec. 

Do. Fem. Mm Olivia Flynt, Sec 

Sprinrfield, Henry Kirkham, Tr 

CONN.— BrooklynfWindham co. Au^ Edwin Newbury, Ag. 

Darien, Charles Whitney, Tr 

Hartford.Conn. Branch, Charles Hosmer, Sec. 
New London, Robert Coit, Tr. . '' . 



1S6 



FcrTr. 

75 00 

13 S5 

10 12 

8 00 

30 00 

500 

150 00 

22 62 



Don. 



Northford, Rev. M. Noyes,Aff. 

North Greenwich, Rev. Mr. Wilcox, Tr 

North Stonington, Rev. Joseph Ayre, Ag, 

Norwich, Fem. Miss Sarah Backus, Sec. .... 

Roxbury, Rev. F. Harrison, Sec. 

NEW-YORK.— Andes, I>elaware Co. Fem. 

Attica, Genesee Co. Abel Wilder, Tr 

Buffalo, Fem. Miss Harriet W. Russel, Sec. ... 

Cairo, D. Johnson, Tr, . . . . >. . . 

Cambridge, Thomas B. Fairehild, Sec. 
East Hampton, L. I. Rev. Joseph D. Condict, Ag. . 
Elbridge, Onondaga Co. Fem. Miss Lydia Clark, Sec. . . 
£lmira,.(Tioga Co. Aux.) West Jury Dist. Joel Jones, Tr. 
.vGreenville, ureene Co. Fem. Misis Hannah Hicock, Sec. 

Hoosick Falls, Lymaa Wilder, Sec. 

Islip and Huntington South, Henry Brewster, Sec. 

Mount Morris Fem. Mrs. Lucretia C. Sleeper, Tr. 

Oyster Ponds, L. I. Rev. P. Robinson, Ag. . . .' . 

Rochester, Monroe Co. Levi A . Ward, Tr. .... 

Tonipkin8vine,Stat. Isl Mrs. Miller, Tr 

Troy, Charles Lyman, Tr. 

Do. By their Fem. Anx. Dorset, Ver. Mrs. Rhoda M. Bliss, Tr. 
Union and Vestal, Peter Mersereau, Tr. 

Utica, Edward Vernon, Sec. 

Windham, Greene Co. Fem. Abigail Pratt, Tr. 

NEW JERSEY.— Amwell, Fem. Mrs. Hetty Skillman, Tr. 

Bloomfield, Robert R. Kellogg, Sec 

Flemington, Rev. Jdin F. Clark, Ag 

Hamburg, Fem. Mrs. Haines, Tr 

Kingston, Fem. Miss Jane K. Comfort, Tr. 

Lawrenceville, Fem. Mrs. M. L. Phillips, Sec. 

PerthAmboy, Fem. Mrs. Margaret Maurice-, Tr. ..... 

Fompton, Fem. Miss Margaret Berry, Tr. .... 

Princeton, Fem. Miss P. W.Morford,Tr. .... 

Washington, Fem. Phebe S. Miller, Tr. .... 

Westfield, Fem. Miss Mary Pierson, Sec. .... 

PENN.— Erie Fem. Emily Wight, Sec. 

Montrose, Jerre Lyons, A ff*. 

Philadelphia Branch, Frederick Erringer, Tr. 

Pittsburgh, Rev. Robert Patterson, A g 

Wilksbarre, W. C. Gildersleeve, Tr 

MARYLAND.— Baliimore Branch, Carter A. Hall, Esq. Tr. . 
DIST. COL.— Alexandria, Fem. Mrs. E. S. Ladd, Sec. 
VIRGINIA.— Pisgah, Bedford Co. (Otter Brklge P. O.) Rev. John 
Leftwick, Tr 

Richmond, Charles Holt, Jan. Tr. ...... 

N. CAR.— Salisbury, Michael Brown, Tr 

OHIO.— Bricksville, John Waite, Sec 

Brooklyn, 

Cincinnati, Henry B. Funk, Tr. 

Cleaveland, Benjamin Roiise, Depositary 

Dayton Branch, E. M. Strong, Tr 

Dover, Ashur Cooley, Tr 

Ellsworth, Trumbull Co. Rev. Wm. O. Stratton, Sec. 

Euclid, Henry Mc Ilrath, Sec. ...... 

Frederick, Knox Co. Rev. John Mc Kinney, Ag. 



3 71 
2 86 
8 00 
227 

4 50 
14 28 
10 00 

4 50 

53 

6 40 
26 52 



00 
60 
08 
00 
49 



5 

5 

6 

2 

1 
180 00 

2 25 
100 .^0 



14 93 
96 01) 



6 13 
47 00 
14 00 



700 
3 81 



208 



300 



10 CO 



1 50 




4 00 




1 60 




9 81 




6 66 




5 00 




13 63 


6 59 


45 






25 


10 00 




254 




225 




22 00 




13 50 




82 67 




130 00 




8 53 




250 00 




10 00 




7 00 




60 00 


760 


42 00 




2 50 


10 00 



58 
1 
2 
9 



50 
00 
50 
32 



10 00 



500 



HBCElPTft. 



Onuger, R«iiry Tiffuiy, 8«e. 

HmUoB, (Portafe Co. Aiuc) Prof. Elizur Wright, Af . 

Medina, TimflthvHudaoDtTr • 

Richlield, W. Welton, See 

TwiDsburjrh, IUt. Samoel Btoell, Af 

MICH. T£R.— Detroit, E;. P. Hastings, Af. .... 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXlLlAEY. 
MA8S.-.We«tlleId, A. O. ChadiHck, Ag. 
CONfN«— Branford, Fem. Mn. H. Baahnell, Ag. 

North Branford, Do. 

N. YORK.— North Salem, Fem. Mia Delavan, Tr. 
N. JERSBY.~PaterM»n, Sd Ref. D'lteh Ch. Ralph Doremnt, Tr- 
Tract< sold at the Depository, to iodividuals, including |3SS, 39 
received fi-om Agents of the Soeiety for Tracts sold. 



375 
30 00 
4SS 
4 18 
1 01 
lOSOO 


10 85 


3 IS 

SOO 


748 08 



850 
890 



Direeiun for Life, 

N. YORK<— Hempstead, Rev. 
Charles Webster, by Mim Eli- 
sabeth Hait, 50 00 

Mtmber$ for Life, 

MASS.— Pittsfield, Mrs. J. L. 
Hyde, by Young Lwiies, . . SO 00 

Wutdsor, Stephen Dawes, appro- 
priated by his wilh previous to 
her death, (la part offSO.) 10 00 

CONN.— Bridgeport, Mrs. Catha^ 
rine M. Bassett, (in part of fSO.) 5 00 

Canton, Mrs. Amelia Everest, by 
appropriation from the Ever- 
est Fund, SO 00 

Glastmibury, Normal^ Hubbard, . 85 00 

Hamden, (Mount Carmel Soe.) 
Miss CUoe Diekermaa, ... 30 00 

N<Kth Branlbrd, Rev. JudsoaA. 
Root, by a Lady of his Soe. (in- 
fhUofiao.) 

West Hartford, Hn. Mary Coi- 



6 54 
80 00 



N. YORK.— Casenovia, Rev. 
Charles White, by Young La- 
dies 80 00 

Livonia, Miss Sarah Beeeher, 
(deceased,) by Mr. A. Beeeher, 
Norwich, Beigamin Ch^imui, 
by Joseph T.Gilbert, . . . 
N. JER.— Peterson, CiOheriae 
W.Colt, by R. L. Coh, Esq. 
John Colt, by do. . . . 

Sarah Colt,t^ do. . . . 
Rev. Jacob T. Field, by do. . 
Rev. Saml. Fisher, D D. by do. 
MD.— Baltimore, Ellen Craig Colt, SO 



Jane Craifr Colt, 
Margaret Oliver CoH, 
Mary Devereux Colt, . 
Thomas Oliver Colt, 

by their father, R. L. Cok, . 
OHIO.— McCoouelsvill^ Rev. J. 

Hunt, by his Ch. and Cong. 



M 

44 



44 
14 



44 
44 



80 00 

80 00 

80 00 

80 00 

80 00 

80 00 

80 00 

00 

00 

00 

00 



SO 

so 

so 



80 00 



800 



11 IS 
18 00 



(in part of 090,) . . . ^ . 
Annual Membert. 
N. YORK.— N. Y. City, Jamee 
W.Bleeeker, SOO 

Other Donatiom. 

VER.— Burlington, Individuals, 

Orw<dl, Gentlemen, for VaL Mist. 

MASS.— Plainfield, Defc. Eras- 

tns Bates, $1, Geo. Vintng H, 

Mrs. »>annretHallock,for.Tr. 

for the Heathen, $3, Justus 

Warner 85 cts. . ' 5 85 

Individtials, by Hiss Martha 
Hallock, ........ 3 00 

CONN^-Canton, Everest Fund, . 5 00 
New Britain, Henry L. Bidwell, 8 00 
N. YORK.-Albany, 8d Presb. Soe 50,00 
Keecker, Montgomery Co. Jo- 
seph Eastman, Esq 8 00 

Brunswick,Rev. Leonard Johnson, 1 00 
BurHngton, Presb Society, . . 1 00 
Newark, Wayne Co. Mrs.Evmn- 

gelicaBaUy, for Val. Miss. . . 1 00 
Sand Lake, Rev. Thomas S. 
Wickes 3 00 



Waterloo, 8. M.Maltby, 
vnUoPisgah, Bedford Co. Indi- 



viduals, . . 
».— Iadivi< 



[duals at a Camp 



1 30 
000 



OHIO. 

Meeting, 85 

EUsworth, Tmnbult Co. Mr. Fiteh, 1 IS 
Kiesman, 8. Andrews, .... 1 00 
Lebanon, Amos Smitli, .... 1 00 

The above list contains doiiap 
tiofis— 
For Tracts for the Valley of the 

Mississippi, 13 00 

For Tracts ftir the Heathen, . . 3 00 

Whole Amount of donations, . $9i9 94 
Received for Traets sold, . $8,790 41 



Totd, $3,380 33 



THE AMERICAN 



DBOBMBSR, 1831. 



AMBRXOAXr TBAOT SOOXETT. 
THE SOCIETY'S PECUNIARY HEANS. 

Having in our lasl number shown (he eicellcnt and evangclicll 
charaeter of lira Society's principalserieeor publications, 578 in all j 
their adaplntlon (o bo uBeHiIi and the ngnBl Diiine blcBsins 
which has attended thetn, ne now proceed to show to what exteai 
tbe Sacietj is provided with Cccunfoni ^eonj. 

Tbe Siwietj bss no permanent funds; and a <inii;)I<lt iiionilory of 
bU it possesses maybe ipven with great deliniten ess in a few words: 
it has, rent free, Ihe building in which ila operilians are conducted ; 
tbo stock of pubUcBtionBiitils General Depository, which is no larger 
than is absolulely necessary In meet the demands of (he country ; 
and its stereotype plates aad other materials used in tran«acling its 
concerns. It is the tledign nf the Sodely to sell its puhlicatiuns ol 
cnl; so that its dependence for Ihenenna ofeitcnding its opera tiaiig 
is solely on Ihe donattcD* of tbe benevoleDt. 

Vol. VL li Wbole No. 69 . 



168 TBI SOCIKTT'S nCVHIA&T HEAHSU [I>ecV 

Ptesting Pecuniary Defideney, 

In thebalf jeir, from Hayltto Nov. 1, there wapaid w ca»kt for pa- 
per, printing, and the Olher ezpoDMe of the Society. ... $37,310 04 

The total rceeipto, during the same period, ezcliuiye <tf loans, were . 
9nly 19,683 S5 

Learing a deficiency, which was paid bj monies loaned at the hanks > . g^ «^ 
pa the individual responsibility efmembers of the Committee of > <iwro tv 

It is worthy of remark, that the whole ammini ofdonaHona made 6y 

'«K (A« Sociefsf'tf Bnnidkes oiuf wSimfianM, from May 1 to Nov. 

lyisbut . : , . . . . 315 65 

There is due, while we now write, on bills presented and allotted at > ' 
|he last meeting of the Committee, beyond the whole amount in the > 1,411 69. 
treasury ....--...--J "^ 

Thertf is due, on notes given by monbers of the Committee for paper 
^d money loaned, which must be paid within one flMmtA ... 5^800 1ft 

There is due on notes, to be paid within six months, the further snm of 10,586 90 
Total due on bills and notes, which must be paid within sil months, in 
addition to all the Society's current expense^ ...... 17,70801 

With whatcTer emotions these deficiencies may be regarded by the 
Christian community in general, they are, to the conductors of the 
Society, a serions reality. ^The obligations given by members of the 
Committee are strictly mercantilein their character, and roust bo met 
on the day of payment, however deficient may be the Society's 
means ; and though temporary loans may be made, while members 
.of the Committee are witling individually to assume them, the day of 
redemption soon arrives, and they add nothing to the Society's sub- 
stantial means. They cannot be permanently resorted to. Aid must 
be aflurded by the contributions of the benevolent, or the Society's 
■ labors and consequent usefulness must be abridged. 

, How this Deficiency has been Occasioned, 

The simple fact is, that, while the conductors of the Society have 
been persevering in their laborious efibrts, with economy, and, as they 
hope, with some good degree of fidelity, the contributions received for 
the last eigfiteen months have been iar less than in preceding years, 
and, for much of that period, as i^ppears above, essentially less than 
the amount expended. 

Shall then the Society restrict and tvnit its endeavors? or, will the 
friends of God and man throw themselves into the breach, and say, 
** oo ON : here is the pecuniary means; and the blessing of God be with 
you," This is the only alternative. 

Shall the Society cease to issue new puUicatims ? when the voice of 
all its Auxiliaries, and of the Christian community calls for them ; 
and Tracts and other publications are presented for adoption, which, 
like the Pilgrim* s Progress, trnd the CaU to the Unconverted^ now in 
hand, promise to be the means of salvation to many souls. 

^all it curtail the stock in its General Depository 7 >vhich now with 



1831.V THE society's PE«t7NIAftt MEAKS. ISi 

great difficulty can be kept so replenished as not continually to dis- 
appoint the orders of Auxiliaries and friends, especially those desir- 
ing Tracts for monthly Distribution. 

Shall it dimimsh the amount of agency in the Tract Home 7 wheii 
two of its principal Agents there, have already been threatened with 
the termination of their earthly services, under the pressure of the 
accumulating responsibilities and labors of wjlK^hing over its gene- 
ral interests, superintending its publications and agencies, conduct- 
ing its correspondence, and managing its pecuniary transactiensi 
and the minute concerns of its General Depository. 

Shall it caU back its Traveling jSgcHts from their labors to ble^s the 
distant and destitute portions of our land ? one of these, Ret. Ctrvs 
W. Allen, is laboring to extend the blessings of the Society over the 
whole of Missouri and Illinois. Another, Mr. Moses H. Wilder^ 
is laboring in a similar manner for Indiana. Mr. William Yonob 
and Mr. Lucius C. Rousb are thus laboring in Ohio; Mr. Oren C. 
Thompson in Michigan Territory ; Rev. Warren Day in the Wes- 
tern District of New-York ; ReV. Thomas Coci|RAjf in the North 
Eastern part of the same state and Vermont; Rev. Thaddeus B. 
HuRLBUT in Virginia ; and Mr. Alexander Baglet in North Caro- 
lina. The collective labors of all these Agents involve a heavy draft 
on the Society's Treasury ; but from what portion of the fields they 
are occupying shall they be recalled ? Who, on the other hand, shall 
account to God that no more is doing by this Society for other desti- 
tute portions of our extended country ! 

Shall it withhold grants of Tracts from the destitute of our country? 
while millions of our population are crowding their way beyond the 
stated means of grace, and present a claim on this Society which the 
cold heart of infidelity and misanthropy alone can have courage to 
resist 

Shall it deny a short eredU to Auxiliaries and individuals in destihde 
flaces ? when, by waiting on them till a part or alf the piiblications 
they receive can be sold, they will pay for them ; and otherwise they 
4hustbe supplied by grant, or the Society's publications be utterly de- 
nied them. 

Shall it refuse to furnish Tracts to American J\iissionaries toiUing 
among the Heathen ? when they entreat our aid, and tell us there is 
no means of benefiting the Heathen which promises more usefulness 
at an equal expense; and when the Society solemnly and publicly 
resolved, at its last anniversary, that << they will endeavor, by the Di- 
vine blessing, to supply Evangelical American Missionaries in Fo- 
reign countries with as many approved Tracts, or the means of pro- 
earing them, as shall, in the opinion of the Executive Committee, be 
needed in the proaecotion of their labors." 



100 THE SOCIKTT*t FECUKUltY HBAHS. [DCO* 

The Voice ofProvidenee and of Ckridians is, *' Go or.** 

Im what rbspbct, then, shall the Society diminish its operations 7 
'* Diminish V Shall we talk of diminishing the operations of Benevo- 
lence, in this daj of blessing to Zion, when the church is called and 
encouraged to redoubled effarts, prayers, and confidence in her King, 
that her " labor shall not be in vain in the Lord?" "/nwAot respect 
diminish?*^ We seem to hear one universal answer from the wise and 
good, «* In no respect : Go .ow, and * the Ood of heaven prosper you.' »' 
. " Go OM," we doubt not, fe. the voice of all the Society's Branches 
and AuxiUaries, And yet, sjiall it be told, that the whole amount of 
donations made to the Parent Institution by Branches and Auxiliaries 
from May 1 to November I, is only $315 65! Will not, then, the 
officers of every Auxiliary revive their operations ; make immediate 
collections ; pay promptly, if any thing is due the Parent Society ; 
and make at least a smsill donation to aid its extended concerns. 
' "Go ON," we d(mbt not, is the voice of the Evangelical Ministers of 
the Gospd in <mr country, almost without' e&ception. Will they 
not then lay thirolgect befqrQ their people, oad remember it in their 
public prayers? 

" Gro ON," say those Christians who haoe more than\ competency of 
this world's goods, and who pray God to direct thenrhow to use what 
they possess most efidctually for his glory. Will they not, t^en, con- 
jrtitute themselves Directors or Members for Life ; or perpetuate some 
acceptable Tract, or some spiritual, awakening Occasional volume ? 

**Xj1o on," say, with unequalled promptness and sympathy for the 
welfare of tiiis cause, the pious Females of our land. Will they not» 
then, make tliemttlTes, or their Pastors, or the wives of their Pas- 
tors, or other individuals to whom such a token of respect will be 
proper, Directors or Members for Life? 

" Go ON," we believe is the voice even of many an ardent youth in 
our flouria^fcln^fiUbocrfs, Aeadeioies, Colleges and Seminaries. Will they 
not, then, tliu* constitute their Instructers Directors or Members 
for Life? 

" Go ON," reply the thousands who have little of this world's ' 
goods to impart, but »vho feel that the cause of Christ is the only ob- 
ject for whieh they %Be bound .to live. Will they not, then, send 
promptly forward to the Society's aid that little which ihey can 
afford, and pray God to bless it, and to open the hearts of others ; 
guide the conductors of the Society in duty, especially in selecting 
and preparing its publications; make his children active in.difluBiog 
them, and give them efficacy in bringing sinners to the Cross of their 
Redeemer. 

« 

Would every one| not mer^y take isUo contideratian what be ahotdd 



*S5J'] ' VOKTBLT DISTRIBUTIOK. %%i 

do, butcto U according to his own estimate of the measure of duty, the 
wants of this Institution would be supplied, and it might go on with- 
out hindrance, achieving new conquests under the blessing of the 
Holy Spirit, and causing great joy in Heaven over multitudes brought 
to repentance. 

MONTHLY TRACT MSTRIBUTlON IN NEW-YORK CITY. 

This good work is still prosecuted with'.ctficieaey and zeal, and evi- 
dences of its usefulness are continually, occurring. The following are 
brief extracts from the reports in New- York for October. 

In the Fourth Ward, a Distributer says, I found a woman appa- 
rently in a decline, anxious about her future well-being ; but delay- 
ing the work of repentance, and flatteria^ herself that, if she reco- 
vered, she should live a different life. After reading a few verses of 
the 3d of John, I endeavored to show her that the heart is deceitful 
above all things, and desperately wicked, and that without a change 
she could not enter thc^kingdotn of Heaven. She^stened with intense 
interest, and with tears rcf^ied, " It is alt true ; and all that you have 
ever said to me is true ^ and all ttie Tracts which you have brought 
me are true ; I must be bom againJ** 

In the Fiflh Ward, a Distributer says, T have furnished my district 
and I think i have increased evidence of the utility of the Monthly 
Distribution, I have obtained, in my district, 29 names pledged to 
total abstinence from ardent spirit, many of whom are heads of fami- 
lies, and hitherto have always used it. I have been enabled to induce 
several families to send their children to the -Sabbath School. There 
are two persons, a husband and wife, apparently under deep convic- 
tions, and earnestly inquiring what they must do to be saved. The 
husband has been ens[agf>d in an infidel printing office The Tract 
Examine your hopes for Eternity, accompanied by (ilain; but tender 
expostulation, seems to have been the means, in. the hands of God, of 
arousing him from his sleep of death. May God make it effectual to 
his salvation. Another says, I found a sick <!Olored woman, who 
thanked us for the Tract, and said she could not read it herself, but 
would get some one to read it to her. She appeared .deeply impressed 
with her unworthiness and sinfulness. I endeavored iQ point her to 
the Lamb of God. She appeared to be very much efiectcd while I was 
conversmg with her. I found nine families destitute of the Bible, who 
were all willing to receive -it. Another says, Your Tracts were all 
kindly received. I have obtained five children for the Sabbath School. 
By the several distributers ia this ward, thirty-nine families were 
found destitute of the Bible. 

Inihe^lnth Ward, one Distributer says, A number that I convers- 
ed with, appeared to feel deeply the importance of now "examining 
their hopes for eternity." Another says, i am happy to state that two 
persons in my ^Ustrietj a man and his wife, have fip\)a.renl\y suhmiUed 
themselves to God during the last month, and are now rejoicing in the 
hope of a free pardon of their sins through the merits and atoning 
lilood of our blessed Savior. By the Grace of God, the female prayer 
laeetiog in this district, was the happy means of leading this dear wo- 



IfiS 



MONTHLY DI8TRIBUTI0M. 



[Dec. 



man to a sense of her lost condition as a sinner. There is an appear- 
ance of deep feeling manifested by some others, in view t>f their need 
of a Savior. A woman who received her Bible with much apparent 

gratitude, about fonr weeks since, is now in eternity. I have distri- 
uted four Bibles this month. 

In the EUeventh Ward, a Distributer says, a man in my district, who^ 
has for a long time been addicted to intemperance, has, through the 
influence of the Tracts, and friendly conversation, been induced to 
adopt the {Principles of total abstinence. This is the second instance 
of reformation in this district within a short time. Another says, 
there is apparently much more feeling in my district than formerly ; 
two or three are anxiously inquiring what they must do to be saved. 
A weekly prayer meeting has been held for two or three weeks past 
which has been well attended and very solemn. 
^ In the Fourteenth Ward, aDistributer says, without any thing espe* 
cially interesting,, this district exhibits much of Christian . character, 
and much that illustrates the good effects of the sjLeady distribution 
of Tracts. In my district, says another, two men, whom I have be- 
fore reported as sick, have departed to a world of Spirits since the last 
month'g distribution. The widows of both are'poor and needy. One 
has three children. ' ^he appeared anxious for her soul*8 salvation, 
and wished to convqrse on religious subjects, i,o have her children 
attend the Sabbath School, and to attend, herself on the public wor- 
ship of God. I know of no one who cafed for the souls of iho two 
departed men,*Or labored for their spiritual good, except your unwor- 
thy Tract Distributer. I conversed with both of Uiese men and 
prayed with one of them in my last distribution. But my last oppor-. 
tiinity to labor for their good is past. Who shall estimate the res- 
ponsibility of the monthly Tract Distributer f 



RECEIPTS 

INTO THB T&EASURY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY 

During the month endi$tg November 15, 1831. 

FROM AUXILIARY TRACT SOCIETIES. 
VER.— Brookfi«l<),*FemaIef Mrs. H.^ W. Wild, Secretary, 

Charlotte, Noble Lovely ,*Treasurer, 

Clarendon, Female, Mrs. Evelina Hoigee, Secretary, 
Ea»t Berkshire, Deaooa Jonathan Samson, Secretary, . 
Enosburgh, Deacon Levi Nichols, Secretary, . . . , 
Hinesburgh, William Harlbut, President, .... 

Pittsfo^d, Abel Penfield, Treasurer, 

Poultney, ' 

Sandpate, George Stone, Treasurer, • . . . . 
fit. Albans, Female, Theodore W. Smith, Depositary, . 
MASS. — Boston, Amer. Tract Soc. John Tappan, Esq. Treasurer, 
Richmond, Abraham B. Roaiter, Secretary, .... 
Springfield, Henry Kirkham, Treasurer, ' . -« . ^ . 
R. ISL.— Bristol, Female, Miss Hannah Church,J^ecretary, . 
CONN.— Chester, Female, Rev. William Case, Agent, 

Essex in Sayforook, . 

Huatin^on, William Milb, Se^retarv, .... 
Kent, Young Men's, Philo G. SGIls, Secretary, 

Do*. Female; Mrs. H. P. Slosson, Agent, .... 
Killingworth, Oliver B.Hull, Treasurer, .... 

Middletown, Luke C. Lyman, Secretary, .... 
MUford, George Mann, Treasurer, . . 



For TV. 


Don. 




1 00 


17 50 






4 00 


8 00 


5 00 


13 00 


5 00 


30 00 




21 67 




2 14 






1 00 


to 00 




1606 00 




3 61 


5 91 


11 00 




15 06 




2 34 


78 


25 




7 77 


10 00 


525 




200 


1 25 


3 00 




60 00 




500 





« » 

tf llington in East Haddam, William E. Cone, Secrotaqr, 

New-Haven, J. L. Croes, ^JS^^^* 

New Milford, Ezra Noble, Treasurer, 
North Greenwich, Rev. Mr. Wilcox, Treamirer, 
Norwich City, F A. Perkina, Esq. Treasurer, 
Salisbury, Female, Emeline H. Norton, Treasurer, 

Sharon, David Gould, Treasurer, 

N. YORKw— Albany, N. York Central Branch, D.McKercher, Sec. 

ArkpoM, James Hurlburt, Secretary, 

Auburn, C. B. Hotchkifs, Agent, 

Do. by their Female Auxiliary Genoa, .... 
Bath, (Steuben county Auxiliary,) James G. Hjggins, Treasurer, 
Bedford, Female. Susan N. Nichols, Secretary, . . . ' 
Beekmantown, Clinton county, John Smith, Secretary, 
Berea in Alontgomery, Fem. Miss Maria Houston, Treasurer, . 
BridgehamptoD, Rev. Arozi Francis, Treasurer, . . 
Brooklyn, L. I., Joseph Howard, Esq. Treasurer, 

Cameron, John Hedges, Secretary, 

Canaan Four Corners, Fem. Mrs. £. C. Warner, Presidtnt, . 

Cattskill, Female, 

Cutchogue, L. I., Rev. Ezra Young, Agent, .... 
Delhi, Sd Fresb. Cong. Del. Co., William Broadwell, Treasurer, 
Edwards, St. Lawrence county, Josephus Morton, Agent, 
Geneseo, (Livingston county Auxiliary,) T. Hastings, Secretary, 

Geneva, James »>gert. Treasurer, 

Ghent, FemaiR, M. W. Wynkoop, Secretary, . * . 

Gouvcmeur, Female, Mrs. Lucina Parsons, President, , 
Greenwood, Jacob Manning, Secretary, .... 

Hopewell in Fishkill, Fem. Mrs. Ann R. Swartwout, Treasurer, 

Hornelsville, M. Thatcher, Secretary, ^ 

Howard, J. Baldwin, Secretary, 

Jasper, Enoch Ordway, Secretary, . . . . , . 
Kinderhook, Df. Henry L. Vandyck, Agent, .... 
La Fayette, Female, Harriet Hoyt, Secretary, .... 

Lodi, Joseph Plumb, Treasurer, 

Lyons, Wayne county. Erastus Dean, Treasurer, " 

Montgomery, John F. Scott, Secretary, 

Moriches, L. L, Alfred Ketcham, Secretary, .... 
New Hi^ckensack, M. W. Dwight, Treasurer, 
New- York City Tract Society, Alfred Edwards, Treasurer, 
Do. by Female, Auxiliary, Mrs. J. R. Hurd, Treasurer, 

St. George's Church, Female, Miss Ann Dominick, Tr. 
Owego, (Tioga county Aux.) East Juty Dist. John Carmichael, Tik 
Oyster Ponds, Rev. P. Robinson, Agent, 
Peru, Female, Harriet Wells, Treasurer, 
Piattsburgh, Rev. Moses Chase, -^ent, . 
Ponghkeepsie, L. J. Van Kleek, Treasurer, 
Puhney, Daniel Benton, Secretary, 
Rye, Female, Ann H. Buckley, Secretary, • 

Sand Lake, Rensselaer Co., Rev. Mr. Wickea, Agent, 
Shelter Island, Jonathan Huntting, Treasurer, . 
Sheridan, Female, Mrs. Bennett. Agent, . 
Southold L. L, Rev. William Fuller, Secretary, 
Sweet Hollow, L. I., John Everett, Treasurer, 
TroupslHirgh, Charted Fay, Secretary, 
Troy, Charles Ljrman, Treasurer, .... 
Tmxton, Female. Mrs. A. Avery, Secretary, 
Utica, Edward Vernon, Secretary, .... 
Walton, Female, Mrs. Hannah N. Seymour, Treasurer, 
Wheeler, Cornelius Younglove, Secretary, 
Whitehall, Young Mens' Oscar F. Blount, IVeasurer, 
WoodhnU, Francis V. Hubbard, Secretary, 
N. JER. — Baskingridge, Horace Sheldon, Secretary, . 
Lamington Cong., Female, Mrs. Blauvelt, President, 
Mendham, Female, Mrs. Johnson, Treasurer, ^ 
MorriHo vn, Fenalei Swali A. MfllSf Traasurer,, 




ForTr. 

3 50 
30 00 

50 00 

1 28 
1196 68 

11 02 

4 05 
109 25 

6 95 
60 00 

51 50 
6 37 

5 00 
9 75 

54 

132 63 

3 25 

6 38 

2 50 

3 20 
3 25 

2 25 
15 00 
62 85 

3 67 

4 71 
3 12 

8 50 
222 

9 78 

7 69 

12 24 

6 14 
12 72 

450 

3 50 

5 00 
100 00 

45 00 
15 00 
29 34 

1 49 

4 00 
20 00 

2 50 
10 00 

7 14 

5 12 
360 



75 
8 74 

2 98 
1100 00 

100 00 

3 75 
10 00 
10 00 

3 30 
899 
8 00 
2 00 
18 75 



163 

JTms. 
3 50 



696 



1 76 



3 28 



3 14 



1 89 



450 



6 56 



45« 



508 
1 90 



3 09 
1 85 



1.6 SS 



RECCIPT8. 



If ew-S^annack, Nicholas Witliamson, Treaourer, 

Patterson, Edwin Soxton, Secretary, 

Pompton Plains, Female, Mnrgaret Berry, Treasurer, 

Princeton, Nassau Hall, E. D. Armstrong, Treasurer, 

Trenton, 1st Giinrch, Female, Esther Mcllvaine, Secretary, 

Westfield, Female, Mary Pierson, S'iCretary, .... 

PENN. — Philadelphia Branch, Frederick Erringer* Treasurer, . 

MARYLAND — Hagerstown, Fem. Mrs. Rebecca L. Martin, Sec. 

VIRGINIA. — ^Winchester, Daniel Gold, Treasurer, 

Po. by their Auxiliary, Back Creek, 

Do. do. ^ do. Falliug Wnter Cong. 

Do. do. * do. Gerraras Toirn, . 

ff CAR. — Chapel Hill, in University of N. Car. Junius B. BUog, Ag. 

Q8QRGIA. — Bryan Co., jQhq B. Htu-den, Secretary, 

TfiNN. — Knoxville, James Park. Esq. Treasurer, . 

OHIO. — Cincinnati, Henry B.l^ihk, Treasurer, . 

Dayton, E. M. Strongs Tressurav, 

MISSOURI.— Franklin DsbosHory, 

MICH. TER.— Detroit. K.'P Hastings, Agent, 

SOCIETIES NOT AUXILIARY. 

MASS.— Northampton, J. P. Willistoo, Agent, 

West Springfield, (Feeding Hills,) 

CONN.— West Hartford, ..•-... 

N. YORK— South Dansvifte, Steuben Co., W. T. Stone, Sec. . 

N. JER.— Patterson, in *2d Ref Dutch CU., Ralph Doremus, Tr. 

Tracts sold at the Depository to inJividuaU including $44 44 re- 
ceived from Traveling AgeatSi for Tracts sold, . 



jJ'tfrTV 
I 787 
10 80 



50 
77 
50 
06 



4 

15 
4 
3 

400 00 
4d 40 
99 00 



16 00 
12 50 
75 00 
30 00 

17 00 
27 25 

5 00 

22 27 
2 12 

80 
I 2 00 

'524 59 



7 8a^ 



4 50 



2 50 

3 50 
5 00 



21 45 
4 00 



Direciors for Life. 

N.YORK —Bridgeliampton. L I., 
Rev. Amzi Francis, by his Ch. 
and Cong (in Aill of $50,) . . 

Geneva, Rev. Henry Dwight, . . 

Upper Red Hook, Dutchess Co., 

• Robert Gosinan, 

Members for Lift, 

MAINE.— Saco, Rev. Samtiel 
Johnson, by Ladies of 1st Cong. 
Church, 

R. IS L.— Bristol, Mrs. Susau 
Chtckering, (in part of $20,) . 

CONN.— Lisbon, Daniel Braman, 

(in full of ^0,) 

** Mariamne Branch, by Mrs. 

Sabina Branch, (in full of $20,) 

" Dea. Livi Crosby, do. . 

» Mrs. Eunice Avorill, (in part 

of$20.) 

*< Elisha Morgan, do. . 

" Silas Reed, do. . 

New Canaan, Lorana Benedict, . 

Plainfield, Miss Dolly Eaton, (in 
full of $20,) 

N. YORK.— Brockport, Rev. Jo- 
seph Myers, by Ladies, . . . 

Cattkill, Rev. lAic N. WyckotT, 
by members of. his Bible Clupa,. 

New-York Ctty« l)li«s Martfta Hal- 
lock, by Rev.Oraaft Eastman, . 

VIR._ Winchester, Miss .Betsy 
Ann Hoiliday, by Gap. Barn- 
hart, (in part of $20,) . . . . 
AiMWil Member; 

CONN^Westbrook, Mrs. Nancy 
htJt 



N.YORK.— New-York City, Mrs. 

James A. Stevens, ..... 

West Sparta, Rev. Ludonicus 

30 00 Robbins, 

125 00 VIR.— Eastville, William G. 

Smith, 

50 00 Other Donations. 

VER. — Burlington, individuals, , 
Fairfield, Rev. Benjamin Wooster, 
Georgia, Individuals, .... 
MASS.— Franklin, a Friend, . . 
N. YORK.— New-York City, M. 
M. Thank offering, $2, Member 
of Rev. Mr. Lud low's Ch. $2 50, 
A Tract Distributer, $5, A Sai- 
lor by Rev. J. Leavitt,$lO, W. 
A. H. abalance,25cts. . . . 
PENN— Philadelphia, Z. V. Z. . 
S. CAR. — Charleston, Anony- 
mous, by D. W. Harrison, . . 
TENN.— Tazewell, Hugh Gra- 
ham 

OHIO.— Bloomingburgh,Mr. Still, 

for val. Missis-sippi, 

WilUam A. Usti£k, 

for do. . 



\ 



300 



5 00 



seo 



90 00 

10 00 

10 00 

10 00 
10 00 

5 00 

5 00 

6 00 
20 00 

6 00 

30 00 

The above list contains dona- 
33 75 tions— 

For Tracts for Valley of the 
30 IK) Mississippi, 

For Tracts for the Heathen, 



2 00 
200 
2 00 


28 00 

10 00 

2 00 

5 00 



u 



19 25 

5 00 


300 


63 


59 


1 00 



Whole amount of donations. 
Received for Tracta sold, 



1 50 
. 3 43 

. $593 50 
$4,480 66 



Total, $5,074 89 



^ ^ 






1 



( 



