BV 3680 
H4 P68 

Copy 1 




WALTER R. STEINER 
COLLECTION 



It ucY A Sit vltttnti 



/ 



\ 



BARTIMETJS, 

OF 

THE SANDWICH ISLANDS. 



BY REV. H. BINGHAM, 

ONE OF THE FIRST MISSIONARIES TO THOSE ISLANDS. 



a THE TESTIMONY OF THE LORD IS SURE, MAKING WISE 
THE SIMPLE." 



PUBLISHED BY THE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

150 NASSAU - STREET, NEW YORE. 
28 CORN HILL, BOSTON. 



BEQUEST OF 
WALTER R. STEMER 
AMI. 20, 194S 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I. 
Origin and heathen state of Bartimeus, «§ 

CHAPTER, II. 
His reception of the gospel, and his transition state, . . 9 

CHAPTER III. 

His removal to Lahaina — His progress at the new station, 
and admission to Christian fellowship, 18 

CHAPTER IV. 

His progress and influence as a Christian and friend of tem- 
perance at Lahaina, 28 

CHAPTER Y. 
His visit, residence, and labors at Hilo, 32 

CHAPTER VI. 

His return to Maui — Residence at Wailuku — Lay-preach- 
ing, 36 



CHAPTER VII. 

His appointment as deacon — His official license to preach the 
gospel, . , 45 

CHAPTER VIII. 

His labors as an evangelist — Removal to Honuaula — Final 
visit to Wailuku— His death, 48 



BARTIMEUS. 



CHAPTER I. 

HIS ORIGIN AND HEATHEN STATE. 

The pioneers of the Christian mission sent by the 
American Board in 1819, to the Sandwich Islands, 
early found among the thousands of their degraded 
inhabitants, a poor blind man, almost destitute of 
clothing, habitation, and friends. He was born at 
Waikapu, the central part of the low isthmus be- 
tween the two divisions of the mountainous island 
of Maui, probably about the year 1785. His bar- 
barous mother, following many of her unnatural 
and murderous countrywomen, attempted to bury 
him alive in his infancy ; but he was rescued by a 
relative ; and surviving the ravages of pestilence, 
war, and private violence, he reached the years of 
maturity. 

Like many of his countrymen of that dark period, 
he received a diminutive, degrading name, and was 
called Pu-a-a-i-ki, (Poo-ah-ah-ee-kee, little hog,) no 
faint shadow of his gross mind, his neglected child- 
hood, and unrestrained youth. Having a shagged 



6 



BARTIMEUS. 



head of black hair, unshielded "by a hat from trop- 
ical suns and showers, and, at middle age, a heard 
growing at full length under the chin, the rest 
being plucked out, he roamed shoeless, without 
moral or mental culture, without hope, and with- 
out a Saviour. 

Though the islands had, by Capt. Cook, been 
discovered, and introduced to the Christian world in 
1778, yet, for half of "threescore years and ten," 
this poor pagan was surrounded by the unbroken 
darkness and the undiminished pollution of Ha- 
waiian heathenism, and trained under the baleful 
influences of a senseless and cruel superstition. He 
possessed, therefore, the general characteristics of 
a nation of superstitious savages, w T ho being utterly 
ignorant and regardless of the true God, and follow- 
ing their own appetites and vile imaginations, had 
prostituted their best powers to the worship of stocks 
and stones, volcanos and demons, human relics, 
sharks, birds, and creeping things. 

In some of the Hawaiian arts he w r as, before the 
loss of his sight, more skilled than many of his 
countrymen. He was taught the lua — an art pro- 
fessed by a small class, by which a proficient, it 
was believed, could, without weapons or bonds, 
seize and hold a lonely traveller unacquainted with 
this art, break his bones, and take the spoil. He 
was taught the hake- — a sort of secret dialect. 



HIS ORIGIN AND HEATHEN STATE . J 

valued for amusement and intrigue. He learned 
also the hula — a barbarous singing and dancing — 
the use of rude songs, with little melody or har- 
mony, accompanied with antic motions of the legs 
and feet, extended gestures of the arms, hands, and 
fingers, and varied movements of the head and 
body. In the rehearsal or cantilation of these songs 
he excelled, and he often employed his skill in sing- 
ing, drumming, and dancing for the amusement of 
the king and chiefs, by which he procured the 
means of subsistence, and also of intoxication and 
deeper ruin. In this state was he in middle life, 
wasting his days at Kailua in Hawaii, when our 
mission barque put in there, April, 1820, on the 
way to Oahu. 

The royal family in the course of the year leav- 
ing Hawaii, and stopping a little at Maui, came, in 
the early part of 1821, to reside at Honolulu, then 
our principal mission station ; and in connection 
with their rude, noisy train, was the blind dancer. 
A stranger there, he shortly suffered from severe 
illness, destitution, and neglect. In his distress and 
danger, John Honolii, having enjoyed Christian in- 
struction in America and been hopefully converted, 
spoke to him of the great Physician as one who 
could cure his sickness and restore his sight. Ar- 
rested by this new thought, he desired to know if 
it could be so— without knowing the depth of his 



8 



BARTIME US . 



maladies, or feeling the need of an almighty Saviour 
for his soul, then in the gall of bitterness and bonds 
of iniquity, and ready to perish. 

Poor, blind, infirm, and debased, he, as soon as 
able to walk, came with Honolii to our place of wor- 
ship to hear for the first time the preaching of the 
gospel. His rude stature, below ordinary height, 
rendered diminutive by sickness ; his scanty cover- 
ing of bark-cloth, the rags of a prodigal ; a malo — 
a narrow strip around his waist ; and a kihei — a 
shawl-like piece over his shoulders ; his shaded, 
meagre face ; his defective, ruined eyes ; his long 
black beard gathered in a knot under his chin for 
some heathen purpose ; his feeble, swarthy, almost 
naked limbs ; the total darkness of his soul ; and 
the ravages and desolations in his whole being, 
occasioned by idolatry and sin, rendered him an 
object peculiarly pitiable — one of the most to be 
commiserated of all the human family. 



HIS RECEPTION OF THE GOSPEL. 



9 



CHAPTER II. 

HIS RECEPTION OF THE GOSPEL AND HIS TRiN 
SITION STATE. 

In the public service which Puaaiki first at 
tended, just such a Friend and Saviour as he 
needed was proclaimed in his fulness and glory. 
He was attracted by the announcement of a spir- 
itual divine Helper for the needy, and manifested 
a desire to know how he might avail himself of his 
aid, and resolved to seek it further. 

He was often led by a heathen lad to our place 
of worship, where prayer and praise were offered to 
Jehovah, pardon and salvation proclaimed to sin- 
ners, and the duties of religion enjoined on all. And 
often did he listen attentively to the voice of the 
missionary, while the existence, character, and 
works of Jehovah, as the true and eternal God, 
were made known to the people, in contrast with 
the lying vanities of the heathen ; the precepts and 
sanctions of the divine law exhibited and enforced ; 
the mediation, death, and resurrection of Christ set 
forth ; and ruined sinners urged to repent, reform, 
believe, and live. Whenever, on such occasions, 
the missionary took him by the hand and spoke a 
kind word to him, as one for whom God's grace had 
provided, he seemed comforted and encouraged to 



10 



BARTIMEUS. 



persevere in seeking heavenly guidance and eternal 
life. He readily gave up his intoxicating drinks, 
his narcotic aiva, and his hopes of gain, honor, and 
pleasure from the practice of the hula, to which he 
had been so long and so fondly devoted, and en- 
deavored to conform to the rules of the gospel as he 
understood them. 

But for him, and others who simultaneously re- 
ceived equal attention and instruction, and whose 
hearts the Lord inclined to attend in some measure 
to their immortal concerns, time and unaccustomed 
effort were required to enable them to come up to 
the perception, understanding, and belief of the 
heavenly things which were taught, and to trust in 
an unseen Saviour. To them, during the first two 
or more years of our missionary labors, how very 
limited must have been the evidence that what we 
taught, and claimed to teach by divine authority, 
was indeed from the Creator and Redeemer of the 
world, or that through their obedience an eternal 
and blissful inheritance might be secured. It was 
necessary that the same Spirit who indited the 
sacred oracles should " take of the things of Christ 
and show it" unto them, and make them feel that 
the religion we inculcated was not of men, but of 
God, and must be believed and obeyed in order to 
the salvation of their souls. 

As the claims and proffers of the gospel were 



HIS RECEPTION OF THE GOSPEL. H 

made known to this man, he was led to see that 
not only his life of idolatry and the indulgence of 
heathen passions and appetites was a course of 
heinous sin, but that when the forms of idolatry 
and the love of it were laid aside, his heart was 
still vile, and that he needed the w T ashing of regen- 
eration and the blood of Christ for cleansing. That 
he should so soon and so clearly see the evil of the 
song and dance, against which, in its most guarded 
form, we protested as unsuited to the Sabbath ; and 
that he should deem it wrong for him to encourage 
it at all, though he should abstain from the idolatry 
and licentiousness sometimes connected with it ; and 
that he should so freely and resolutely turn away 
from it, when the highest in authority, like the un- 
reclaimed multitude, not only delighted in it, but 
urged his following it for their amusement, indi- 
cated that he was early and effectively taught from 
on high, and was even then led by the Spirit of 
God. 

Since the introduction of Christianity into the 
Sandwich Islands, and since the leading chiefs be- 
came favorable to schools and religion, which, as 
the most casual observer could not fail to see, en- 
gaged also the attention of their people — the aged, 
middle-aged, and the young — it has often been 
affirmed disparagingly, by men of the world, that 
" the people have no will of their own, but only 



12 



BARTIME US. 



follow their o'ulers" The common people some- 
times, indeed, suffered unjustly by the arbitrary 
will of their chiefs, to which they were obliged to 
yield. But our mission to the nation w T as one of 
'persitasio)i, not of force ; and desiring to w T in, by 
presenting to their free agency the claims of learn- 
ing and religion, and believing that an attempt 
by force to make a heathen people learn and obey 
the gospel would be prejudicial, we, from the first, 
carefully guarded against it. Trained under arbi- 
trary power, they were taught from infancy, and 
generally accustomed, to respect the authority of 
rulers, and some still believed the will of the sov- 
ereign to be the highest law ; and the majority, 
even in the transition from heathenism to Chris- 
tianity, showed deference to the will, the opinions, 
and the practice of the rulers. But if the affirma- 
tion that they had no will of their own were true, 
it would be difficult to account for the course of the 
helpless and dependent Puaaiki and other subjects, 
in seeking the " one thing needful," while their kings 
were disregarding it ; or for the opposite course of 
some who violated established laws or rightful 
edicts, or wrongfully set at naught both the known 
wishes and the will of their rulers. 

This poor man did not wait for the king and 
chiefs to mark out for him his new and wiser 
course ; but he took it contrary to their choice. He 



HIS RECEPTION OF THE GOSTEL. 



took it, in his poverty and weakness, at the hazard 
of offending them, of losing his maintenance, and 
encountering the sneers of his associates. He took 
it while the king, as with the pride of a Pharaoh, 
would " not seek after God," but, in respect to Sab- 
bath-keeping, " temperance,^ and righteousness," 
was openly and wickedly trampling on his author- 
ity. For this new course, moreover, Puaaiki as- 
signed his reasons in no complimentary terms or 
sycophantic tones, when the proud ones, in their 
revelry, called for him to hula again for their pleas- 
ure. " That service of Satan," he said, " is ended ; 
my intention now is to serve Jehovah, the King of 
heaven." It is obvious, therefore, that with a con- 
science of his own, he began to feel what the unob- 
scured gospel, when received or divinely applied, 
always makes men feel — a personal responsibility 
to God, which tyranny aims in various ways to 
forestall or diminish in its victims, and sometimes 
by withholding the divine word. Some, indeed, de- 
rided him ; but others, including persons of high 
rank, having now a healthful influence thrown 
around them, respected him the more for his rational 
decision. He was not on that account hindered 

* It was supposed by subordinate chiefs and many of the 
people, that when as the king's daily teacher, a year later, 
and as a pioneer of temperance there, the writer significantly 
and kindly put the mouth of his royal pupil's bottle to the 
earth, it was very much at the peril of his life. 



14 



BARTIMEUS. 



from seeking instruction, or from engaging in the 
service of his Maker. 

Applying more and more his mind, now rising 
from its long prostration, and learning at length to 
find without a guide the way to the house of God, 
by feeling out the path with his staff, he was ac- 
customed with great regularity to come at the 
sound of the hell, join us in solemn acts of worship, 
and, humbly sitting near the preacher's feet, uni- 
formly give as attentive and obedient an ear as any 
in the assembly. 

The Spirit of God at that time or even earlier, it 
is believed, wrought powerfully on him by the gos- 
pel. His very helplessness was doubtless favorable 
to his acceptance of divine aid, and his sense of de- 
pendence and sinfulness led him to look upward for it. 
To human view, bearing then some resemblance to 
the arrested Saul who was led by the hand into Da- 
mascus, having his eyes blinded, his pride of former 
distinction and false worship abased, his alien spirit 
subdued, and his mind awakened to serious inquiry, 
he might have been described as Saul emphatically 
was, by three words : "Behold, he prayeth." 

Before any of us regarded him as a true Chris- 
tian, and, as I think, before he believed himself to be 
such, like many of his countrymen in later years, 
hopefully converted, and like the early converts at 
Jerusalem, as he beheld and admired the new and 



HIS RECEPTION OF THE GOSPEL 



15 



heavenly light, he began early to recommend to 
others a serious attention to the word and kingdom 
of God. His queenlike patroness, Kamamalu, the 
favorite wife and half-sister of the king, who had 
been longer under missionary instruction and influ- 
ence, and was in some respects in advance of him, 
he exhorted to seek earnestly the salvation of her 
soul, instead of the fleeting pleasures and honors of 
this world. 

She and others were making efforts to rise, and 
a few were then putting on a more shining or im- 
posing exterior ; yet neither Puaaiki nor our other 
hearers in general aspired to refinement in dress 
or manners ; and though there was little or no ex- 
ternal artificial polish to the rude casket of his soul, 
yet after two years' instruction in the gospel, there 
was in him an appearance peculiarly childlike, 
teachable, and harmless. As new-born babes, he 
needed and seemed to " desire the sincere milk of 
the word." Never will the writer or his first col- 
league preacher, Rev. Mr. Thurston, who came to 
Honolulu at the close of 1820, nor Hev. Mr. Ellis, 
who joined us there in February, 1823, be likely to 
forget the image of this blind man at church, or the 
constancy and interest with which he heard our dis- 
courses on the things that belong to God's kingdom. 
The same may be said in respect to others, on whose 
ministry he subsequently attended. 



16 



BARTIMEUS. 



Undisciplined as had been his dark mind, the laws 
of memory — attention and repetition, — he seemed 
well to understand. While he cherished a desire 
to be a doer of the word, the grandeur of the ob- 
jects and the force of the truths presented to him 
in the gospel, helped him successfully to cultivate 
his mental pow T ers. Unattracted by the objects of 
sight in public worship, he heard perhaps better 
than others ; and having more leisure through the 
week, he reflected more. For the purpose of self- 
culture, social pleasure, and the benefit of others, 
adopting a practice like that so successful in Sir 
Robert Peel's youthful training for public life — of 
repeating at home, in order, as fully as possible, the 
instructions of the pulpit — he grasped what he could 
of every sermon which he heard, carried it home, 
meditated on it, rehearsed it to his acquaintances, 
and treasured it in his memory and in his heart ; 
and, by the divine blessing, was made to " grow 
thereby." 

His intellectual development exhibited eventu- 
ally one of the peculiar triumphs of the gospel, 
illustrating the divine declaration, " The testimony 
of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple." 
Little or nothing but the gospel being employed to 
expand or discipline his mind, beginning at so low 
a point as he did, and being surrounded still with 
a mass of ignorance and heathenism, while the at- 



HIS RECEPTION OF THE GOSPEL. 



17 



tention of the missionaries was directed chiefly to 
multitudes of others, it might naturally be supposed 
that in two or three years his intellectual stature 
would not rise much above that of a child. But 
among the twenty-four chiefs, and five hundred 
others, then under our instruction, though there 
were marked and happy cases of advancement, none 
seemed, at the commencement of the fourth year of 
the mission, to have advanced further in spiritual 
knowledge than he. The meekness, docility, and 
gratitude with which he appeared to receive the 
same message which the great Teacher had, amid 
the scorn and opposition of rulers, preached with 
acceptance to the poor, and the use he made of his 
acquired knowledge, led us to rejoice with a trem- 
bling hope, which we expressed, not to him, but to 
the missionary Board, that " He who caused the 
light to shine out of darkness," had shined into the 
dark soul of this blind man, to give him a saving 
knowledge of Christ. Though but a little before 
he had been a vile, ignorant heathen, debased, op- 
pressed, neglected, and ready to perish, the gospel 
had met his case. The condescending Author of 
salvation, who "spares the poor," and " saves the 
souls of the needy," regarded him with divine com- 
passion, and led him by the right way. 



Bartimeus. 



2 



18 



BARTIMEUS. 



CHAPTER III. 

HIS REMOVAL TO LAHAINA— HIS PROGRESS AT 
THE NEW STATION, AND ADMISSION TO CHRIS- 
TIAN FELLOWSHIP. 

Early in March, 1823, an opening for his use- 
fulness as well as maintenance occurred on another 
island, and he removed hastily to Lahaina, in com- 
pany with the acting governor of Maui and his wife. 
They had been under our instruction at Honolulu, 
and took their books with them ; and he there 
humbly engaged in leading their morning and even- 
ing family devotions, and in speaking to his country- 
men of the new religion, and inciting them to its 
duties. 

At the commencement of the fourth year after 
our joyful entrance into the islands, our first rein- 
forcement from America arrived, April 27, 1823, of 
which Messrs. Stewart and Richards were stationed 
at Lahaina. They went thither in May, partly at 
the request of Keopuolani the queen-mother, who 
with her husband Hoapili was then leaving Hono- 
lulu, to reside there — declaring her purpose to serve 
Jehovah, and wishing a missionary to guide her. 
After distinguishing herself a few months by her 
reformed life, her kind patronage of the missionary 
cause, and her devotedness to the Saviour, she 
quickly finished her course, September 16, greatly 



ADMISSION TO THE CHURCH. 



19 



lamented. She took a very tender leave of her 
husband, children, and friends, and though she had 
never seen an experienced Christian die, she seemed 
taught by the Spirit to lean sweetly on her Shep- 
herd as she stepped down into the Jordan, earnestly 
exhorting her survivors to follow Christ and meet 
her in heaven. 

On the 27th of November following, the acting 
governor of Maui died ; and the same day, the king 
and Kamamalu, who had made important attain- 
ments, embarked from Honolulu for England, where 
they also died. 

Thus Puaaiki's earthly patrons failed him, but 
not his heavenly Father. By the divine blessing 
on his honest industry, he was enabled to procure 
his own maintenance, occasionally to give with 
pleasure a trifle from his products for the mission- 
ary's table, and to bear a healthful testimony in 
favor of Christianity. I often met him there, and 
marked his course. It was sometimes heart-melting 
to see and hear him join the praises of Jehovah in 
sacred song at the family or public altar, in which 
he seemed to make melody unto the Lord, so widely 
different in design and effect from the employment 
of his powers in his heathen state. 

The new missionaries having during eight months 
made themselves acquainted with him, and helped 
him forward, gave, in their journal, January, 1824 



20 



BARTIMEUS. 



the following record : " There is perhaps no one in 
the nation who has given more uninterrupted and 
decisive proofs of a saving knowledge of the truth 
as it is in Jesus, than has Puaaiki, a poor blind man, 
who has been mentioned in the journal kept at Ho- 
nolulu. No one has manifested more childlike sim- 
plicity and meekness of heart — no one appeared 
more uniformly humble, devout, pure, and upright. 
He is always at the house of God, and there ever 
at the preacher's feet. If he happens to be ap- 
proaching our habitations at the time of family 
worship, which has been frequently the case, the 
first note of praise or word of prayer that meets his 
ear produces an immediate change in his whole 
aspect. An expression of deep devotion at once 
overspreads his sightless countenance, while he 
hastens to prostrate himself in some corner in an 
attitude of reverence. Indeed, so peculiar has the 
expression of his countenance sometimes been, both 
in public and domestic worship, especially when 
he has been joining in a hymn in his own language, 
to the praise of the only true God and Saviour, an 
expression so indicative of peace and elevated en- 
joyment, that tears have involuntarily started in 
our eyes at the persuasion that, ignorant and de- 
graded as he once had been, he was then offering 
the sacrifice of a contrite heart, and was experienc- 
ing a rich foretaste of that joy which, in the world 



ADMISSION TO THE CHURCH. 21 

to come, will ' rise immeasurably high.' .... In 
our judgment he bears on him the image and su- 
perscription of Christ." Missionary Herald, vol. 
xxl, p. 276. 

In his humble station, from his first reception of 
the gospel onward, he cherished an interest in the 
affairs of the nation, the movements of the chiefs, 
and the trials and progress of the mission. On the 
26th of May, Kaumualii, the viceroy of Kauai, a 
warm friend of the mission, having in his last sick- 
ness calmly and distinctly expressed his confidence 
in Christ, died at Honolulu, much lamented, and 
was interred at Lahaina. This event was followed 
by an insurrection at Kauai, August 8th, among a 
disaffected portion of his people — the only warlike 
outbreak in those islands for the last thirty years — 
and by the consequent calling, by Kaahumanu, for 
a fast at Maui on the 27th, and other demonstra- 
tions of her growing interest in the cause of re- 
ligion. 

To notice the influence of this on our blind friend, 
in the language of Ptev. Mr. Stewart, "As the 
queen was embarking for Oahu and Kauai, Puaaiki 
seemed ready to kiss her feet, for gratitude and joy, 
at the decided stand this powerful regent was taking 
in favor of Christianity, and would not let go his 
grasp of her hand till her barge had pushed off 
from the beach, and he was knee-deep in water." 



22 



B ARTIME US . 



After a short conflict and the loss of some fifty 
lives, order and peace were restored, which called 
forth hearty thanksgivings to Jehovah from the 
Christian party ; but soon an effort was made by a 
heathen party at Maui, to revive old idolatrous 
rites. Against this, the remonstrances of the mis- 
sionaries, and the prayers and influence of Puaaiki 
and other natives, called with him " the 'praying 
ones" were earnestly directed. These "praying 
ones " were soon called together by the missionaries, 
instructed and encouraged, and, at their request, 
Puaaiki led in prayer. Of this, Hev. Mr. Stewart, 
hearing him for the first time, says, " His petitions 
were made with a pathos of feeling, a fervency of 
spirit, a fluency and propriety of diction, and above 
all, a humility of soul, that plainly told he was no 
stranger there. His bending posture, his clasped 
hands, his elevated but sightless countenance, the 
peculiar emphasis with which he uttered the ex- 
clamation, ' O Jehovah' his tenderness, his impor- 
tunity, made us feel that he was praying to a God 
not afar of£ but one that was nigh, even in the 
midst of us. His was a prayer not to be forgotten. 
It touched our very souls, and we believe would 
have touched the soul of any one not a stranger to 
the meltings of a pious heart." Missionary Herald, 
vol. xxii., p. 39. 

Nothing, however, was done till the following 



ADMISSION TO THE CHURCH. 



23 



year, as to his uniting with the church. In such 
a land of darkness, pollution, and confusion, where 
it was known to be difficult for natives instructed 
and hopefully converted in America, and even for 
foreign professors of religion, to maintain a steady 
course consistent with their profession, the mission- 
aries, though they believed true and consistent con- 
verts were not only entitled to Christian ordinances, 
but bound to observe them for the honor of Christ, 
were for half a generation slow, perhaps too slow, 
to receive to Christian fellowship those who declared 
themselves on the Lord's side, and who were atten- 
tive to religious instruction, apparently reformed, 
and even hopefully pious. Believing that " the 
tree is known by its fruit," they desired to see in 
the life decisive evidence not only of true and 
thorough conversion, but also of intelligence, and 
firmness to withstand the temptations by which 
they were surrounded, and, amidst unavoidable ex- 
posures, effectively to exhibit before the nation a 
consistent Christian example. In this state of 
things, Puaaiki expressing his warm desire to unite 
with God's people, was, in the spring of 1825, care- 
fully examined as to his Christian knowledge and 
belief, and the evidence of a work of grace in his 
heart. 

His clear views as to the duty of the convert to 
unite with the church, of the nature of the Lord's 



24 



BARTIMEUS. 



supper, and the prerequisites to Christian fellow- 
ship, are indicated in the following translation of a 
few of his own prompt answers to the questions put 
to him by the Rev. Mr. Richards : 

"Why do you ask to be admitted to the church ?" 

" Because I love Jesus Christ, and I love you," 
the missionaries, " and desire to dwell in the fold 
of Christ, and join with you in eating the holy 
bread, and drinking the holy wine." 

"What is the holy bread 7" 

" It is the body of Christ, which he gave to save 
sinners." 

" Do we then eat the body of Christ 
" JNTo ; we eat the bread which represents his 
body ; and as we eat bread that our bodies may not 
die, so our souls love Jesus Christ and receive him 
for their Saviour, that they may not die." 
" What is the holy wine ?" 

"It is the blood of Christ, which was poured out 
on Calvary, in the land of Judea, to save us sinners." 

" Do we then drink the blood of Christ ?" 

" No ; but the wine represents his blood just as the 
holy bread represents his body ; and all those who 
go to Christ and trust in him, will have their sins 
washed away in his blood, and their souls saved 
for ever in heaven." 

" Why do you think it more suitable for you to 
join the church than others ?" 



ADMISSION TO THE CHURCH. 



25 



" Perhaps it is not. If it is not proper, you must 
tell me ; but I do greatly desire to dwell in the 
fold of Christ." 

" Who do you think are proper persons to be 
received into the church?" 

" Those who have repented of their sins, and have 
new hearts." 

" What is a new heart ?" 

" One that loves God, and loves the word of God, 
and does not love sin and sinful ways." Mission- 
ary Herald, vol. xxn., p. 147. 

These are a specimen of numerous spontaneous 
answers equally correct which he gave in his own 
style and manner, showing an acquaintance with 
the doctrines and duties of the gospel, in respect to 
which, millions of mature age in Europe and Amer- 
ica would fall behind him. 

In connection with a Tahitian convert, the wife 
of Taua, an assistant from the Society Islands, he 
was set before the church and the world as a can- 
didate for Christian ordinances ; and after further 
instruction in doctrines and duties, and a season of 
gratifying probation, they were on the Sabbath, 
July 10, 1825, admitted, by the Rev. Mr. Rich- 
ards, to "the fold of Christ." 

In preparation for this memorable transaction, 
and for the future joyfully anticipated use of tens 
of thousands of Hawaiian Christians. I had trans- 



26 



BARTIMEUS. 



lated our highly evangelical Articles of Faith and 
Covenant, which had been drawn up by the Rev. 
Dr. Worcester, and adopted and subscribed by the 
missionary church, then the only church at the 
Sandwich Islands. To these articles the two candi- 
dates gave their assent before a solemn and atten- 
tive assembly of the late victims of superstition, 
who now, in their own house of Christian worship 
recently dedicated to Jehovah, were forming or 
maturing their estimate of the Christian religion. 

The poor blind Puaaiki, coming out from the 
mass of the nation, to whom and to angels he was 
indeed a spectacle, put off his allegiance to heathen- 
ism and the world, and with meekness and dignity 
took on him, in the presence of a "great cloud of 
witnesses," the vows of the triune God, " Father, 
Son, and Holy Ghost." In this transaction he re- 
ceived the new name, Batimea Lalana, (Bartimeus 
London :) the first, by which generally he has 
since been called, in remembrance of the impor- 
tunate blind convert who received his sight at the 
hands of the Saviour ; the second chosen by him- 
self, in accordance with a Hawaiian custom of 
noting events, to commemorate the visit of his 
king and queen to London, and their recent death 
in that city. 

No longer a " stranger and foreigner," but a 
fellow-citizen in Zion, admitted to full communion, 



ADMISSION TO THE CHURCH. 



27 



lie sat down at Christ's table, and, as he had long 
desired to do, received the memorials of his body 
and blood, the "consecrated bread and wine," to 
show his Lord's death ; and this, with grateful re- 
membrance, he often did through his subsequent 
irreproachable life. Precious, golden sheaf — one 
of the first fruits of a rich harvest ! 



28 



BARTIMEUS. 



CHAPTER IV. 

BARTIMEUS' PROGRESS AND INFLUENCE AS A 
CHRISTIAN AND FRIEND OF TEMPERANCE AT 
LAHAINA. 

By this time there were in Lahaina some fifty 
houses where morning and evening prayer was 
offered. At Honolulu, Kaahumanu and Kalani- 
moku and a few others had been propounded for 
church-membership, and were soon after admitted ; 
and about a hundred others had likewise offered 
themselves there, and some at other stations. 

Bartimeus having been recognized as a Chris- 
tian brother, manifested no disposition to make this 
an occasion for resting in careless ease or increased 
worldliness, but rather for greater activity and 
more entire consecration to the Redeemer's cause, 
that he might daily pay the vows he had made. 
Though his attainments were but moderate, and his 
maintenance required his labor in the cultivation 
of small patches of fertile ground, yet as a 'private 
Christian, growing in grace and the knowledge 
of God, dwelling in a region where the gloom of 
paganism had so fearfully brooded, and vain forbid- 
den oblations so long been offered, and where sav- 
age chieftains had, even in his day, often struggled 
for temporary ascendency, Bartimeus, shut out as 



PROGRESS AS A CHRISTIAN. 



29 



he was from the light of the natural sun, so as to 
grope at noonday or be led by his wife or some 
other person, with a joyous heart reflected for a few 
years the rays of the Sun of righteousness ; and 
was, indeed, earnest in his endeavors to turn his 
dark-hearted countrymen from their downward, 
ruinous course to the peaceful paths of wisdom. In 
a kind, private, persevering manner did he urge 
the stout-hearted neglecters of divine things to seek 
the Saviour whom he had found ; to go and hear, 
and visit the missionary for clearer light as to the 
way of life, than he could give ; and with equal 
kindness, as many can testify, he encouraged the 
more humble inquirer and frequent worshipper to 
seek the great salvation. 

Like other men, Bartimeus had a will and strong 
preferences of his own, but when these appeared to 
conflict with God's word, he was ready to yield 
them, and thus, through grace, enabled to escape 
from ruinous habits, and avoid the pits and snares 
of destruction around him. On one of my visits to 
Lahaina, I observed that as he quietly sat with his 
friends upon the mats of a grass-thatched habita- 
tion, he was indulging himself with a pipe — a prac- 
tice to which he and the mass of the nation were 
addicted from early life. As a pleasurable indul- 
gence, a means of social enjoyment, smoking had 
scarcely been named as an evil ; and for a time it 



30 



BARTIMEUS. 



seemed to be a part of a comfortless Hawaiian's 
lawful inheritance ; but it did not prove in the 
strictest sense to be so. Desiring to see in our 
blind friend a commendable example in every thing, 
I asked him, "Why do you continue to smoke?" 
Kindly taking the question, which might perhaps 
puzzle a wiser head, he hardly knew what reply to 
make, further than, in the Hawaiian fashion, when 
an answer is not clear or an evasion is intended, 
to repeat in part the question, "Why, indeed?" 
In pleasantry, a missionary from another station 

prompting him, said, • ' Ask Mr. B if the Bible 

forbids smoking tobacco." He very modestly did so, 
and received in return, " Ask your adviser if the 
Bible authorizes it." 

But small portions of the Bible had as yet been 
translated for the people. But when Paul's epistles 
were soon after placed in their hands, the sincere 
inquirers after God's will soon found in them strong 
dissuasives, if not interdictions, not only against 
their drinking but their smoking habits. " Prove 
all things ; hold fast that which is good ; abstain 
from that which is of evil character, " # many re- 
garded as conclusive in their case, as soon as they 
came fairly to estimate the evils of smoking. Bar- 
timeus, therefore, fond as he long had been of this 

* 2 Thes. 5 : 21, 22, rendered back from the Hawaiian into 
English. 



PROGRESS AS A CHRISTIAN, 



common but now questionable indulgence, gave it 
up for Christ, as thousands of others there have 
freely done, and became, in a peculiar sense, much 
in advance of many Christian churches, a warm 
advocate of abstinence from alcoholic drinks, and 
awa, and tobacco. From these things the Protes- 
tant Christians at the Sandwich Islands in general 
totally abstain. 

As the Christian character and mental powers 
of Bartimeus were more fully developed, he often 
took an active part in meetings for prayer and con- 
ference, and social improvement, and in Sabbath- 
schools, and became a good speaker, and a very 
acceptable coadjutor of the missionaries, wherever 
his lot was cast. "Daily and everywhere," says 
the Rev. Mr. Green, who became acquainted with 
him at Lahaina some three years after his public 
vows, "he was the consistent Christian, adorning 
in every thing the doctrine of God his Saviour. He 
was also the faithful Christian friend ; prompt to 
rebuke sin in high places and low places ; earnest 
in pressing upon the consciences of all the claims 
of the law and gospel ; and affectionate in his 
efforts to win souls to Christ." " Often," said 
Daniel Ii, a Christian magistrate, " did Bartimeus 
seek to turn me from my follies to the love and 
service of the Lord Jesus Christ." 



32 



BAR T IMEUS. 



CHAPTER V. 

HIS VISIT, RESIDENCE, AND LABORS AT HILO. 

In 1829, when the church at Lahaina had in- 
creased to some thirty members, some of whom ac- 
knowledged their indebtedness to this blind man's 
fidelity, and several of different rank being intelli- 
gent and active, Bartimeus, by request of some of 
the chiefs, went to visit Hilo, on Hawaii, where 
missionary labor had been prosecuted some five 
years, but gross darkness still prevailed among most 
of his countrymen. While he fervently prayed for 
those around him, "he was eager to make them 
acquainted with Him whom he loved above all 
price. He was always ready to speak a word for 
the Saviour, and to exhort his countrymen to look 
to the Lamb of God for light and salvation." It 
was here that, in the autumn of 1830, I heard one 
of his earnest public appeals to the people, whom 
Kaahumanu, the devoted Christian queen-regent, 
on one of her useful tours, had called together to 
hear from her lips, and her chiefs and teachers, 
what they had to make known concerning their 
duties to themselves, to each other, to their rulers, 
and to their Maker and Redeemer. There were in 
that mission district 83 schools, and 7,500 learners. 
Thirteen were that year added to the church, and 



RESIDENCE AT HILO. 



33 



twenty-two propounded. Hundreds were inquiring", 
and thousands sometimes thronged the place of 
worship. Bartimeus, though well adapted to that 
field, was now ready, as the chiefs passed on, and 
even desirous to return to Lahaina. But at the 
request of the Rev. Mr. Goodrich, the resident mis- 
sionary, the recommendation of the Rev. Mr. An- 
drews then present, and the solicitations of the na- 
tive Christians, with the full concurrence of Kaa- 
humanu, he, with his wife, remained, and for sev- 
eral years rendered to the cause of the gospel im- 
portant assistance by his sympathy and counsel, his 
prayers and exhortations, and the impressive ex- 
ample of his irreproachable uprightness, his deep 
humility, and his untiring zeal. 

While at Hilo, he had the prospect of so far re- 
covering his sight as to be able to read the word of 
God — an object of his desire so intense that he 
made an effort, earnest, painful, and perhaps injuri- 
ous to himself, to accomplish it ; but though aided 
by the patient instruction of the wives of mission- 
aries, particularly Mrs. Andrews and Mrs. Green, 
he was obliged reluctantly to abandon it, when he 
had well-nigh acquired the art of reading. 

The privation was felt deeply, while thousands of 
the people were getting free and joyful access to the 
Scriptures ; but it was doubtless graciously over- 
ruled, not only for his continued and more success- 

Bartimeus. 3 



34 



BARTIME US. 



ful cultivation of the memory by which he became 
highly distinguished, but also for giving him the 
greater power of persuasion as a teacher and advo- 
cate of divine truth. 

In his own thatched cot, and in those of his 
countrymen, in social religious gatherings, and in 
the Sabbath-school, he let his light shine around 
him ; while from the counsels and preaching of suc- 
cessive missionary pastors, Messrs. Goodrich, Green, 
and Dibble, and the influence of others, he, as a 
humble learner, continued to derive advantage to 
himself. 

For more than a year, or about one-fourth of the 
period of his residence at Hilo, he enjoyed a pecu- 
liar intimacy with Rev. Mr. Green, to whom, as a 
speaker, he was a sort of Aaron, and who, in his 
" Notices" of him, gives this grateful and high tes- 
timony : "My interest in Bartimeus greatly in- 
creased as I became more intimately acquainted 
with him as a man, and as a Christian. I saw him 
daily. I communed with him on subjects which 
had a bearing on the interests of the Redeemer's 
kingdom ; he stood by my side and held up my 
hands. ..... He engaged with much energy and 

delight in the labors of the Sabbath-school. He 
used to attend little neighborhood meetings with 
me, and these he assisted to make deeply interest- 
ing. He frequently accompanied me on my pas- 



RESIDENCE AT IIILO. 



35 



toral visits ; and I can testify to his happy talent 
for securing the wakeful attention of persons of 
every variety of character to his faithful admoni- 
tions, or to his searching inquiry. He used fre- 
quently to visit the people, either alone, or accom- 
panied by his wife or a Christian brother. His 
own house, too, was always open for the reception 
of all who either sought instruction or desired fra- 
ternal Christian intercourse. Being of an affec- 
tionate disposition, he attracted many to his house ; 
and seldom did any one leave without having re- 
ceived benefit, in the form of instruction, warning, 
or encouragement. In short, he was ' instant in 
season, out of season;' he was the laborious servant 
of the Lord Jesus Christ, ' always abounding in the 
work of the Lord.' " 



36 



B ARTIME US . 



CHAPTER VI. 

HIS RETURN TO MAUI— RE SIDE NCE AT WAILUKU— 
LAY -PREACHING. 

After a few years of usefulness at Hilo, where 
the work of God has since been conspicuous, he re- 
turned to Maui, and subsequently made his resi- 
dence chiefly at "Wailuku — a missionary station not 
far from his birthplace, having a congregation of 
about 3,000 — learning, teaching, and laboring, in 
conjunction successively with Rev. Messrs. Green, 
Armstrong, and Clark. In reference to this period, 
Mr. Green says of him, " During the eight or nine 
years of his residence at Wailuku and vicinity, my 
acquaintance with him became more intimate and 

endearing His Christian character has been 

constantly developing and maturing, and my confi- 
dence in him, and admiration and love of him, have 

been daily strengthening I have never known 

a more consistent, devoted, growing Christian." 
Notices of Bartimeus, by J. S. Green, p. 20. 

It is proper to speak of him distinctly as & preach- 
er, but in tracing his history it is difficult to fix the 
precise period of his life between that of a private 
Christian, and that of a public teacher of relig- 
ion ; for he, in fact, was for years a Z&?/-preacher, 
before he was publicly and officially licensed. 



AS A LAY-PREACHER. 



37 



Scores of others there, labor more or less in that 
capacity. 

Though so much of Bartimeus' time, the last fif- 
teen years of his life, was devoted to the spiritual 
interests of his countrymen, he was unwilling to 
burden them at any period with his maintenance. 
He was so much beloved that he might have re- 
ceived it, in part at least ; and although he was 
very helpful to the mission, I am not aware that he 
received any pecuniary aid from the funds of the 
Missionary Board. Living in the humblest style, 
and not seeking to accumulate, yet he was " not 
slothful in business," but by raising kalo, bananas, 
potatoes, sugar-cane, etc., his own hands, wherever 
he resided, ministered to his necessities ; and in him 
was fulfilled the saying of David, "Trust in the 
Lord and do good ; so shalt thou dwell in the land, 
and verily thou shalt be fed." 

With a fixed heart he relied on the care, wisdom, 
power, and promises of God in respect to himself, 
the church, and the nation. In seasons of public 
adversity, his faithful intercessions for the mission- 
aries, the rulers, the churches, and the people, were 
importunate, and in prosperity his thanksgivings 
abounded. At the commencement of the great re- 
vival near the close of 1837, Bartimeus and many 
others wrestled in prayer for the outpouring of God's 
Spirit on themselves, on the churches, and on their 



38 



B ARTIME US . 



dying fellow-sinners ; and as the blessing was richly- 
granted, his refreshed and elevated soul richly en- 
joyed it — his countenance beamed with joy, and the 
glad and grateful emotions of his heart were often 
overflowing. Within a year, 208 were admitted 
to the church at Wailuku, and within three years, 
500 ; whom he, as a member or officer, joyfully wel- 
comed as brethren and sisters in the Lord. 

During this wonderful outpouring of the Spirit 
upon the nation, Bartimeus revisited my station at 
Honolulu, where he first received the gospel ; and 
now ready with heart and tongue to contribute to 
its triumphs, was gladly welcomed among us. 

Wherever he labored, his prayers, exhortations, 
and appeals were characterized by simplicity and 
unction. Breathing the spirit of the justified pub- 
lican, whose language, " God be merciful to me a 
sinner," he sometimes forcibly illustrated in con- 
trast with pharisaic pride, he would approach the 
throne of mercy with great apparent humility, clasp- 
ing his hands, and filially addressing " Our Father 
in heaven," he would, in free, reverential, and ap- 
propriate language, pour forth supplications, con- 
fessions, thanksgivings, and ascriptions of praise, 
like a true son of Abraham, so as to make it delight- 
ful for Christian missionaries and their churches to 
unite with him in this social or public exercise. 

Not only his intellect and heart, but also his vis- 



AS A LAY - PREACHER. 



39 



age, form, and stature, were improved by Christian 
education and civilization. This was specially oh 
vious when, blest with health, peace, and joy, mod- 
estly " clothed and in his right mind," and con- 
strained by the love of Christ, he rose to address 
an attentive congregation ; and standing erect or 
inclining a little forward in the midst of them, or 
before them on the same level, and in a manly 
posture stretching forth his hand, pleaded with his 
fellow-men as an ambassador of God. 

He was master of his mother-tongue. His enun- 
ciation was peculiarly distinct, though sometimes 
rapid. His arms, hands, and fingers being exceed- 
ingly flexible, his gestures were free, graceful, and 
forcible, sometimes perhaps more exuberant than 
the best taste would dictate. His memory was 
prompt and accurate, and his voice winning. If he 
chastised, it was in love ; and his remarks, some- 
times strongly reprehensive, were seldom or never 
offensive. Though he could give neither flashes of 
fire nor the softer expressions of deep-toned kindness 
by the glance of his eye, he often labored with tears 
to persuade transgressors to forsake their sins, and 
multiplied his fervid appeals wherever he went, to 
arouse his dying countrymen to immediate compli- 
ance with the divine injunctions. 

From the first dawn of gospel light on his soul, 
attentively listening on the Sabbath and other days 



40 



B ARTIME US. 



for some fifteen years to evangelical preachers, who 
in their discourses allowed the Scriptures with great 
plainness to speak to their hearers, and eagerly 
hearing the successive portions of the Bible read, as 
our translations issued fresh from the mission press, 
Bartimeus, with his cultivated and retentive mem- 
ory, treasured up many important ideas — a rich fund 
of scriptural truths, not only for his own comfort, 
growth, sanctification, and maturity, hut for the 
"benefit of others ; to whom, from time to time, 
bringing " forth out of his treasures things new 
and old," he faithfully and impressively imparted 
them. 

Such was his familiar acquaintance with the 
traditions, character, habits, wants, and modes of 
thinking of the people ; the preaching and conver- 
sation of educated missionaries ; the doctrines of 
Christ and the modes of reasoning exhibited by the 
sacred writers ; and such his love to his Saviour 
and the souls for whom he died, that he could at 
any time, when opportunity allowed, readily make 
a happy, appropriate, and forcible appeal to a large 
public assembly, a Sabbath-school class, a private 
circle, or an individual sinner. 

" I have sat with pleasure, as my brethren have 
done, and heard him pour forth a torrent of fervid 
words and burning thoughts, which caused me to 
admire the grace of God bestowed on such a de- 



AS A LAY -PREACHER. 41 

graded heathen as he had been, and to feel it to be 
a privilege to sit at his feet, while the love of Christ 
and of sonls glowed in his heart, and the law of 
Christian eloquence was on his tongue." 

His discourses were never written, and our re- 
ports of them are few and meagre. 

" For a time the question was agitated, whether 
the method of dealing with those who appeared to 
come over from the world to Christ, or from hea- 
thenism to Christianity, the long probation required 
of candidates, and the slowness with which the 
missionaries came to an opinion favorable to the 
piety of multitudes who offered themselves, were 
not calculated to mislead the people in regard to 
the nature of conversion, and consequently, in re- 
spect to their personal duty. Some of the people 
doubtless thought that a considerable time was in- 
dispensable for a sinner to pass through the suc- 
cessive stages of seeking and praying for a new or 
clean heart — inquiry, conviction, distress, repenting, 
submitting, choosing God and trusting in Christ, 
and setting the affections on heavenly things." And 
some of the missionaries were materially changing 
their course in respect to admissions to the church. 

At a series of meetings at Honolulu during the 
great revival, when the nation was moved, and 
many there were inquiring, Bartimeus, standing 
just before the pulpit, addressed my congregation, 



42 



B ARTIME US . 



with some reference, as I supposed, to that question, 
but more to the dangerous halting and hesitating of 
the multitude, " and in an able plea, urged on his 
countrymen the duty of immediate repentance, and 
the practicability of instantaneous conversion. With 
earnestness, fluency, and force, he cited for his pur- 
pose the case of Zaccheus hastening down from the 
sycamore-tree, at once obeying the Saviour's call, 
and entering on his service ; of the dying malefac- 
tor on the cross suddenly changing his course, con- 
fessing and forsaking his sins, and trusting in Christ ; 
of the trembling jailer of Philippi, who, on first 
hearing the gospel, believed and was baptized ; and 
of the three thousand who, hearing the gospel at 
the Pentecost, were pricked in their heart, believed, 
and were added to the church the same day. These 
and other considerations he impressively presented, 
to prove that every impenitent sinner ought with- 
out delay to repent and obey the gospel."^ 

The volume of nearly two hundred psalms and 
hymns in Hawaiian, published in connection with 
more than one hundred tunes, such as are in com- 
mon use in the United States, was both familiar 
and delightful to him. These with emphasis he 
quoted at pleasure in his addresses, or gave out as 
he chose for use in social or public worship. 

* Bingham's "Residence of Twenty-one Years in the Sand- 
wich Islands," pp. 482-3, 527-8. 



AS A LAY-PREACHER. 



43 



Believing that education was of great value, es- 
pecially to the young, both as it respects this life 
and that which is to come, Bartimeus, not less per- 
haps than the Christian chiefs, manifested a com- 
mendable interest in the support of schools. To 
inspirit the parents and head-men connected with 
the station at Wailuku, in this cause, a large public 
meeting was held, July, 1837, in their spacious 
church. Numbers, including graduates from the 
mission seminary, spoke with animation and force 
for schools and education. Bartimeus, the most 
eloquent, rose last. " He appealed," says Rev. Mr. 
Armstrong, who was present, "to the great assem- 
bly, if they had looked on the happy effects of the 
gospel in these islands for seventeen years, and 
were yet unbelieving as to the value of instruction. 
He told them civilized nations treated them and 
their chiefs as children, and domineered over them 
because they were so ignorant. He said, ' I have 
been twice educated. In the time of dark hearts I 
learned the hula, and the lua, and the kake* I 
was taught mischief in those days. And did it cost 
me nothing ? Had we not to pay those mischievous 
teachers ? Ah, think of the hogs, and kapa, and 
fish, and aiva, and other things we used to give 
them. And we did it cheerfully. We thought it 

^ The song and dance, the robber's art, and the secret 
dialect. 



44 



BARTIMEUS. 



all well spent. But how is it now ? Here are men 
of our own blood and nation, whose business it is to 
teach us and our children good things — the things 
of God and salvation ; how to read our Bibles, 
geographies, arithmetics, etc. ; and ought we not 
cheerfully to support them ? How can they teach, 
if they have nothing to eat and nothing to wear ? 
Will they not soon get tired ? Who can work when 
he is hungry ? Let us take hold and help, and do it 
cheerfully.' " Missionary Herald, vol. xxxiv., p. 246. 

The parents who had children to send to school, 
universally and promptly expressed their readiness 
to send them ; and about fifty persons rose to ex- 
press their willingness to aid in the support of 
teachers. Within a week the demand for books, 
and especially for Testaments, amounted almost to 
a clamor. 



i 



APPOINTMENT AS DEACON. 



45 



CHAPTER VII. 

HIS APPOINTMENT AS DEACON — HIS OFFICIAL 
LICENSE TO PREACH. 

Diligently availing himself of the means of 
grace, and by the aid of the divine Spirit growing 
in knowledge, experience, and the power of persua- 
sion, Bartimeus was, in the time of the great revi- 
val, chosen and set apart as one of the deacons of 
the church at Wailuku. 

In the higher duties of this office, he labored " in 
word and doctrine" as a useful coadjutor in church 
discipline and the care of the flock. " Grave, not 
double-tongued, not given to wine, not greedy of 
filthy lucre," "the husband of one wife," "holding 
the mystery of faith," he used " the office of a dea- 
con well," purchased to himself " a good degree," 
and exhibited " great boldness in the faith which is 
in Christ Jesus." The young he affectionately in- 
vited and urged to come to that Saviour who, he 
showed them, manifested great kindness and conde- 
scension, took young children in his arms and blessed 
them, and said, " Suffer the little children to come 
unto me, and forbid them not ; for of such is the king- 
dom of heaven." The aged, who heard him with 
pleasure, he patiently and earnestly instructed in the 
leading doctrines of the Bible. And to parents, 



46 



BARTIMEUS. 



whether in or out of the church, in enforcing parent- 
al duties which were often neglected or but poorly 
performed, his fervent language was, " Awake, I 
beseech you, to consider the value of the soul ; cry 
mightily to God on behalf of your offspring, ' bone 
of your bone, and flesh of your flesh.' Walk before 
them uprightly. Teach them to fear God, to hate 
and avoid sin, and to go to Christ for pardon and 
eternal life. Do all you can to save them from 
perdition, lest God require their blood at your 
hands." 

As a humble and useful officer in the church, 
he had the happiness to be associated for several 
years with a true yoke-fellow of kindred spirit, phys- 
ically and in business matters superior, and in in- 
tellectual powers and moral qualities nearly equal. 
This was Hawaii, an " aged disciple," who, in his 
boyhood, had seen Captain Cook the discoverer, 
and after a half century, embraced the gospel; in 
1833, united with the church ; at the age of sixty, 
became a good reader ; and still later, a dignified, 
affectionate, impressive speaker, and an active, a 
devoted, benevolent fellow-helper to the truth. His 
well-directed exertions to infuse a healthful energy 
into the congregation, and his faithful services as a 
church officer, were not less valued than those of 
Bartimeus. This veteran, " born out of due time," 
running like him, with buoyancy and patience, the 



LICENSE TO PREACH. 



47 



Christian race, with silvered locks, passed the limit 
of " threescore years and ten," and almost simul- 
taneously with Bartimeus, reached the goal. " Love- 
ly and pleasant in their lives, in their death they 
were not far divided." 

About a year after Bartimeus' appointment, the 
scripture translations being completed, the entire 
Bible was, in 1839, put into the hands of the na- 
tion — the great source from which he, as a "man 
of God," was so c< thoroughly furnished" for his work. 
He was still eager to improve himself as well as 
others, and in connection with a class under training 
to be helpers, he, while a deacon, was further in- 
structed by the missionaries in the elements of moral 
science, church history, and theology. 

In 1841, sustaining a public examination at Wai- 
luku as to his acquaintance with Christian theol- 
ogy, ecclesiastical history, experimental religion, 
and his desire to preach the gospel, he was offi- 
cially licensed for that purpose. This honor and 
trust he received with apparent lowliness, and a 
grateful desire to be more active and useful in the 
Master's cause. On this occasion, in which his 
fellow-Christians rejoiced, he delivered a short and 
interesting discourse. 



48 



BART I ME US. 



CHAPTER, VIII. 

HIS LABORS AS AN E VAN GE LI ST — REMOVAL TO 
HONUAUL A — FINAL VISIT TO "WAIL UK U — HIS 
DEATH. 

With ardor and fidelity, Bartimeus, in various 
ways and places, exercised his gifts about two and 
a half years as a publicly accredited preacher of 
that gospel which he had long loved, and often be- 
fore proclaimed ; but whether from modesty, hu- 
mility, or as the best means of gaining acceptance, 
he, in his public efforts, preferred a humbler station 
than a pulpit ; and probably, as it may be said of 
Christ and Paul, he never ascended a pulpit to plead 
with God or with sinful dying men. Payson pleaded 
best perhaps below the pulpit. Regarding himself 
as a sinner, and relying alone on the merits of Christ 
for justification, Bartimeus was distinguished for 
uniform humility, notwithstanding the deference of 
the people, the esteem of his brethren, the confidence 
of the missionaries, and the respect of the chiefs, 
that were shown him. 

Residing chiefly at Wailuku for some two years, 
he itinerated and preached at many villages around 
the island, generally about three Sabbaths in a 
month at out-stations from five to twenty miles 
distant. In his last preaching tour around Maui, 
he was associated with David Malo, a licensed use- 



LABORS A S AN EVANGELIST. 



49 



ful preacher, the author of a sermon on Psa. 14 : 1, 
against atheism, published by the mission in Ha- 
waiian, with the sanction, and at the expense of 
the American Tract Society. This intelligent and 
judicious native commends with admiration his 
blind companion's addresses to the people, who 
readily assembled, in the different villages in their 
course, to hear the word and receive the kindly 
aloha or salutations of the preachers. 

As w r as naturaljbr one who at middle age began to 
turn away from dark heathenism, who was still una- 
ble to read, and had no possible access to rich libra- 
ries, Bartimeus felt great dependence on his ear, or the 
hearing of missionary preaching and teaching. He 
loved, moreover, the society of the missionaries and 
his native Christian brethren, and could hardly be 
induced to be absent from them for a period longer 
than three or four weeks. Though preaching at a 
distance, he frequently returned to them to spend a 
Sabbath at Wailuku, pleasantly saying, " I have 
come back to recruit my stores.'' 

In the early part of 1842, our collective mission, 
speaking of three native assistants, say, " Bartimeus 
the blind preacher of Maui is regularly licensed as 
a preacher, and labors both abundantly and suc- 
cessfully in the wide and destitute regions of that 
island. David Malo also labors a considerable por- 
tion of his time as an evangelist. He is an able 

Bartimeus. 4 



50 



BARTIMEUS. 



and successful preacher. There is another on the 
island of Oahu, in the district of Waianae, who is 
entirely devoted to the work of preaching, and is 
very acceptable to the people." Missionary Herald, 
vol. xxxviii., p. 473. 

As a preacher generally solemn in his manner, 
Bartimeus made free use of the very language of 
Scripture with striking appositeness, quoting ver- 
batim, and often book, chapter, and verse, with great 
accuracy and astonishing facility. The verse-system, 
so useful to the Hawaiians, of committing to mem- 
ory a verse a day of the sacred oracles, and reciting 
seven verses a week at the Sabbath-school, doubt- 
less contributed materially to his familiarity with 
the Bible, and his readiness to aid in Sabbath-school 
labors, and more generally to instruct and guide 
those who were ready to hear him. The themes he 
chose for his discourses were important, of consider- 
able range and variety, judiciously selected in ref- 
erence to time and place, and well adapted to the 
wants of his hearers. Dealing closely with the 
conscience, he aimed with a true eloquence, "as a 
workman that needeth not to be ashamed," so to 
divide and apply "the word of truth" as to rouse 
the careless and hardened, rebuke the erring, guide 
the inquiring, stimulate the drooping, and to edify 
the humble and believing, as if it were daily his 
sincere and accepted ejaculation to the divine Spirit, 



LABORS A S AN EVANGELIST. 



51 



"0 teach me that divinest art, 
To reach the conscience, gain the heart, 
And train immortals for the skies." 

A brief report of one of his discourses, by Rev. 
Mr. Clark, who heard him at a series of meetings 
at Wailuku, January, 1843, and soon after became 
the pastor of the church there, which spontaneously 
assumed his support, will further illustrate the char- 
acter of his preaching and eloquence. 

"He was called upon to preach at an evening 
meeting. His heart was glowing with the love of 
souls. The overwhelming destruction of the im- 
penitent seemed to be pressing with great weight 
upon his mind; and this he took for the subject of 
his discourse at the evening meeting. He chose for 
the foundation of his remarks, Jer. 4:13: ' Behold, 
he shall come up as clouds, and his chariots shall 
be as a whirlwind.' 

" The anger of the Lord against the wicked, and 
the terrible overthrow of ail his enemies, were por- 
trayed in vivid colors. He seized upon the terrific 
image of a whirlwind or tornado as an emblem of 
the ruin which God would bring upon his enemies. 
This image he presented in all its majestic and 
awful aspects, enforcing his remarks with such 
passages as, ' He shall take them away as with a 
whirlwind, both living, and in his wrath.' Psa. 
58 : 9. ' And your destruction cometh as a whirl- 



52 



J3ARTIMEUS. 



wind.' Prov. 1 : 27. ' And the whirlwind shall take 
them away as stubble.' Isa. 40 : 24. ' Behold, the 
whirlwind of the Lord goeth forth with fury, a con- 
tinuing whirlwind ; it shall fall with pain upon the 
head of the wicked.' Jer. 30 : 23. ' For they have 
sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind,' 
Hos. 8:7; Nahum 1:3; Zech. 7:14; and other 
passages in which the same image is presented, al- 
ways quoting chapter and verse. 

" I was surprised to find that this image was so 
often used by the sacred writers. And how this 
blind man, never having used a concordance or a 
reference Bible in his life, could, on the spur of the 
moment, refer to all those texts, was quite a mys- 
tery. But his mind was stored with the precious 
treasure, and in such order that he always had it 
at command. Never have I been so forcibly im- 
pressed as while listening to this address, with the 
saying of the apostle, ' Knowing therefore the ter- 
ror of the Lord, we persuade men ;' and seldom 
have I witnessed a specimen of more genuine elo- 
quence. 

''Near the close, 'Who can withstand,' says 
he, ' the fury of the Lord, when he comes in his 
chariots of whirlwind? You have heard of the 
cars in America propelled by fire and steam — 
with what mighty speed they go, and how they 
crush all in their way ; so will the swift chariots 



LABORS AS AN EVANGELIST. 



03 



of Jehovah overwhelm all his enemies. Flee to 
the ark of safety.'"* 

The llev. Mr. Armstrong, who had been several 
years pastor of that church, says of Bartimeus, 
" He was my true yoke-fellow in preaching Christ 
over the wild wastes of East Maui, for five years. 

Often, while listening with exquisite delight 

to his eloquent strains, have we thought of "Wirt's 
description of the celebrated blind preacher of Vir- 
ginia." 

At length, in February, 1843, Bartimeus, receiv- 
ing a somewhat more specific charge, was stationed 
as an evangelist at Honuaula, the southernmost part 
of Maui, in accordance with the repeated solicita- 
tions of the church at that place, and the people in 
that vicinity, who had heard him often, and highly 
esteemed him, and among whom certain Roman- 
izers were trying their mysteries. There, twenty 
miles from Wailuku, and thirty south-east from La- 
haina, in the public sanctuary, by the way-side, and 
from house to house, he diligently held forth the 
word of life to win and save his dying " kindred ac- 
cording to the flesh." 

In the summer he visited Rev. Mr. Green, then 
a pastor of a church at Makawao, and assisted in 
labors preparatory to the communion, as he some- 

* "Notices of the Life, Character, and Labors of the late 
Bartimeus L. Paaaiki, by J. S. Green, Lahainaluna," p. 29. 



54 



BARTIMEUS. 



times did at other places. He also visited Wailuku 
as Rev. Mr. Clark came there to take charge of the 
church and station; and then returned to his post 
for his last public labors. Of this brief period, Mr. 
Clark gives the following gratifying testimony, un- 
der date of Wailuku, December 14, 1843 : 

" He spent a week or two in this place after my 
arrival here, was present at our church meetings, 
and assisted with his advice m some cases of dis- 
cipline. He returned to Honuaula, in time to 
in the services preparatory to the Lord's supper in 
that place on the third Sabbath in July. I here 
met him again, and found him as ever, abt)ut his 
Master's work. The kingdom of God seemed to 
occupy his whole thoughts. His prayers and ex- 
hortations were full of unction, and added much to 
the interest and profit of the meetings on that oc- 
casion. He, if no other one present, held commun- 
ion with the Saviour in the solemn ordinance. I 
left him, after the Sabbath, to continue his labors 
in that place, to watch over, and feed the flock with 
the bread of life. He soon transmitted to me, at 
my request, the names of a large number of per- 
sons who were professing to be on the Lord's side, 
and were seeking admission to the church." Rev. 
J. S. Green's Notices of Bartimeus, p. 31. 

He had witnessed and labored through one of the 
most remarkable revivals in modern times, extend- 



SICKNESS AND DEATH. 



55 



ing through tlie nation, where in the latter half of 
his life, Christianity had displaced a barbarous hea- 
thenism. At this period there were, in the collective 
Protestant churches of the Sandwich Islands, 23,804 
communicants reported in good standing ; a portion 
of whom, as well as of those admitted later, it is 
believed had been led to Christ, and others greatly 
benefited by his labors. 

But notwithstanding his hopeful present and pro- 
spective success in the new and wide field assigned 
him, he was soon arrested by disease ; and leaving 
his appointed station, was removed to Wailuku, that 
he might receive better attentions and medical aid, 
and renew for a season the pleasure of peaceful in- 
tercourse there with his loved Christian associates. 
He had reached the age of fifty-eight. He did not 
much expect to recover, though to others his com- 
plaint — an affection of the stomach and diaphragm — 
did not seem alarming. Hawaiians appear often to 
yield up too soon to attacks of disease, and not unfre- 
quently sink even under influenza. Mr. Bailey, the 
principal of the Female Seminary, rendered him 
what medical aid he could give ; and he was par- 
tially relieved, so that on the 9th of August, he united 
in the public and joyful thanksgivings of the nation 
for the restoration of the sovereignty of the islands 
to their rightful king, after the seizure by Lord 
Pawlet. But he soon grew feeble again. Without 



BARTIMEUS. 



impatience or murmuring ; and often speaking from 
the heart of the things of the kingdom of God to his 
Christian friends who visited him, he, in a few 
weeks, became quite prostrate, and by the middle 
of September seemed " nigh unto death." Uni- 
formly taking a low estimate of himself and a high 
estimate of the ways of God, he said, in his affliction, 
" I am in a good school, but I am a dull scholar." 

To the missionary who inquired of him how he 
felt in view of another world, he modestly and ten- 
derly replied, " Aole paha makaukau — ua nui loa 
kuu hewa : Not perhaps prepared — my sins are 
very great." But being reminded of the full atone- 
ment, he manifested his undiminished love to the 
Saviour, and his unshaken trust in his all-suffi- 
ciency ; and though sensible of his own entire un- 
worthiness, he remembered the cross — looked up- 
ward with hope, and expressed the joyful expecta- 
tion of meeting his Redeemer in a world where sin 
and pain and death could never enter. Grace, that 
had rescued, sanctified, and borne him thus far, sus- 
tained him as he was stepping down into the valley 
of the shadow of death. His conversation was in 
heaven. Calmly and peacefully he leaned upon his 
Saviour, whom for twenty years he had endeavored 
to serve ; and on Sabbath evening, September 17, 
18*13, he surrendered his liberated spirit into his 
gracious hands. 



FUNERAL. 



57 



He opened his eyes on the glories of eternity, and 
was that day, we trust, admitted into paradise as a 
part of the Redeemer's purchase, and a trophy of 
missionary toil. 

"What a change had been wrought in him by the 
grace of God, through the power of his gospel ! A 
dark-hearted, stupid, polluted, deluded, and con- 
firmed heathen idolater, transformed into an en- 
lightened, ardent, sanctified, disenthralled, firmly 
established worshipper of God, a faithful disciple, 
a meek and humble servant of the church, and an 
acceptable minister of Christ, loved and admired by 
those who knew and heard him, and lamented by 
many of all classes, who could hear him no more 
on earth ! To God alone, and for ever, be the praise. 

A large concourse, including many converted na- 
tives, laying deeply to heart the sentiment, " A 
good man— a great man in Israel, is fallen'' at- 
tended his funeral as sincere mourners. A sermon 
was preached on the occasion, from the exulting 
language of Paul, " For we know that if our earthly 
house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a 
building of God, an house not made with hands, 
eternal in the heavens." 2 Cor. 5:1. His brethren, 
with tender, believing hearts, and gentle hands — 
so different from the customs of former days — laid 
his earthly tabernacle in the grave of the faithful, 
to be " raised in power" at the last trump. 



58 



BARTIMEUS. 



In the life of this convert from Paganism, what 
a conclusive argument is furnished for the value of 
the Bible, the truth of Christianity, and the efficacy 
of the preached gospel ! How forcibly illustrated 
is the truth, that 

"The law of Jehovah is perfect, converting the soul; 
The testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple." 

And is it not manifest that what was done for 
Bartimeus to bring him to Christ, needs essentially 
to be done for every idolater on earth, who might 
also find and embrace him, and that the aggregate 
results of such a work would be immeasurable ? Let 
this triumph of divine grace encourage the friends 
of Christ to seek among the impenitent in Christian 
communities, and among the dying heathen nations, 
lost and neglected souls, whom the Lord will make 
his own, and gather as his jewels in the day of glory. 



PUBLICATIONS 



1 



OF THE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 



These works are not exceeded in high evangelical charac- 
ter, spiritual power, and practical worth, by any spiritual col» 
lection in any language. They have been carefully selected 
for the great body of intelligent readers throughout the coun- 
try, and the most watchful parent may supply them to his fam- 
ily or to others, not only with safety to their best and eternal 
interests, but with hope of the richest spiritual blessings. 



D'Aubign6's History of th<* Reforma- 
tion. A new translation, revised 
by the author, in four volumes 
12mo, with portraits. Price $1 75, 
extra cloth. 

Baxter's Saints' Everlasting Rest, 
12mo, in large type ; also ISmo. 

Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, 12mo, 
in large type ; and 18mo Both edi- 
tions neatly illustrated. 

Memoir of Jas. Milnor, D. D. 

Mason's Spiritual Treasury, for every 
day in the year. Terse, pithy, and 
evangelical. 

Flavel's Fountain of Life, or Re- 
demption provided. 

Flavel's Method of Grace, or Re- 
demption applied to the Souls of 
Men. 

Flavel's Knocking at the Door; a 
tender, practical appeal. 

Pishop Hall's Scripture History, or 
Contemplations on the Historical 
Passages of the Old and New Testa- 
ments. 

Bishop Hopkins on the Ten Com- 
mandments. Two standard works 
of the times of Baxter. 

.President Edwards' Thoughts on Re- 
rivals. 

Venn's Complete Duty of Man, 
Owen on Forgiveness, or Psalm 130. 
Gregory's (Oiinthus, LL.D.) Evi- 

denQ«a of Christianity. 
Paley'a Natural Theology. 



Dr. Spring's Bible not of Man, or the 
Argument for the Divine Origin of 
the Scriptures drawn from the 
Scriptures themselves. 

Nelson's Cause and Cure of Infi- 
delity. 

Memoir of Mrs. Isabella Graham. A 
new and standard edition. 

Memoir of Mrs. Sarah L. Huntington 
Smith. 

Sacred Songs for Family and Social 
"Worship. Hymns and Tunes— 
with a separate edition in patent 
notes. Also, the Hymns separately. 

Elegant Narratives, Select Tracts, 
illustrated. 

Willison's Afflicted Man's Com 
panion. 

Doddridge's Rise and Progress of Re 
ligion in the Soul. 

Edwards' History of Redemption. 

Volume on Infidelity, comprising five 
standard treatises : Soame Jenyns 
on the Internal Evidence ; Leslie's 
Method with Deists ; Littleton's 
Conversion of Paul ; Watson's Re- 
ply to Gibbon and Paine. 

Pike's Persuasives to Early Piety. 

Pike's Guide to Young Disciples. 

Anecdotes for the Family and tho 
Social Circle. 

Universalism not of God. 

Dibble's Thoughts on Missions.. 

The Bible True. 



2 



ELEGANT PRACTICAL WORKS. 



Wilberforce 's Practical View. 5 
Hannah More's Practical Piety. 
James' Anxious Inquirer. 
Elijaii the Tishbite. 
Nevins' Practical Thoughts. 
Melvili's Bible Thoughts, selected 
the late Rev. Dr. Milnor. 



Harris' Mammon. 
Gurney's Love to God. 
Foster's Appeal to the Young 
Abbott's Young Christian. 
Abbott's Mother at Home. 
- Abbott's Child at Home. 
James' Young Man from Horns, 



CHRISTIAN MEMOIRS. 



Rev. Claudius Buchanan, LL.D., in 
eluding his Christian Researches in 
Asia. 

Rev. John Newton. 

Rev. Henry Martyn. 

Rev. David Brainerd. 

Rev. Edward Pay son, D. D. 

Harriet L. Winslow, Missionary in 
India, & 



James Brainerd Taylor. 
Harlan Page. 
Norman d Smith. 
Richard Baxter. 
Archbishop Leighton. 
Matthew Henry. 
Rev. Samuel Pearce. 
Rev. Samuel Kilpin. 



OTHER SPIRITUAL WORKS. 



Edwards on the Affections. 
Baxter's Call to the Unconverted. 
Alieine's Alarm to the Unconverted. 
Flavel's Touchstone. 
Flavel on Keeping the Heart. 
He IfFen stein's Self-Deception. 
Sherman's Guide to an Acquaint- 
ance with God 



Pike's Religion and Eternal Life 
Baxter's Dying Thoughts. 
Matthew Henry on Meekness. 
Andrew Fuller's Backslider. 
Scudder's Redeemer's Last Cor&r 
mand. 

Scudder's Appeal to Mothers. 
Burder's Sermons to the Aged. 



MISCELLANEOUS WORKS. 



Bogue's Evidences of Christianity. 
Keith's Evidence of Prophecy. 
Morison's Counsels to Young Men. 
The Reformation in Europe. 
Nevins' Thoughts on Popery. 
Spirit of Popery, [12 engravings.] 
The Colporteur and Roman Catholic. 



Mason on Self-Knowledge. 

Sherman's Guide to an Acquaint- 
ance with God. 

Divine Law of Beneficence. 

Zaccheus, or Scriptural Plan of Be- 
nevolence. 

Hymns for Social Worship. 



POCKET MANUALS 



Clarke's Scripture Promises. 

The Book of Psalms. 

The Book of Proverbs. 

Daily Scripture Expositor. 

Ten Commandments Explained. 

Bean and Venn's Advice to a Married 

Couple. 
Hymns for Infant Minds. 
Reasons of Repose. 



Daily Food for Christian s. 
Chaplet of Flowers. 
Heavenly Manna. 

Cecil and Flavel's Gift for Mourner* 
Daily Texts. 

Diary, [Daily Texts interleaved^ 
Crumbs from the Master's Txi>I©. 
Milk for Babes. 
Pew-Drops. 



BOOKS FOil THE YOUNG 



s 



MANY OF THEM BEAUTIFULLY ILLUSTRATED WITH ENGRAVINGS. 



Gallaudet's Scripture Biography, 7 
vols., from Adam to David. 

Gallaudet's Youth's Book of Natural 
Theology. 

Peep of Day. 

Line upon Line. 

Precept upon Precept. 

Anzonetta R. Peters. 

The Night of Toil. 

Legh Richmond's Letters and Coun- 
sels. 

Advice to a Young Christian. 
Madam Rumpff and Duchess de 

Broglie. 
Charles H. Porter. 
Missionary's Daughter. 
du udder's Tales about the Heathen. 
Amelia, the Pastor's Daughter. 
Trees, Fruits, and Flowers of the 

Bible, [9 cuts.] 
Elizabeth Bales. By John Angell 

James. 



Nathan W. Dickerman. 
Grace Harriet. 
Children Invited to Christ 
Narratives of Pious Children. 
The Dairyman's Daughter, eto. 
Charles L. Winslow. 
Withered Branch Revived. 
Peet's Scripture Lessons. 
Child's Book of Bible Stories. 
Children of the Bible. 
Amos Armfield, or the Leather-cover* 
ed Bible. 

The Child's Hymn-Book. Selected 

by Miss Caulkins. 
Scripture Animals, [16 cuts.] 
Letters to Little Children, [13 cuts,] 
Great Truths in Simple Words 
Clementine Cuvier. 
Rolls Plumbe. 
Pictorial Tract Primer. 
Watts' Divine and Moral Songs. 
With numerous similar works. 



ALSO, 



Dr. Edwards' Sabbath Manual, Parts 
1, 2, 3, and 4. 

Dr. Edwards' Temperance Manual. 

In German — 40 vols., various sizes, 
including Barth's Church History, 
Life of M. Boos, Rules of Life, 
Lord's Day, Fabricius, Honey- 
Drop, Christ Knocking at the Door, 
and two volumes and packets of 
Books for Children, recently pub- 
lished. 

In French — Twelve volumes. 



In Spanish — D'Aubigne's History of 
the Reformation, Vol. I., Sabbath 
Manual, Part 1, Kirwan's Letters, 
Evangelical Hymns, Temperance 
Manual, and Manual for Chil- 
dren. 

Ix Welsh — Pilgrim's Progress, Bax- 
ter's Saints' Rest and Call, Anxious 
Inquirer, History of Redemption. 

In Danish — Doddridge's Rise and 
Progress, Baxter's Saints' Rest and 
Call. ' 



Also, upwards of 1,000 Tracts and Children's Tracts, separate, bound, or 
in packets, adapted for convenient sale by merchants and traders, many of 
them with beautiful engravings — in English, German, French, Spanish, 
Portuguese, Italian, Dutch, Danish, Swedish, and Welsh. 

VCr" It is the design of the Society to issue all its publications in good 
*ype, for the poor as well as the rich ; and to sell them, as nearly as may bs, 
iX cost, that the Society may neither sustain loss nor make a profit by all 
sales. 



f 



LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 



III 


III ill I I 






( 


121 ( 


523 413 3 



