
BV 3269 .C25 B7 1860 
Calderwood, William. 
Brief memorial of Mrs 
Lizzie G. Calderwood 



BRIEF MEM01?|»A.t. " 

OF \4^r^ .y\' 

MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERAVOOD, 



OF THE 



SAHAEUNPUR MISSION, NORTHERN 
INDIA. 



IN A LETTER OF 

REV. WILLIAM C ALDER WOOD. 



PUBLISHED BY THE 
AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

150 NASSAU-STEEET, NEW YOKK. 



BRIEF MEMORIAL 

OF 

MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 



Dehra, Northern India, Aug. 15, 1860. 

Dear Mother, Sister Agnes, and other 
Relatives and Friends — For a long time I 
have been intending to comply with the request 
of many of you for a more detailed account of 
my dear departed wife than I have yet given ; 
but always when I attempted it, for some rea- 
son or another, I can scarcely say what, I have 
found it next to impossible to proceed. To- 
day being just one year from my great bereave- 
ment, I feel that if I ever do it, it must be done 
now. Perhaps the fulfilment of this task will 
be a fitting observance of the first anniversary 
of the mournful event. 



4 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

I, as well as you, have a desire that you 
should remember one whose memory will ever 
be most dear to me. I feel that my obligation 
to make you better acquainted with her, is 
much strengthened by the fact that you all 
loved her so sincerely, although many of you 
knew her so slightly. I will try to write such 
a letter as you may wish to preserve among 
you as a kind of memento of a very dear de- 
parted one. I will therefore begin with 

THE CHILD. 

Her birthplace was in the same country town 
of Massachusetts as that of her very dear friend 
Mrs. Herron. But though they were both 
children at the same time in Petersham, yet. so 
far as they knew, they never met with each 
other till five years ago, when they were both 
embarking on the same ship, for the same field 
of labor, far, far from their native town, there 
to become most intimate and loving friends. 

She was the eldest child of Mr. and Mrs. 
Charles Greenleaf, and was born on the 27th 
of February, 1835. Her mother dying when 
she was about two years old, requested her 
mother, Mrs. Phebe Greenwood of Templeton, 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 5 

^^fassachusetts, a most pious and active Chris- 
tian lady, to take her as her own child and 
bring her up in the fear and service of the 
Lord. This charge she fulfilled most faithfully, 
and by the divine blessing, successfully. 

For the benefit of those with sunny little 
faces who, even in a few weeks' acquaintance, 
learned so fondly to love her, I will tell a story 
of her childhood. 

When she was eight or nine years old, a lit- 
tle friend of hers, younger than herself, had 
received a pair of new shoes. This little girl 
went one day a strawberrying. On reaching 
the strawberry field, to save her new shoes 
fi'om becoming soiled, she put them ofi". But 
on leaving the field for home, she had forgotten 
where she left her shoes ; and as darkness was 
approaching, she had no opportunity of search- 
ing for them. While she had been careful in 
one respect, she had been careless in another. 
So next morning her mother required that she 
should find her shoes before she could have her 
breakfast. In great trouble, on her way alone 
to the strawberry field, she called for comfort 
and counsel on her little friend Lizzie Green- 
leaf. As they walked together towards the 



6 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

field, doubtless sadly discussing the probability 
of one of them losing her breakfast as well as 
her nice new shoes, a happy thought entered 
Lizzie's mind. She said, " God knows where 
these shoes are, and if we will ask him, perhaps 
he will show them to us." Before they entered 
the field, they knelt down beside the fence, and 
Lizzie offered a prayer. As for years after 
this time she had scarcely thought of this 
prayer, the precise words were forgotten ; but 
she remembered her pleading that God had 
asked little children to come to him, and now 
they two little children had come, and wished 
him to show them where A 's shoes were. 

That prayer, whatever were its words, was 
answered ; they had scarcely entered the field, 
when, to their great delight, they spied the 
shoes. 

It appears that at that time the Holy Spirit 
had begun his work of grace in Lizzie's heart. 
She expressed a desire to enjoy the full privi- 
leges of communion with God's people. But 
on account of her early youth, her superiors in 
years advised her to defer the step for a time. 
For some years, about this time, she enjoyed 
great delight in daily secret prayer; and in 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 7 

riper years she sometimes longed for the sweet 
seasons she in childhood often enjoyed in secret 
communion with her Saviour, and the trans- 
porting views she sometimes had of him as her 
Elder Brother and Redeemer. 

I presume it must have been about this time 
of her life when the following anthem or hymn 
became a special favorite of hers, as she spoke 
of it as having been such for years. Favorites 
of any kind give an excellent clue to the taste 
of the individual. The character of the favor- 
ite sacred songs of any Christian is a good in- 
dex to his prevailing frame of mind. He who 
is always sorrowing will have very different 
favorites from those of him who is always re- 
joicing ; even the airs that a person is accus- 
tomed to hum over, may be an indication of his 
taste and character. This hymn she invariably 
sung to the sweet flowing melody of Lowell 
Mason's Ariel. When I recollect the animated 
expression with which she always sung the last 
verse, I feel I ought not to have been surprised 
that her closing hours on earth were so calm 
and triumphant. I wish all my nieces could 
sing with the feeling that their dear aunt Liz- 
zie did, this beautiful hymn. 



8 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

"Oh. could I speak the matchless worth, 
Oh could I sound the glories forth, 

Which in my Saviour shine, 
I 'd soar and touch the heavenly strings, 
And vie with Gabriel, while he sings 

In notes almost divine. 

"I'd sing the precious blood he spilt, 
My ransom from the dreadful guilt 

Of sin and wrath divine ; 
I 'd sing his glorious righteousness. 
In which all-perfect heavenly dress 

My soul shall ever shine. 

" I 'd sing the characters he bears, 
And all the forms of love he wears. 

Exalted on his throne ; 
In loftiest songs of sweetest praise, 
I would to everlasting days 

Make all his glories known. 

"Soon the delightful day will come, 
When my dear Lord will bring me home, 

And I shall see his face ; 
There with my Saviour, Brother, Friend, 
A blest eternity I '11 spend. 

Triumphant in his grace." 

She had one other very special favorite. It 
seemed to be understood that one or the other 
of these must be sung at the close of our hours of 
singing, in which, ever since I have known her, 
we have been accustomed to indulge. Till this 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 9 

moment, it never occurred to me how much 
these two favorites correspond with each other. 
The music of this is also by Lowell Mason. I 
will transcribe one or two verses. 

*' Jerusalem, my glorious home ! 
Name ever dear to me ; 
When shall my labors have an end 
In joy and peace m thee ? . 

" Oh when, thou city of my God, 
Shall I thy courts ascend. 
Where congregations ne'er break up, 
And Sabbaths have no end ? 

" There happier bowers than Eden's bloom, 
Nor sin, nor sorrow know ; 
Blest seats ! through rude and stormy scenes 
I onward press to you." 

I remember hearing her speak of several oc- 
casions, when she was about nine years of age, 
when little girls called on her, and sometimes 
when a few would be walking with her from 
school, she would talk to them about Christ's 
loving little children, and how much he had 
done for them ; and as their little hearts would 
melt, sometimes even to tears, she would sug- 
gest that they all go with her to some place 
where they would not be seen or disturbed, 



10 BEIEF MEMORIAL OF 

and there thank him and pray to him. Her 
grandfather's barn was one place to which they 
resorted for such purposes, and a shady grove 
not far from her grandfather's house, another. 
Sometimes they took the Testament and hymn- 
book with them, when they would read and 
sing and pray. Of these occasions she seldom 
spoke without adding some such exclamation 
as, " Oh, what sweet seasons those were!" 

Who can limit the amount of good done at 
these children's impromptu prayer-meetings; 
the holy impressions that may have been made 
upon their young hearts — impressions which 
may have had no slight influence in giving tone 
and character to their after-lives? " The child 
is father to the man." " Jesus saith unto them. 
Yea; have ye never read. Out of the mouths 
of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected 
praise?" 

But after those years of interest and pleasure 
in divine things, came some years of lukewarm- 
ness, over which she often deeply mourned. 
Probably, however, few would have looked 
upon those " years of backsliding," as she called 
them, in the same light in which she did. It 
does not appear that she was ever considered 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 11 

a thoughtless or irreligious girl; on the con- 
trary, she was commonly regarded as consist- 
ently pious from her childhood up. 

Although her home was over three miles 
from her house of worship, yet perhaps there 
was not one more regular in attendance there, 
or more uniformly in the Sabbath-school, both 
when she was a scholar and when she was a 
teacher. I have heard her speak of her hav- 
ing walked the whole three miles, rather than 
either stay at home herself or prevent her good 
grandmother from going; as sometimes there 
were not vacant seats in the carriage in which 
they were accustomed to go to church, for both 
of them. What she in after-life mourned over 
was not a reckless irreligion, but a lack of holy, 
ardent delight in sacred things ; a want of full 
assurance of faith ; and especially an inactivity 
in promoting the eternal welfare of others. 

THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN. 

I think she was never fully decided in her 
own mind, whether it was before or after those 
years of lukewarmness in religious things that 
she really became a child of God. When she 
was about seventeen years of age her interest 



12 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

in religion was graciously revived. Her pastor, 
a devoted servant of Christ, the Rev. A. Y. 
Dimock, at that time pastor of the Baptist 
church at Baldwinsville, Massachusetts, feeling 
fully assured that she had at some time become a 
child of God, admitted her to the communion 
of the church under his care. 

The first I ever heard of her was when I 
was engaged in that most important work, the 
circulating of the books of the American Tract 
Society. As volume agent of the Branch Soci- 
ety at Boston, I made it my business to go to 
each town and obtain Christians of both sexes 
who would, as a religious duty, without any 
pecuniary remuneration for their labor, receive 
a few of the publications, and taking an allot- 
ted portion of the town, would visit every fam- 
ily in that section, and endeavor to do all the 
good they could do, in the way of religious 
conversation and prayer ; and supply at least 
some religious publication, by either sale or 
grant, in every household. 

Mr. and Mrs. Dimock and myself were con- 
sulting as to what persons might be suitable to 
visit his parish, when he remarked, "There's 
Lizzie Greenleaf ; if she were only home from 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 13 

the seminary now, on vacation, she would like 
to visit the whole of the parish herself, and no 
one would do it better." Her name being again 
mentioned, I asked who this Lizzie Greenleaf 
was. Her pastor replied, " She is a young lady 
about twenty years of age, who two years ago 
united with the church, and since that time, 
after the example of her divine Master, she has 
been constantly going about doing good, and 
has been the means of the conversion of more 
than one.'' 

As Providence would have it, she did return 
from the seminary in time to visit a portion of 
the town. Nor did she, in the performance of 
that labor, dishonor the high character her 
pastor had given her. With the other volun- 
tary colporteurs of that parish, at an appointed 
day, she met me at the pastor's house to report 
with regard to her colporteur labors. I asked 
her how she liked the employment. As the 
crimson slightly mantled her cheek, and the 
moisture filled her eye, she replied, " I wish I 
could be always engaged in such work." 

Nor was this a mere transient flash of zeal. 
She had whispered to her grandmother more 
than once, that she "would like to go to any 



14 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

country in the world where she could be con- 
stantly engaged in telling perishing sinners 
about the precious Saviour." And, what I pre- 
sume few of her friends ever knew, she at one 
time had determined to go unmarried as a for- 
eign missionary, should her grandmother not 
forbid it. It was not her fault that she did not 
carry out her purpose. 

But she was not one of those who are con- 
stantly saying or thinking that if they were 
only in some place where they are not, or in 
some circumstances in which they are not, or if 
it were not for this or that or some other thing, 
then they might do some good, but just as they 
are they can do little or none. She was not 
one of those who look with such interest and 
intentness on distant opportunities, that they 
cannot see the most urgent demands close at 
their side. Wherever she was she labored with 
such interest, and unfaltering, cheerful zeal, 
that an observer would have thought she con- 
sidered herself always in the very best place in 
the world for the noblest Christian exertion. 
Improve the present was emphatically her motto. 

I cannot refrain from giving you an illustra- 
tion of this, and in giving it I am thinking 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 15 

again of those with bright little faces, who 
were so delighted with her visits. It may be 
suggestive to some, as to how they may some- 
times obtain opportunities of doing good ; and 
it is interesting to me as another example of 
the ease with which such opportunities are 
found by those who are always on the lookout 
for them. There is always "ready work for 
willing hands." 

She herself, however, seemed to think that 
she had done, and had even attempted, very 
little. I do not remember her ever speaking 
of the incident to which I refer but once, and 
then I with difficulty drew from her a few of 
the facts by a succession of questions. The 
chief details have been learned from papers 
discovered since her lamented departure. 

She was always considered as a most diligent 
student while at school. One might therefore 
have expected that while there she would have 
excused herself from active Christian effort for 
the salvation of others. But to do good was a 
recreation to her. 

She had a young lady companion at the sem- 
inary, a great favorite with the scholars gener- 
ally; intelligent, talented, and good looking; 



16 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

but considered to be entirely thoughtless as to 
her soul's eternal welfare ; and she was engaged 
to be married to an openly irreligious man. 
Lizzie persuaded her room-mate to engage with 
her in prayer daily for the salvation of this gay 
young companion. For a long time these two 
together wrestled with God in prayer for this 
special object. " Morning, noon, and night 
might these two young Christians have been 
heard pouring out their hearts in supplication 

to God for 's conversion." One day she 

entered, somewhat abruptly, this gay compan- 
ion's room, and found her with the New Testa- 
ment in her hand, which she at once threw 
aside. "No, no," says Lizzie, "don't lay it 
away, but let us read it together;" saying 
which, she took it up and read a passage con- 
cerning the sufferings and death of the Lord 
Jesus, and closed remarking, doubtless with 
affectionate feeling, "Is it not a shameful sin 
for any to neglect such a precious Saviour, who 
has done so much for them?" Her companion, 
with the tears gathering in her eyes, replied, 
" 0, Lizzie, I do want that Saviour to he mincJ' 
Soon they were both on their knees, and in a 
few days it was cautiously whispered around 



MRS. LIZZIE (J, CALDEUWOOD. 17 

througli tlie sclioo], that liad become seri- 
ous, and intended to join the church. 

The person to whom she was engaged was 
not a little displeased ; and with all her efforts 
to arouse him to a sense of his own eternal 
danger, the best terms to which she could bring 
him were, that she might be as religious as she 
pleased in secret — might pray every day in 
private — but she must on no account make a 
public profession of religion. Many were the 
struggles and trials through which she had to 
pass before she found her way clear in this 
matter. I need scarcely say that she some- 
times found comfort from a few words and a 
prayer with Lizzie. Her irreligious friend was 
firm in his determination, that if she would be 
his wife she must never be openly numbered 
with the people of God — he doubtless depend- 
ing for success on her long and ardent love to 
him. She at last found herself compelled to 
choose between her Saviour and the object of 
her earthly love. Grace triumphed. It has 
been said that after she had united with the 
church, he hesitated as to the wisdom of his 
decision, but I have not heard it whispered 
that she ever, repented of hers. 



18 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

While Lizzie was thus faithful to the eternal 
interests of those around her, she was not neg- 
lectful of her ordinary duties. Her object in 
studying was to make herself the better able to 
accomplish good. If Providence threw oppor- 
tunities in her way for the accomplishment of 
this grand object without interfering with the 
pursuit of the secondary one, why should she 
in the least sacrifice the principal to the sub- 
sidiary? Those young men or young women 
who, in the course of their education, find few 
or no opportunities for the performance of ac- 
tual labor in the upbuilding of their Saviour's 
kingdom, have great reason to fear that they 
may not find these openings any too frequent 
after their course of training is completed. He 
who neglects an inviting opportunity for the 
accomplishment of good while he is pursuing 
his studies, has certainly some reason to doubt 
whether he is pursuing them for the purpose of 
fitting himself for doing good. 

Her earnest efforts to promote the welfare 
of others did not seem to interfere at all with 
her progress in her daily studies. The princi- 
pal of the seminary considered her one of the 
most diligent as well as apt sojiolars of his 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 19 

school. From her first attendance at the dis- 
trict school, till the time when she left the sem- 
inary to come and teach benighted heathen the 
way of eternal life, she was often the youngest 
in large classes and yet at their head. It will 
generally be found that those that do most for 
others, prosecute their own affairs with the best 
success. " There is that scattereth, and yet 
increaseth." 

But it is not always that those most active 
in doing good meet with the fewest trials. 
Perhaps few have made great progress in sanc- 
tification without having had their faith fre- 
quently put to severe tests. I must not fail to 
speak of what was undoubtedly, to her^ 

THE ORDEAL. 

About a year from the time of her colpor- 
teur labors, some of you met with her, and 
know the cheerfulness Avith which she left the 
home and friends of her childhood and youth, 
for the sake of going "to tell perishing sinners 
[of India] about the precious Saviour." But 
there were fearful storms through which she 
had to struggle in reaching the sunshine in 
which you saw her, of which only a few ever 



20 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

knew, or will know, until tliey shall learn them 
from sanctified lips above, in the notes of the 
grand anthem of praise to Him who giveth us 
the victory. 

In her own mind, through grace, she had been 
consecrated to this great work for years, in case 
Providence should open a door through which 
she could enter upon it. On this subject her 
mind never changed. But the idea of abandon- 
ing all that had been dear to her from child- 
hood was often to her overwhelmingly distress- 
ing ; and just before the final determination on 
the question of her going to India at the time 
she did go, events transpired, all of which were 
providential so far as she was concerned, and 
many of them so far as any human being was 
concerned, which, for a time, seemed almost ab- 
solutely to forbid her proceeding. 

A few words from one of her grandmother's 
letters to her while she was at the seminary, 
will give some idea of one of the trials through 
which she had to pass. It must be remem- 
bered that for years she and her grandmother 
had composed an entire family, and their mutual 
love was most ardent. Her grandmother writes 
her: 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 21 

" But I must answer your kind letter, althougli 
it is a most trying task. Yes, clear Elizabeth, 
to think that you have made up your mind to 
leave me and go to India, never more to see 
your face, is very trying to your aged grand- 
mother. I was hoping to lean upon you in my 
declining years. Yes, Elizabeth, you are as 
dear to me as my own daughter could be, now 
that I have no daughter left upon earth. It is 
very, very trying. But if the Lord has called 
you to this great work, I will say amen to it, 
and rejoice that he has counted you worthy." 

The bitterness of this fearful cup was aggra- 
vated also by the fact that, with but two or 
three exceptions, all her relatives and accus- 
tomed advisers were firm in the belief that she 
was doing wrong in going to India. Nor did 
they at all attempt to conceal this opinion from 
her. To some persons this might have caused 
no serious grief; but not so with her. From 
childhood, one of her characteristics was, that 
objections made by her friends to any step she 
took, were to her a cause of inexpressible un- 
easiness. 

You would be better able to appreciate the 
bitterness to her of this ingredient, had you 



22 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

seen the radiant snnsliine with which her coun» 
tenance was lit up, on reading, after she had 
reached the mission ground, such passages as 
the following. The first is from a letter to 
her from one whose opinion she looked up to 
with almost the same confidence as to her 
grandmother's, and who for a long time felt 
it duty firmly to ^orotest against the step here 
more than approved of. This person writes, 
"I now rejoice very much that you went to 
India. I feel thankful that I have so near a 
relative laboring among the heathen for their 
salvation. I feel it has been a great blessing 
to myself, by increasing my interest in the cause 
of Christ." 

I may be allowed to give a slight hint with 
regard to this change of sentiifient. You may 
judge whether it may not, at least partly, ac- 
count for the change. The person had long 
been a Christian. But even Christians do not 
always bask in the sunshine of religion. In 
the letter from which the above extract is 
taken, there are various very evident indica- 
tions that religion had recently been very much 
revived in that person's soul. 

A few genial rays of light and heat from the 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 23 

Sun of righteousness on high, will sometimes 
do wonders towards dispelling the dark fore- 
boding clouds that often hang over the vale of 
religious sacrifice and self-denial. Many sac- 
rifices which appear quite uncalled for, indeed 
very wrong, when viewed through the dusty 
clouds of this world, appear very right when 
seen in the clear light of eternity. 

The following from her revered pastor also 
reveals something with regard to this same 
trial. " There were misgivings in some hearts, 
but not in yours, nor in your companion's, no, 
nor in mine. I believe in doing right, and leav- 
ing the consequences with Go'd And now 

I believe all agree that the results have shown 
that the step was approved by our divine 
Master." 

Her grandmother, although the chief sufi'er- 
er, always gave the movement her hearty ap- 
probation. She writes, " Almost if not all of 
your friends now think you did right in going, 
and daily I thank God that he called you 
there, and pray for success to you and to your 
whole mission, in the blessed work of showing 
poor ignorant heathen the way of eternal life." 

That good woman, from the day we left the 



24 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

American shores, till the day of her lamented 
death, 27th December, 1856, at a particular 
hour of every day, no matter how she was en- 
gaged or in what company, retired to suppli- 
cate blessings on us, on our work, and on that 
of our whole mission. I believe her hour for 
tliis prayer was at ten o'clock A. M. Oh that 
we had more than we have of such praying 
mothers in Israel. 

I have often wondered why the great Ruler 
above should allow or direct such obstacles to 
appear, as rose before her of whom I write, 
when she was preparing to go as a foreign 
missionary. Probably, however, it is as easy 
to understand his providence in the present 
case, as in his commanding Abraham to slay his 
only hope of promised posterity; or in strip- 
ping Job of all his earthly possessions, xil- 
though her trials at the time were most distress- 
ing to us both, yet they had scarcely passed over 
when we were enabled most heartily to bless 
our heavenly Father for them. I regard them 
as having been an important instrumentality 
in preparing us for our work in India ; and 
the Christian heroism with which she buffeted 
them, I have always considered one of the 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 25 

clearest testimonies I have ever met with to 
the depth of her piety, the nobility of her 
Christian character, and the genuine fervor of 
her zeal in the service of her Redeemer. The 
circumstances and results of this trying ordeal 
illustrate the wisdom of not conferring with 
flesh and blood, in the discharge of our highest 
duties; and the certainty that, though obsta- 
cles as fearful as the deep waters of tlie Red 
sea lie before us, we may go over dry shod, if 
we in faith boldly "go forward/^ 

Without detaining you with any details about 
the voyage, etc., which I presume would neither 
be new nor edifying to you, I will go on at once 
f. to say a little, and but a little, about her as 

THE MISSIONARY. 

It was with a kind of bewildering satisfac- 
tion that, after the distressing ordeal through 
which she had passed, the whirl of excitement 
in the busy scenes of our departure from Amer- 
ica, the tossings on the wide ocean, the rattle 
and dust of a thousand miles through the midst 
of this heathen country — after all this within 
the space of a few months, it was, I say, with a 
kind of bewildering joy that she could look 



26 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

around on the work before her, and say, " Well, 
am I now indeed on foreign missionary ground? 
Am I really settled down in my own home, 
among the heathen, with nothing to do but to 
labor to lead them to the Saviour? Why, it 
seems as if it must be only a dream. And how 
remarkable the providences by which I have 
been brought here ! How narrowly did I escape 
losing the precious privilege!" Often such ex- 
pressions would musingly fall from her lips 
within the first few months after our settlement 
at Saharunpur. 

Her deep interest in the great work, her 
ardent desire to be engaged in it, did not van- 
ish at the touch of the realization. In the 
early part of her missionary life, she thought 
she could scarcely remain here ten years with- 
out visiting her dear old home. But gradually, 
in her mind, she extended the time of her visit 
further and further — twelve, fifteen years — and 
at last, if she ever visited home, she wished to 
return here and leave her bones on the mission 
field. In the latter wish she has been grati- 
fied, sooner indeed than she anticipated, but 
not, as you will see, before by divine Provi- 
dence and grace, she was prepared for it. 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 27 

With regard to her interest in her mission- 
ary work, a slight hint may be found in the 
following, which she penned just one year and 
two days before she entered into her rest. 

" God has been most kind to us in preserv- 
ing our lives through this dreadful rebellion. 
I trust we shall be led to do more for Him 
and love Him more, for this merciful preser- 
vation. Oh, how little have I done for Him 
who has done so much for me ! Oh that I could 
live entirely for Him. I have been the past 
year much more anxious to be more earnestly 
and zealously devoted to His cause, and have 
tried very hard to do more work for Him than 
formerly." 

I ought, perhaps, before this to have re- 
ferred more particularly to an event which 
occurred shortly after she entered upon her 
missionary work, and was of no slight impor- 
tance to her. Many, many a time, often for 
hours together, she would weep almost as if 
her heart would break, when something would 
suddenly recall to her mind her "poor dear 
grandmother, left all alone." She, however, 
never expressed a doubt that she did right in 
cominor to India. " God will take care of dear. 



28 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

dear grandmother/' was her usual satisfying 
consolation. God did take care of her. Pie 
took her up into His own home. Tlie following 
appeared in The Watchman and Reflector, 
January, 1857 : 

"DiED,inEastTempleton,onthe 25th ult., Mrs. 
Phebe Greenwood, in the 68th year of her age. 
For the last thirty-five or forty years of her life 
she was a ' living epistle, known and read of all 
men.' Her piety shone brighter and brighter 
to the end of her course. All who knew her 
were constrained to feel that her daily deport- 
ment and conversation were a living demon- 
stration of the truth of experimental religion. 
She loved the cause of Christ, the followers of 
Christ, and the ministers of Christ. She had 
an excellent acquaintance with the system of 
doctrines contained in the Bible, and adhered 
to them as her spiritual food. Her fervid zeal, 
her humility, her calm unshaken trust in God, 
her heavenly unction in prayer, evinced that 
she daily experienced fresh anointing from on 
high, and held constant communion with God. 
Though she lived more than three miles from 
the house of God, yet her seats there and in 
the Sabbath-school were seldom vacant on the 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 29 

Sabbath for a scries of years. She was remark- 
able also for a tender concern for the souls of 
others, and especially for those of the young. 
By a cheerful and happy frame of mind, she 
divested religion of every thing repulsive and 
gloomy to the youthful mind, and labored to 
win them to Christ. She was therefore pecul- 
iarly dear to the young, as they could not but 
feel assured that she was their sincere friend. 
"While our departed friend was ardently 
attached to her own church and denomination, 
still, rising superior to the prejudices of party, 
she rejoiced equally with all who gave proof 
of possessing the mind of Christ. She has left 
two children and a number of grandchildren to 
mourn their irreparable loss. One of the lat- 
ter is the wife of Rev. William Calderwood, 
a missionary of the Reformed Presbyterian 
church in India. Mrs. Calderwood was brought 
up by her grandmother, and will therefore 
mourn as for an own mother. This event will 
doubtless cast a deep shadow over her Indian 
home. That mission too has lost the fervent 
prayers of one who, at a particular hour of each 
day, remembered it in supplication before God. 
But her work on earth is done, and why should 



30 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

we be reluctant to have lier go to the rewards 
of the just? Though her mortal remains are 
housed in the silent tomb, and her sainted spirit 
has gone to dwell with Christ, she will long 
live in the memories of those who knew her." 

From the above obituary notice, taken in the 
connection in which it here stands, you cannot 
avoid noticing how distinctly the impress of the 
character of the grandmother was left on that 
of the granddaughter; another beautiful illus- 
tration of the power of maternal example. 

After this event Lizzie felt additional grati- 
tude that Providence had brought her to India 
before her grandmother's home was broken up 
by death. It was all well. The offering was 
made in good faith ; Isaac was sacrificed ; and 
now after four short years from the time of the 
offering, the devoted grandmother and the 
fondly-loving granddaughter are restored to 
each other in an infinitely happier home than 
that which, for the sake of their Saviour, they 
broke up at Templeton. Doubtless ere this, in 
celestial songs of gratitude to their beloved 
Saviour, with a heavenly ardor they have con- 
gratulated eacli other over the sacrifice that 
grace then enabled them to make. 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 31 

During the four years of lier life in India, 
most of you heard from time to time of her 
missionary labors ; so that even if I had leisure 
now it would be unnecessary to enlarge on them. 

In the acquisition of the native languages, for 
a long time she kept quite in advance of her 
husband, and would doubtless have continued 
to do so, had her health remained as firm as 
his. 

In no enterprise did she ever make more 
strenuous or prayerful ejfforts, than in the gath- 
ering of heathen girls into a school. She did in- 
deed succeed in getting some to attend very 
regularly, but they were few in number. Her 
success certainly did not seem to be commen- 
surate with her efforts. But if she did her 
duty, she could do no more, and the gracious 
reward will not be wanting. Doubtless Da- 
vid's honest desire to build the temple met with 
as large a reward of grace as if he had actually 
accomplished the work. 

But her success in instructing the native Chris- 
tian women and their children, was most gratify- 
ing. The children came to her every morning, 
and after instructing them for some hours in 
the common branches of education, she taught 



32 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

til em and their mothers various kinds of needle- 
work. This introduced them to quite a new 
way of spending their time, a way that did not 
seem to have ever before entered their minds. 
She has done them a great benefit in teaching 
them to improve their hours of leisure from 
strict domestic duties in this way, for whicli 
she received many most pleasing marks of sin- 
cere gratitude. Some of you have seen some 
of their work performed under her direction. 

Simply teaching them the work was only a 
small part of her care in the matter. They 
were entirely dependent upon her for selecting 
and purchasing the material, planning in what 
way to make it up, and disposing of it after it 
was manufactured. She was therefore a kind 
of commission merchant, purchasing for them 
by the wholesale the raw material, and retail- 
ing for them again their manufactured article. 
Although the pecuniary profits of her mercan- 
tile operations were a minus quantity, yet I am 
sure she enjoyed the business quite as much as 
merchants usually do in filling their coffers. 
Part of her interest in this work arose from the 
excellent opportunity it gave her of daily con- 
versing with the women and children in an in- 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 33 

formal manner on religious subjects, as well as 
the common duties of life. Like her grand- 
mother, she had a peculiar aptness for doing 
good in this way. The amount of good she 
really accomplished in this department of her 
labors, I believe can scarcely be overestimated. 

Several of the girls that she instructed are 
now ill the mission boarding-school for girls at 
Delira, pursuing the same course of education 
under the care of Mrs. Herron. Soon these 
girls will become the mothers in our Israel 
here. With such a training as they are now 
receiving, they will be fitted for doing incalcu- 
lably more for the advancement of Christianity 
in India than their predecessors could do. In- 
telligent religious female influence is now, most 
undoubtedly, one cliief desideratum in the evan- 
gelization of India. I trust this boarding- 
school at Dehra will yet do wonders towards 
securing this great desideratum. I bespeak for 
it the earnest prayers of you all. 

I have discovered a scrap written in her 
hand, which she evidently prepared as a kind 
of a skeleton of a discourse, as preachers would 
call it, to assist her memory in making some 
remarks to the native Christian women, prob- 



34 BEIEP MEMORIAL OF 

ably in tlieir weekly prayer-meeting, which was 
established shortly after we settled at Saha- 
runpiir. From some references in it, it seems 
likely that it was prepared on the occasion 
of the death of a little orphan boy, John H. 
Brown, named after the worthy superintendent 
of the Sabbath-school of the Rev. Dr. McLeod's 
church, New York. You would perhaps like 
to see the skeleton of a Hindustani serm,on by 
her. I will give under each word its transla- 
tion into English, from which you Avill be able 
to pick out the meaning of the whole, although 
in English the composition will not appear 
very rhetorical. 

Meri Piydri Bahin — Yih achcha waqt hai 
My Dear Sisters — This good time is 

ki ham apne dilon ko azmawen ki we Khuda 

that we our hearts to examine, that they God 

ke nazar men achcha hain ki nihin. 

of sight in good are or not. 

Khuda is waqt, ham ko, buland awaz se 
God this time us to high voice with 

bulata hai, ki ham apne Khuda se milne 

calUng is, that we our God with meeting 

ke liye taiyar howen. 

for ready be. 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 35 

KliLida, liam men se, bar ek ko apne kam 
God us among from every one to liis work 

ke karne ko bulata liai. 

of the doing to calling is. 

Ek liafta guzri, palile se zayada zor se 

One week ago, before from more loud from 
bulata hai. 
calling is. 

Hamko, uski awaz ko suuua chahiye. 

Us to His voice to hear it is necessary. 

Aur clialiiye ki uske kliidmat karne 

And it is necessary that His service the doing 
men ziyada koshish. karen. 
in more effort make. 

Aur zarur hai ki ab ham dil o jan 

And necessary is that now we, heart and soul 
se dua mdngen ki hamari larke, jaldt se, 
with, pray that our children, quickly, 

Yisuh Masih par Iman lawen ; aur ki we 
Jesus Christ upon faith bring ; and that they 
Khuda ke khauf aur danc4i men barhen. 
God of fear and wisdom in increase. 

While she was so much interested in promot- 
ing the welfare of those around her, she was 
not forgetful of her old acquaintances in 
America. Of some of them she could scarcely 
ever speak without expressing the most anx- 



36 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

ious solicitude regarding their eternal welfare. 
I have found a scrap of lier writing, without 
name or date, which is evidently a pa,rt of a 
letter intended for one such person. Although 
she was not a very prolific writer of letters of 
mere friendship, you will see from this that she 
sometimes found leisure to write for the simple 
purpose of doing good. 

"Let me ask you," she writes, "have you 
looked to the things pertaining to your soul's 
welfare ? Do you believe from the heart, that 
you have nothing more to do in preparation for 
another world ? Ask yourself seriously, Am I 

prepared to die ? Do not tell me, dear , that 

God is merciful and cannot bear to see his 
creatures suffer, and that there can be no such 
thing as everlasting punishment. Yes, he is 
merciful, but he is also just. If we go to him, 
he promises us eternal life; but if we reject him, 
it is just as certain we shall have eternal misery. 

" Do not say, dear , that you have accepted 

him ; for it is written, ' By their fruits ye shall 
know them.' Do the people of the world know 
you to be a child of God by your fruits? 
Think a moment ; what are the fruits by which 
they know you to be such? Are your walk 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 37 

and conversation sucli as become a child of 
God ? Do those around you, particularly your 
Himily, see that you are carefid always to keep 
the Sabbath holy ; that you do not even think 
or talk about worldly things; that you are 
careful to converse only on sacred things, and 
read only religious books on that holy day? 
Is one of your fruits morning and evening fam- 
ily worship? Do you teach your little ones 
about this great and holy Being who has done 
so much for you ? I am afraid you do not. I 
fear your fruits show you to be only of the 
world. 

'' And now, dear ^, I have one request to 

make, and that is, that you daily study your 
Bible and ask God to direct you hy his Holy Spirit 
to read it understandingly . Go as a child to it, 
and try to learn from it what you ought to do ; 
and as it teaches, so do. Do not go trying to 
prove this or that or the other thing. 

" It has pleased God to lay you on a bed of 
sickness several times; and twice, within my 
recollection, to bring you very near the grave. 
And it has pleased him to restore you again, 
and to grant a few more days to you to pre- 
pare for heaven. Now let me entreat of you 



38 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

not to put it off longer, but come now while 
you may. 

" I beg you, dear , to think over these 

things, and to strive now to become a follower 
of the meek and lowly Jesus. I shall continue 
to pray for this so long as I live." 

With regard to another such person, 1 find 
the following in a kind of a journal, in which 
she appears to have only occasionally written 
at her daily private devotions; for like her 
good grandmother, it was her custom to retire 
daily at ten o'clock for secret prayer. 

" May 12. To-day I received letters from my 

dear home : from my dear , my beloved 

, and my truly dear . Oh how my 

heart bleeds for her. She is yet without God, 
without Christ in the world. Oh how I ought 
to humble myself in the dust for her. Oh, my 
heavenly Father, do thou in much mercy spare 
her life, lengthen out her day of grace, at least 
till she turn unto thee. Bless the influence of 
her dear pastor over her. Oh, draw her heart 
to thyself. Oh that my eyes were a river of 
water, that I might weep day and night for her. 
Oh give me faith to believe that tliou art able 
to and wilt turn her from the error of her 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 39 

ways to thyself. Oh bless the letter that may 
have readied her ere this. May every word 
bring home the truth to her heart, that without 
thee she cannot live." 

I fear too many of us quite too seldom write 
such letters, and offer such prayers as these. 

In no work, I think, did she engage with 
greater relish, than in visiting the heathen women 
of the neighboring villages at their own houses. 
But it was only a short time before the com- 
mencement of her fatal disease, that she felt 
sufficiently at home in the native languages to 
perform such visits with comfort and advan- 
tage. I have no doubt you would have enjoyed 
seeing her seated on a chdrpdi — a native bed, 
used also for sitting on during the day — with 
twenty or thirty native women and children 
standing around her, or sitting on the ground, 
chattering that strange topsy-turvy language 
of which I gave you a specimen. Doubtless 
you would be willing to take some trouble to 
see such a sight. I cannot show you the sight, 
but perhaps I may assist you a little in imagin- 
ing the scene, by giving you an extract or two 
from a little book, in which she seems to have 
commenced, at one time, a kind of journal of 



40 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

these labors — evidently intended to assist her 
in the discharge of such duties, by helping her 
to remember the circumstances of the places she 
might visit. In these visits she usually took 
one or more of the native Christian women 
along with her. 

"April U, [1858.] Took Eliza [wife of Rev. 
I. W. J. Wylie] with me to Patanpura, and met 
with a more cordial welcome than I expected. 
The women and children flocked around me, and 
talked so fast I could scarcely understand what 
they said. Upon invitation they promised to 
call on me at my own house to-morrow." 

"April 15. Contrary to my expectation, more 
than a dozen of the women and children came. 
I talked with them, showed them the interior of 
our house, and answered innumerable questions 
about the strange things they saw. In the 
evening took Eliza and Suhani" [Kanwar Sain's 
wife, who was the first person I received to the 
church, and who has proved a most worthy 
member] " with me, and went to the same vil- 
lage. Having been previously invited by an 
old woman to call on her the next time I came 
to that village, we went first to her house. She 
invited us to be seated on chdrmis, and soon at 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 41 

least thirty women and children were around 
us. After talking to them for a time, they asked 
us to read to them, and Eliza read the first part 
of the sermon on the mount. Four or five old 
women said they believed in God, and wished 
to become Christians. Eliza told them that 
there were two ways of wishing to come to 
Christ: one is in word, and the other in heart; 
and that Christ would only accept of those 
that came in the latter way. They then began 
to boast of their good works. Desiring to hear 
more reading, I read them from the sixth cha,p- 
ter of Matthew. As we were leaving, the old 
woman asked me to take a drink of milk, and 
seemed quite surprised and delighted that I 
consented. ... Oh that God would bless us in 
this work, and that he would open my mouth 
so that I might fully and clearly point these 
poor creatures to the Lamb of God, which tak- 
eth away the sin of the world." 

"April 16. Visited three houses in a village 
on the canal west of our house. Although many 
were out at work in the fields, those we saw 
treated us politely. One woman was spinning, 
and Sohaui worked a little for her, which 
seemed to please her very much." 



42 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

Had she from whose journal the above is 
extracted been spared in health a few years 
longer in India, I have no doubt she would 
have accomplished great good in that depart- 
ment of labor. Few are as well fitted as she 
was, for obtaining access to such places. 

I must now introduce a subject which I fear 
will not be as pleasant as the preceding, to 
either the reader or the writer, although it 
may be quite as profitable to both. 

THE SUFFERER. 

I may as well frankly confess, that it is only 
after several abortive attempts, and now with 
the utmost difiiculty, that I am able to come to 
the determination to proceed in some way with 
this part of the narrative. For the purpose of 
refreshing my memory as to dates, etc., I glanced 
over some old papers ; but instead of this exer- 
cise fitting me to proceed, it only made prog- 
ress impossible, for a length of time which I 
am ashamed to confess. I am sure you will 
pardon me if I should here seem to be somewhat 
more brief than you expected. 

I cannot date her last illness later than June, 
1858. It was then that the disease to which 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 43 

she had been more or less liable for the pre- 
vious five or six years became so alarming that 
tlie physician was consulted. For some months 
we had employed a teacher of the native lan- 
guages for each of us, as it seemed necessary 
for her to pursue quite a different course of 
study from mine. I therefore knew less of the 
manner and extent of her labors than previous- 
ly. Nevertheless I am surprised that I did not 
learn, in some way, or indeed that she did not 
distinctly tell me what the doctor on close in- 
quiry discovered — that for several weeks, at the 
completion of some of her daily duties, it was 
a common thing for her whole frame to be in 
such a tremor for half an hour or an hour, that 
she was unable to hold her pen with sufficient 
steadiness to write. The labors which were 
followed by this tremor were teaching the girl's 
school, and translating with the munshi — na- 
tive teacher of Hindustani. 

The physician very naturally ascribed the 
aggravation of her old disease to excessive 
effort and interest in the discharge of these 
duties. I this moment discovered that her 
most earnest labors in visiting the heathen 
women at their houses were shortly before this 



44 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

sickness, and often on returning from these 
visits, the first thing she would say to me was, 
" Oh how I wish I could talk Hindustani as I 
can English !" She indeed confessed that the 
chief reason of her not allowing me to know 
earlier the full extent of her weakness, was the 
fear that I should stop her from studying with 
the mimshi; and she hoped that Avith a little 
more care she might regain her strength with- 
out discontinuing any of her regular duties. 
Her medical adviser ordered her at once to 
Dehra or Landour, for change of air, etc. He 
said that one reason of his ordering her away 
from Saharunpur was, that he knew if she re- 
mained there she would not be able to dis- 
engage her mind sufficiently from her usual 
labors; and he charged me to be careful to 
prevent her from pursuing her studies while 
absent. 

Having been away from home about a month 
she returned, but not with the full approbation 
of her physician, who, after she had been home 
six or seven weeks, sent her away again. She 
returned in November, improved somewhat in 
health, but much less than we had hoped for. 

Shortly after arriving home, she started wiih 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 45 

mc for our annual meeting of the mission, held 
that year, 1858, at Lodiana. It was at that 
meeting, which may perhaps be called the 
revival meeting, that the invitations for the 
World^s Concert of Prayer were issued. Per- 
haps she is still thankful that a good Provi- 
dence arranged it so that she should attend 
that remarkable meeting, and that the last an- 
nual meeting she was to attend should be such 
a meeting. She always enjoyed meeting with 
her fellow-missionaries, and did not forget them, 
as you will see, in her last hours. Her affec- 
tion for them, I believe, was fully reciprocated. 
More than one of them has said that no one 
was a more general favorite with the members 
of the mission than she. At that meeting she 
had an opportunity of bidding, what turned 
out to be, her last farewell to most of them. 

It was her impression, I think, that she had 
gained as much strength in attending the meet- 
ing as she had in the same time at Dehra or 
Landour ; and on her return home in Decem- 
ber, she at once resumed most of her missionary 
labors. But these were her last, and were con- 
tinued but a short time. 

For a few days she had been suffering from 



46 BEIEF MEMORIAL OF 

a cold, with occasional fever and ague, but all 
so slight as scarcely to attract our special no- 
tice ; when about the fifteenth of January, 1 859, 
the wife of the government surgeon at the sta- 
tion happened to call, and on learning her state 
suggested the propriety of our calling in her 
husband, which was done. He discovered that 
she had been ill with a slight mucous dysentery 
for probably nearly a year past, without her 
fully realizing the nature of the disease. She 
then began to be afflicted with the most excru- 
ciating pains, suddenly seizing her, first in one 
part of the body, then in another — now in her 
arm, then in her leg or shoulder. I cannot de- 
scribe to you the intensity of the suffering she 
then endured for about eight days. The station 
doctor called in another physician for counsel, 
and both of them attended her daily for more 
than a week. I shall never forget the kindness 
of these physicians and their wives. Indeed, 
all our acquaintances, both European and na- 
tive, showed a sympathy with us, and an inter- 
est in our welfare, which we had no reason to 
expect. The kind way in which this interest 
was often shown impressed us very much. Gen- 
eral Eckford, C. B. — a good pious man, son-in- 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 47 

law to the late James Haklane, the eminent 
Scotch lay divine — who had been in the habit 
of calling frequently during the whole time of 
lier sickness at Sahiirunpiir, wrote every morn- 
ing inquiring for her health, and called every 
evening when she was able to see him, during 
the three weeks of her very severe illness. The 
Civil and Session's judge, and his lady, could 
scarcely have shown more interest in their own 
children. One day he wrote such a kind note 
to us that, perhaps in connection with other 
kindnesses, it brought the tears freely to the 
eyes of both the sufferer and myself ; and some 
months after this, when he heard of our being 
advised to go to America, he showed the sin- 
cerity of his interest in us, by offering the use 
of his purse to any amount we might need in 
going home. This he did under the impression 
that we were depending on our own resources 
for the expenses of our voyage ; but as this 
was not the case, we of course could not accept 
the generous offer. 

About the lirst of February her pains were 
entirely removed, and other diseases much 
mitigated, so that she rode out with me in the 
buggy several times, and took a few short 



48 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

walks. To regain her former strength, her 
medical attendants advised a visit of a few 
weeks to Dehra or Landour. So fair were 
her prospects, that neither of us felt the neces- 
sity of my abandoning my post and remaining 
with her ; but they said, that one reason she did 
not receive greater benefit from her visit than 
the summer before, was her not being so happy 
absent from her husband, and they would not 
advise her going again, unless I went and staid 
with her while she remained. 

Accordingly, on the 7th February we left 
for Dehra, hoping that in a few weeks she 
would be as strong as ever, when we should 
both return to our labors again. How fre- 
quently we receive lessons on the uncertainty 
of all earthly things. 

For some time after our arrival at Dehra, she 
improved very rapidly. It was at this time 
that I made a most interesting visit to Bignour, 
from which I was recalled on account of her 
disease taking a very unfavorable turn. Her 
chief ailment had never entirely left her, and 
towards the end of February, in some way she 
caught a severe cold, which very much aggra- 
vated her other complaints. 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 49 

All the time we were at Dehra we were the 
guests of our excellent and dear friends the 
Herrons. We have never found anywhere, and 
could not wish to find, better friends than they 
have been. We felt as much at home in their 
house as in our own. They spared no sacri- 
fice to make the invalid comfortable and happy. 
Brother Herron did what every brother would 
not do — went out and lived in a tent, that we 
might have comfortable rooms. 

About the middle of March, the severe shift- 
ing pains experienced at Saharunpur, returned 
again ; and in several other respects the suffer- 
ing invalid began again to get worse. The 
first three days of April were days of most fear- 
ful suffering. I can safely say that I never 
witnessed suffering at all approaching that in 
severity. So acute was the pain, that some of 
her lady friends were sometimes compelled to 
leave her room, that they might not add to her 
distress by weeping in her presence. Although 
she could not conceal the wrenching pains with 
which her body was racked, yet I have never 
known that any one ever heard a murmur es- 
cape her lips. The tranquil patience she main- 
tained during those days of agony, was the 

CaJJeiM'ood. 4 



50 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

wonder of her physicians, and indeed of every 
one that saw her. After those pains left her, 
she told me she never in her life before enjoyed 
so sensible a realization of the Saviour's pres- 
ence, as she did when the pains were the most 
acute. The nearness of his presence seemed to 
be in proportion to the severity of the bodily 
distress. She said it was "quite worth while 
enduring the outward pain for the sake of the 
inward joy.'' Here is another instance, to add 
to the thousands we have had, of one like the 
Son of God walking with His people in the 
midst of the fire, " while a hair of their head 
is not singed." You will shortly see, I think, 
that her experience in this respect was some- 
thing quite unusual. I do not recollect ever 
hearing of such remarkable joy, in such severe 
pain, as she experienced. 

April 7th, we left for Landour, to stay at 
the Retreat till the beginning of the rainy 
season, when we hoped to return to Saharunpur. 
This change also was followed at first by favor- 
able results. 

April 10th, for the past four years, had been 
a memorable day to us. There was no day of 
the year Avhose return she hailed with greater 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 51 

joy. She could not celebrate it this year as 
formerly ; but Providence, as if to gratify her to 
some extent on the last of such occasions she 
should enjoy on earth, granted her better health 
that day than any day for some weeks previous, 
and better than she ever afterwards enjoyed. 
She walked a little alone, and several times 
across the room with help. Although very 
weak, she insisted on kneeling in prayer by my 
side, and leading in that exercise herself. I 
will give you an extract from an entry in my 
journal on that evening. 

" This is the fourth anniversary of our wed- 
ding-day — four years now since our marriage. 
In reference to this, she offered such a prayer 
as I never heard her present before, for its self- 
consecration, and its nearness of approach to 
the divine presence. She reviewed the chief 
blessings of our lives, but dwelt particularly 
upon that of our marriage and the mercies we 

have enjoyed together since that time She 

has several times spoken of the extreme suffer- 
ing she endured a week ago to-day. She says 
all of that day in which her pains were the 
most severe, she was involuntarily saying in her 
mind, 'Hitherto hath the Lord helped me, and 



52 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

He will help me still.' In conversation to-day, 
she said she had not for years had the slight- 
est fear of death ; and she now thinks that as 
her ' Saviour has been so constantly with her in 
these very severe trials, she has more reason 
than before to feel sure that He will not for- 
sake her even in the passage of Jordan.' She 
has a firmer hope of glory to come than she 
ever had before, and thinks she has during the 
sickness made some progress in spiritual life. 
On this account, she heartily blesses God that 

he has sent these trials She enjoyed 

singing with me to-day very much." 

On the 13th, in the afternoon, a native woman 
who was waiting on her, came running to me 
from her room, in great consternation, saying, 
"Uem Sahib ap ko bulati hai" — The mistress 
is calling you. Hastening to her room, I found 
her leaning back in her chair before the fire, in 
a fainting fit, her body all in a tremor, while 
a native Christian woman, in great alarm, was 
trying to get her to speak. I laid her on her 
bed, and dashing a little water in her face, she 
at once revived. She says about two years be- 
fore she left America, she had three or four such 
fits, at times when she regarded herself as in 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 53 

her usual health. The station surgeon provi- 
dentially was on the road near our house, wlien 
he was sent for, and was by her side within 
fifteen minutes from the time I was called. 

Some hours after this, I accidentally noticed 
tears in her eyes, and asked her what was the 
matter, what troubled her. " Nothing troubles 
me," she says, "only I was feeling so happy.'' 
"What are you feeling happy about?" "My 
Saviour is so near to me, I have so many com- 
forts that many have not — good friends near me, 

etc. There's Mrs. B ," [a good Christian 

friend of ours, wife of a lieutenant-colonel in 
the army,] "has not been able to be off her bed 
for several weeks, and her husband cannot leave 
his post even to come and see her ; while I have 
you with me all the time, and Jesus is so near 
to me ; He's nearer me than you are ;" drawing 
me closer to herself by my hand, which was 
then in hers. After some other remarks were 
exchanged, she says, " Oh what a difference 
there is between knowing that God is present, 
and feeling Him ! I always know He is present, 
but I don't always /ee/ Him so." Then she 
went on to explain that when I saw the tears 
in her eyes, she thought "she almost saw the 



54 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

Saviour, leaning over her, comforting Ler, and 
seemed to feel the soft pressure of His hand on 
her head." She went on to say, "Our home is 
a very happy one, but it cannot be so much so 
as lieaven. I have been thinking how plea,sant 
it would be to die. There is only one dra>w- 

back; it is leaving you alone How 

pleasant it is to think that all my best friends 
who have died have gone to heaven, and I shall 
meet them there ; and all my best friends who 
are left alive will follow me, except perhaps 
two." .... I remarked that "perhaps she would 
follow themJ^ " Weil, no matter which goes 
first ; I mean that I shall some time see them 
there." 

Her medical attendant had advised us to be 
ready to remove at once to Dehra, when the 
rains would fairly set in. Accordingly, on the 
8th of June we left the Hills, intending to re- 
main in Dehra during the rainy season. On 
arriving there, the physician at that place, and 
all our friends, urged us to prepare at once to 
visit America. To determine on such a move 
was no slight trial to us both. But the posi- 
tive opinion of four physicians, being all that 
knew her case, and had an opportunity of ex- 



MRS. LIZZIE g.-caldp:r\vood. 55 

pressing their opinion on it, that such a step 
presented the only promise of recovery, the 
unanimous and urgent advice of our friends, 
together with our own fears founded on expe- 
rience as to the effects of rainy weather on her 
diseases, brought us at last to the full convic- 
tion that it was our duty to go. Although the 
event has been so mournful, yet I have never 
heard of any change of opinion regarding the 
propriety of the step. I still believe it was 
our duty to go. All things occur just as they 
are ordered on high : still there is every reason 
to believe that if we had not been unexpectedly 
detained for nearly a month at Allahabad and 
Calcutta, we should have been well out at sea 
while her strength remained ; in which case, ac- 
cording to all the medical opinions I have ob- 
tained on the subject, including the best in 
India, she had a fair prospect of arriving in 
America in a good state of health. 

Almost the only fear of the physicians was 
the journey down the country during the rains. 
But a merciful Providence ordered it so that 
we experienced not the least inconvenience 
from rainy weather. In the whole journey by 
carriage and railroad to Allahabad, a distance 



50 BRIEF MEMORIAL OP 

of 500 miles, we did not have half an hour's 
rain while we were on the road. The invalid 
I believe Avas in quite as good health when we 
reached Calcutta on the 23d of July, as when 
we left Dehra on the 28th of June. Changes 
of air always had an immediate good effect 
on her diseases, sometimes to a degree that 
quite surprised us. This advantage much more 
than compensated for the fatigue and other in- 
conveniences in the journey to Calcutta, as well 
as on that to the annual meeting before spoken 
of. On our arrival in Calcutta she rode in a 
carriage, apparently with perfect comfort, from 
the steamer in which we came from Allahabad 
to her boarding-house, a distance of about two 
miles. Some time after this, by the advice of 
her medical attendant, she took an hour's drive 
in a carriage. Having received benefit from 
this, she several times afterwards prepared to 
go out, but was always prevented by the inces- 
sant rain. 

The next day after our arrival in Calcutta, 
Dr. Macrae, one of the two most eminent phy- 
sicians of that city, kindly consented to attend 
the invalid, which he did most faithfully and 
skilfully, and notwithstanding the large amount 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 5*1 

of service he rendered, he most generously re- 
fused to accept of any remuneration. Indeed, 
of the eight physicians who attended her, only 
two accepted of any fee, and these two had ren- 
dered the least service. Dr. Macrae having, 
at our request, carefully examined the lungs of 
the patient, said, "There was not the slightest 
indication of any disease in them — that she 
could not expect to recover from her com- 
plaints, or regain strength, during the rains in 
either the mountains or the plains of India — 
that we had nothing to fear as regards the 
effects of a voyage on her health, if we could 
sail before she lost much more strength — that 
if we could get out of this wet climate soon, 
into the sea air, we had every reason to expect 
that in a few weeks her disease would disap- 
pear, and she arrive in America as strong and 
healthy as she had ever been." 

August 2, her disease became worse, and her 
pains and vomiting A^ery severe. 

One day about this time, after a most fearful 
flash of lightning and clap of thunder, she asked 
me to lie down on the bed by her side. " Why ?" 
I asked, "are you afraid?" Such a crash could 
not have failed to produce a shock upon the 



58 BEIEF MEMORIAL OF 

firmest nerves. " No, but such thunder startles 
me," was the reply. "But suppose the lightning 
should strike you dead, which is not at all im- 
possible ; what then ?" "Why, then I should be 
freed from all my pains." "How do you know 
that; have you never committed any sin?" "Yes, 
a great many ; I am a poor sinful creature, but 
Christ died to take away all my sins." 

That day she again spoke of never having 
had a fear of death for the past five or six 
years. I often feared that the death-scene 
might prove to be too severe a test for so con- 
fident an assurance of faith. But my fears, as 
you will see, have been most happily disappoint- 
ed. To me her experience is a most convincing 
evidence, that such a full assurance of faith is 
attainable as will not only bear the test of years 
of temptation, and the most severe afflictions, 
but will even brave the king of terrors in the 
last great struggle. I must be a dull scholar 
indeed, if in four years' companionship with such 
a teacher, and through such vicissitudes, I have 
not learned something of the value of such a 
constant assurance of a title to eternal life. Oh 
how sweetly comforting in affliction, liow assur- 
ing in alarm, how supporting in death, to be 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 59 

able to say, "I know tliat my Redeemer livctli/' 
Let us "give all diligence to make our calling 
and election sure." 

August 11, Thursday, about 10 o'clock a. m., 
I came into lier room, having been absent for 
over an hour, and found her sleeping. But her 
look was so deathlike, that I was instantly con- 
vinced of the truth of what Mrs. Lish, our host- 
ess, who indeed was like a mother to us, had 
labored for several days to impress upon my 
mind, that there was real danger that she might 
not survive to reach the ship. As I could not 
repress my emotions, I retired to a distant room, 
and gave free vent to my feelings. It was 
nearly two hours before I could gain sufficient 
control of myself to return to her room. My 
great struggle was on that day. With about 
as much fear as hope, from that time I tried to 
say, from tlie heart, " Thy will he done^ 

When you have read what I have further to 
say, I think you will agree with me, that I may 
appropriately designate her closing hours, 

THE TRIUMPH. 

If ever any one, at the very verge of the 
tomb, has been able to say, " grave, where is 



60 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

thy victory? death, where is thy sting?" it 
was she of whom I write. 

August 13, Saturday, about 10 o'clock a. m., 
she fell into a state of such weakness that Mrs. 
Lish, for nearly an hour, watched for her last 
breath, although, from various circumstances, I 
felt confident she would again revive. Having 
become quiet for a moment, and closing her 
eyes ; in a tone that I thought the sleeper would 
not hear, I remarked, "Now she will take a lit- 
tle sleep, and wake up feeling better." Without 
appearing to open her eyes, she brought my ear 
close to her mouth, and whispered, "I shall soon 
sleep in Jesus' bosom." 

After about half an hour's sleep, she woke up 
much revived. I suggested that if she really 
had such thoughts as she expressed on going 
to sleep, there would at least be no harm in her 
preparing for the worst. "Well," said she, "I 
do wish to send some messages. You take your 
book, and I will tell you what to write." She 
then dictated two letters to near relatives, one 
of them quite long. Those letters do not belong 
to me, so I have no right to give them to you. 
But I may say that in both, she spoke of being 
"glad she had come to India," and urged upon 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 61 

those to whom they were addressed, to "be 
always in readiness for death and eternity.'' 
In one of those letters occur the words, "I 

GO TO BE WITH MY DEAR SaVIOUR," which sllC 

expressed in a tone and manner that made a 
deep impression upon my mind, an impression 
which I would not wish should be, and which I 
feel never can be erased. The words, the tone 
of voice, the expression of countenance, indicat- 
ed such a fervor of love, such a clear appre- 
hension of the divine Person of whom she spoke, 
that the pencil almost dropped from my fingers, 
and a kind of awe crept over me, as if I had 
unexpectedly found myself in the sacred pres- 
ence on high. 

She sent short messages to several others ; as, 
" Tell the missionaries of our mission, and their 
wives, that I love them all, especially Mrs. Her- 
ron." Her message to every one was, *' Prepare 
for death." She gave me particular directions 
about giving mementos of her to a number of 
her relatives and friends. 

I think it was the afternoon of this day, Sat- 
urday, when she asked me to sing the one hun- 
dred and forty -eighth psalm, second version, 
which we always sung to the tune Lenox. You 



62 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

will remember the psalm from the first stanza, 
which is : 

*' The Lord of heaven confess, 

On high his glory raise. 

Him let all angels bless, 

Him all his armies i)raise. 
Him glorify, smi, moon, and stars ; 
Ye higher spheres, and cloudy sky." 

She frequently joined, but was too weak to 
sing much. As I ended she remarked, " The 
words and the tune both chord exactly with my 
feelings." 

On the morning of this day her medical at- 
tendant expressed his fears that she would not 
live to reach the ship. The incessant rains had 
acted fearfully on her diseases as well as on her 
strength in general. The ten days we were 
delayed at Allahabad, every day expecting a 
steamer to start, and the three weeks we were 
detained at Calcutta before we could secure a 
passage to America, were, I consider, the prox- 
imate cause of the fatal event. These being 
matters so entirely beyond our control, and 
which we could not possibly have foreseen, we 
have the less room for self-condemnation in the 
matter. What Providence does is done right. 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 63 

I may say here too, that had the ship in which 
we had taken passage sailed a week or t\vo 
earlier, as was at first expected, the event 
might have been even worse than it was. At 
that time a fearful storm of several days swept 
over the whole Indian ocean, in which multi- 
tudes of ships and lives were lost, and one man 
who accompanied the remains of the departed 
to their resting-place, and who sailed the day 
she was to have sailed, found the next day, in 
a storm, a watery grave. We have therefore 
some special reason to feel that, in our case, 
"He hath done all things well." 

It having become known that her medical 
attendant had given up hopes of her recovery, 
we were advised to call in another physician, 
who had obtained some celebrity for the cure 
of severe cases of such diseases as hers. To 
this. Dr. Macrae in the most gentlemanly man- 
ner consented. The new doctor being called 
and undertaking the case, as well as from other 
circumstances, we felt much encouraged. Mrs. 
Lish and I, supposing her to be asleep, were 
speaking of the encouraging prospects of her 
even yet recovering, when she spoke out, say- 
ing, "I don't know that I wish to get well." 



64 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

"Why," said I, "would you not like to labor 
more for the spread of the gospel among tlie 
heatlien ?" She hesitatingly said, "Yes ;" then, 
after a pause, she spoke out in a loud lively 
tone, as if she had suddenly made some pleasant 
discovery: "I'll tell you just exactly what I 
wish — I wish that to be which will be most for 
the glory of God." "But you can do nothing 
for the salvation of the heathen in the other 
world," said I. " I expect my Saviour has some- 
thing there for me to do, or he would not call 
me there," was the reply. 

At this moment, as I write, I do not recollect 
any passage of Scripture tliat would justify the 
assertion that glorified saints can do nothing 
for the salvation of the heathen. She of whom 
I write believed that, in the world to come, 
there would be some sphere of active benevo- 
lence for the redeemed, some work in which 
they might do good to others. She now knows 
whether she was right or not. At present it 
more concerns us to improve every opportunity 
we now enjoy of doing good to others, than to 
know whether there will be such opportunities 
in the world to come. She did not neglect the 
present in anticipation of the future. Her 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 65 

opinion in this matter may indicate a marked 
trait in her character — her delight in doing 
good to others. She felt that heaven, to be 
heaven, must afford, in some way, a sphere for 
active benevolence. 

Lord's day, August 14th, she was very com- 
fortable all day, much better than she had been 
the day before. The new course of medicine 
produced a most decided improvement in her 
symptoms. At one of his visits that day, the 
doctor said if she continued improving for four 
days as she had the past twenty-four hours, he 
would pronounce her out of danger. He made 
a singular remark, which may be noticed as 
corroborating what has been already referred 
to — her cheerful patience under severe trials. 
He said, "Three things particularly promote 
recovery : good spirits, the power of medicine, 
and the grace of God. This patient evidently 
has the first in a remarkable degree ; I shall 
try to apply the second, and I hope the third 
will not be wanting." In moving from place to 
place, she necessarily had frequent changes of 
physicians, having had eight different ones at- 
tending on her more or less during that sick- 
ness, every one of whom remarked, some of 



66 BRIEF MEMORIAL OF 

them with great surprise, her astonishingly 
cheerful patience. No one could be in her 
presence for even an hour without observing 
this. I doubt, however, whether all understood 
the secret of it — her constant and vivid realiza- 
tion of her Saviour's presence, her unwavering 
assurance that he was making " all things work 
together for her good." All could easily see 
her courageous patience ; but all might not ob- 
serve the form of " one like the Son of God 
walking in the midst of the fire with her,'' 
" bending over her, comforting her " so sweetly, 
that even tears of joy were brought to her eyes. 
This was a clue to her constant peace and joy 
which every attendant did not discover. 

So much encouraged was I that day, that 
frequently I was unable to refrain from weep- 
ing with joy. How little we know what a day 
may bring forth ! The invalid, however, evi- 
dently continued to look upon her great change 
as near at hand. As she was lying quietly 
meditating, she broke out singing that beauti- 
ful sacred song, 

" Asleep in Jesus ! Oh how sweet, 
To be for such a slumber meet," etc. 

She sung two stanzas with apparently as firm 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 6t 

and clear a voice as ever in her life. Indeed, 
she seemed to have caught inspiration from 
above, for her usually rich, clear voice appeared 
to have acquired a more than earthly sweet- 
ness. I wish you could have heard her voice 
on that occasion. You can find the hymn in 
" The Sacred Songs," published by the Ameri- 
can Tract Society ; there set to the music to 
which she sung it. Dr. Duff, at her request, 
prayed with her to-day ; and after he left, she 
spoke of having enjoyed his prayer in an un- 
usual degree. 

Monday, August 15, The eventful day ! As 
I was standing at the window, gazing at the 
rising sun, which, as had seldom been the case 
for many weeks, was that morning ascending 
beautifully into a fair and cloudless sky, before 
I was aware that the sleeper had awoke, I was 
startled by her commencing to sing, 

" Jesus can make a dying bed 

Feel soft as downy pillows are. 
While on his breast I lean my head, 
And breathe my life out sweetly there." 

She did not sing this with as firm a voice as 
she sung the day before. This was her last 
song on earth. How exceedingly appropriate ! 



68 BRIEF MEMORIAL OP 

The piece, of which this is the last verse, is also 
in " Sacred Songs." 

At worship this morning, she asked me to 
read the fourteenth chapter of John's gospel, 
" Let not your heart be troubled,'^ etc. When 
I had read to the end of the third verse she 
interrupted the reading, saying, "There, that's 
enough ; now pray." This, I presume, was the 
last scripture she read or heard read in this 
life. Again, how appropriate ! That chapter 
and the hundred and twenty-first and twenty- 
third psalms were her favorite portions of the 
Bible. She was accustomed to repeat or sing 
them when she wished to turn her thoughts 
upon religious subjects, but had neither the 
Bible nor psalm-book at hand. Those psalms 
must have become her favorites in her later 
years, as it was the Scotch version she sung, 
which she never had seen till I presented her 
with a copy. Well I remember the calm trust- 
ing tone with which, when something caused 
fear or anxiety in our minds, she would repeat, 

" I to the hills will lift mine eyes, 

From whence doth come mine aid ; 
My safety cometh from the Lord, 
Who heaven and earth hath made." 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 69 

That morning, both of the doctors having 
called, at different times, she asked them 
whether they thought she ought to attempt to 
go aboard the ship. They both unhesitatingly 
said, By all means go ; that presents the only 
hope. Dr. Macrae told me alone — not with 
dry eyes — that he feared I must give up all 
hope of her living long ; but still, if she were 
alive when the vessel sailed, by all means go 
aboard. Just after he left, I received a note 
from Captain Hickey, saying that our luggage 
must be at the vessel by 4 p. m. that day, and 
we ourselves might come the next morning. 
No time was to be lost. By about 3 p. m., I 
had sent off our luggage to the ship, when I 
was sent for to remove the invalid from the 
sitting-room, into which we had carried her on 
the couch three or four hours before, back into 
her bedroom. I expressed surprise that she 
should wish to be taken back at that time. 
She said she "felt strangely." She had just 
reached her room when the Rev. Mr. Pourie, 
pastor of a Free Kirk congregation in Calcutta, 
called. I had talked with him for a few min- 
utes, when Mrs. Lish called me. I found the 
poor sufferer becoming very restless, wishing 



TO BRIEF MEMORIAL OP 

frequently to liave lier position changed. But 
I did not really fear that she was then going, 
although a thought of that had crossed my 
mind at her expression that she " felt strange- 
ly/' until perhaps about half-past four p. M. 
On my asking her if she felt happy, she replied, 
"Yes, in mind.^^ "Are you afraid?" "No,'' 
with a shake of the head. " Is Jesus with 
you ?" Not in a whisper, but in so loud and 
cheerful a voice that every one in the room 
was startled, she replied, " Yes, he is." Short- 
ly after this, with an unusual effort, she turned 
herself from her right to her left side, so that 
she could extend her right hand, saying, " JVoio 
I am going home ; ' ComCy Lord Jesus, come 
quickly ."^ ^^ These were her last words. She 
then held out her hand towards me, and liter- 
ally shaking my hand, with an energy that 
quite surprised me, she smiled, much as if we 
were parting only for an afternoon. She then 
held out her hand successively to each of our 
friends in the room, each of whom took her 
hand and kissed her. After this, for perhaps 
two minutes, she continued looking up quite 
beyond us, with such a smile and expression of 
countenance as I never before saw. I felt sure 



MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. 71 

she was seeing something very pleasant, and made 
a move, involuntarily, to ask her what it was, 
but was prevented by those around me. She 
then with a slight knitting of the brow, as if in 
momentary pain, closed her eyes, her face resum- 
ed its former smile, and all was over. Thus about 
5 p. M. she sunk to rest, or rather rose to glory. 

The first words after this were whispered by 
the nurse, who, I presume, had witnessed scores 
of death-scenes : " What an easy death ; I never 
saw the like of it." 

With difficulty, with a bursting heart, I have 
reached this point in the narration. You must 
excuse me from adding much. I do not re- 
member ever before having witnessed the death 
of any one. I cannot describe to you my feel- 
ings of that hour. But you may think, if you 
choose, of a person suddenly coming to his sen- 
ses, and finding himself sick, alone, and desti- 
tute, in the midst of an unknown waste wilder- 
ness. Oh the desolation! 

Next morning, Dr. Duff conducting the last sad 
religious services, her redeemed dust was laid in 
the old Scotch burial-ground, there to repose till 
the Lord himself shall come in his glory, when she 
shall appear among those who " shall rise first." 



T2 



BRIEF MEMORIAL OP 



I have caused the spot to be marked by a 
neat marble slab, a drawing of which, together 
with the engraving on the black marble tablet 




MRS. LIZZIE G. CALDERWOOD. t3 

which is inserted in it, I herewith inclose. In 
the same burial-ground rest the ashes of Dr. 
Lowrie's first wife, and of two wives of Mr. 
Morrison, one of our missionaries now at Rawal 
Pindi. 

" Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord 
from henceforth ; yea, saith the Spirit, that they 
may rest from their labors; and their works 
do follow them." Let me live the life, that I 
may "die the death of the righteous;" then I 
also shall be prepared, with my last breath, to 



"NOW I 'M GOING HOME." 

"I'm going home — prepare the bridal wreath I 
My Saviour bids my happy spirit come : 
Damp not with tears the Christian's bed of death; 
Rejoice, I 'm going home ! 

" The dove hath found her nest, the storm-tossed found 
A place of rest beyond the dashing foam 
Of grief's wild billows — thither am I bound. 
Joy* joy, I 'm going home ! 

^'Earth's flowers all fade; those fadeless roses blow: 
Earth's sunniest hght is shaded by the tomb ; 
Earth's loves all slumber in the vault below. 
Death dwells not in that home. 



T4 BRIEF MEMORIAL, ETC. 

''I see the city of the blest on high 

With the freed spirit's ken. I come, I come ! 
Ye calHng voices, catch my heart's reply : 
Home 1 now I 'm going horned 

KAGG. 

Ever yours, most dutifully and affectionately, 
W. CALDERWOOD. 



THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY 

SPh/iUa/l ilia faLLoiauin^f cuizcuiq^ ailic/- 
uiaf^/nA cLcla/LtccL ia Jfiuf^LLU^ei^L fai^ ilie 

BUNYAN'S PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

DODDRIDGE-S RISE AND PROGRESS OF RELIGION 

IN THE SOUL. 

PIKE'S PERSUASIVES TO EARLY PIETY, GUIDE 

FOR YOUNG DISCIPLES, AND RELIGION AND 

ETERNAL LIFE. 

BAXTER'S SAINTS' REST, AND CALL TO THE 
UNCONVERTED. 

ALLEINES ALAR^L 
JAMES' ANXIOUS INQUIRER, AND CHRISTIAN 
PROGRESS. 
PRACTICAL PIETY, by Hannah More. 
WILBERFORCE'S PRACTICAL VIEW OF CHRIS- 
TIANITY. 

FOSTER'S APPEAL TO THE YOUNG. 
JAY'S CHRISTIAN CONTEMPLATED. 

SHERMAN'S GUIDE TO AN ACQUAINTANCE 

WITH GOD. 

THE SPRING-TIME OF LIFE, by Dr. Magie. 

WHY DO I LIVE? by Rev.. Thomas Smyth, D. D. 

COME TO JESUS; CALL TO PRAYER; YOUR 

SOUL— IS IT SAFE? 



FOR SALE AT THE SOCIETY'S DEPOSITORIES, AND 
IN MANY CITIES AND TOWNS. 



THE AMERtCAN TRACT SOCtETV 

Issue more than 2,000 distinct publications, of which 
453 arc vohuuos ot" hiigcr or smaller size ; incliidiuj; 

THE RELIGIOUS OR PASTOR'S LIBRARY, 
Of 25 volumes 12mo, cloth 5glO. 

THE EVANGELICAL FAMILY LIBILIRY, 

IG volumes, $5 50. 

Also the continuation of this Librar}', bound to match ; 
21 volumes, $7 50. 

THE YOUTH'S LIBRARY, 

Of great value for Families and Sabbath-schools ; 

70 volumes, $10. 

THE SOCIETY'S SERIES OF TRACTS, 
13 volumes of 500 pages each, in a set, $6 50. 

GALLAUDET'S SCRIPTURE BIOGRArHY, 
11 volumes, $2 So. 

HANNAH MORE'S STORIES FOR THE YOUNG, 

60 engravings, 8 volumes, $1 50. 

Volumes and Tracts in German, French, Si^anish, and 
other languages. 

PACKETS of Tracts and Children's Tracts, many of 
them beautifully Illustrated. 



FOR SAI.E AT THE SOCIETY'S DEPOSITOUIES, 

AND BY B00KSELT.EK9 IN THE rillNCIPAIi 

CITIES AND TOWNS. 



JV^cdnjcddn jlLcuuijcdA fat"- the S^cudnet 
and ^^loAel, 



BOGATZKY'S GOLDEN TREASURY ; CLARKE'S 
SCRIPTURE PROMLSES; DAILY SCRIPTURE EX- 
POSITOR; SUMMARY OF SCRIPTURE TRUTU ; 
MASON'S SELECT REMAINS. 

ADVICE TO A MARRIED COUPLE; GIFT FOR 
MOURNERS; PORTEUS' EVIDENCES; BOOK OF 
PROVERBS; PASTOR'S COUNSEL; THE FAITHFUL 
PROMISER ; CECIL'S MORNING PORTION. 

DIARY, (daily texts interleaved;) McCHEYNE'S 
GEMS; GEMS OF SACRED POETRY; THREEFOLD 
CORD ; PROVISION FOR PASSING OVER JORDAN, 
by Dr. Scudder; DAILY FOOD FOR CHRISTIANS; 
MASON'S CRUMBS; CHAPLET OF FLOWERS; 
HEAVENLY MANNA. 

DAILY TEXTS ; MILK FOR BABES; THE LORD'S 
SUPPER; DEW-DROPS. 



PUBLISHED AND FOR SALE BY 
THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

150 NASSAU-STREET, NEW YORK ; 

AT 929 CHESTNUT-STREET, nilLADELPniA, AND- 
IN OTHER TRINCirAL CITIES AND TOWNS. 



^tandcu'cL S^^acticaL Mqj'Iu. af the 
<0^eLLenteentlz ^efihu^tf. 

BAXTER' S SAINTS' KEST, 12mo 60 cts. 

" 18mo 40 " 

TREATISE ON CONVERSION, 12mo 50 " 

REFORMED PASTOR, " 45 " 

CALL TO UNCONVERTED--- 18mo 15 " 

DYING THOUGHTS, " 15 " 

LIFE, " 15 " 

FLAVEL'S REDEMPTION, singly or in a set of 3 vols., viz: 

" FOUNTAIN OF LIFE, 55 cts. 

" METHOD OF GRACE, 55 " 

CHRIST KNOCKING AT THE DOOR, 50 " 

FLAVEL ON KEEPING THE HEART, 15 " 

FLAVEL'S TOUCHSTONE, 15 " 

BUNYAN'S PILGRIM'S PROGRESS, ]2mol 00 

" " " 18mo 40 

RICHES OF BUNYAN, 12mo 55 

ALLEINE'S HEAVEN OPENED, " 50 

" ALARM TO THE UNCONVERTED, ISnio 15 
BISHOP HALL'S CONTEMPLATIONS OF SCRIP- 
TURE HISTORY, - 55 

BP. HOPKINS ON THE TEN COMMANDMENTS,- 50 
OWEN ON FORGIVENESS, an exposition of Psa. 130, 50 



THE ABOVE, WITH MANY OTHER STANDARD 
WORKS, PRACTICAL AND BIOGRAPHICAL, ARE 
SOLD IN LIBRARIES OR IN SEPARATE VOLUMES, 
AT THE SOCIETY'S HOUSE, 150 NASSAU-STREET, 
NEW YORK; ALSO AT 929 CHESTNUT-STREET, 
PHILADELPHIA. ; AT THE SOCIETY'S AGENCIES IN 
ROCHESTER, CINCINNATI, CHICAGO, ST. LOUIS, 
NEW ORLEANS, BALTIMORE, AND CHARLESTON, 
AND BY BOOKSELLERS IN THE PRINCIPAL CITIES 
AND TOWNS. 



