UNIVERSITY OF N.C. AT CHAPEL HILL 



IVERSITY C | |j | || ! I | |j |; || 1 1 

00022094225 
School of Libr\ 
Science 

JH 



H.H. ^T^.^ (&*-. 









»1 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 

in 2011 with funding from 

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 



http://www.archive.org/details/busterbabyjimOObake 



BUSTER AND BABY JIM, 



BY THE AUTHOR OF 

"THE BLUE FLAG," ETC. 



A fM\ euvice Soc.ie.ttf Nt 



"with god all things are possible." 




PUBLISHED BY THE 
AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

1.30 NASSAU-STREET, NEW YORK. 



He who would see the originals of Buster and 
Baby Jim, need but explore the lanes and alleys 
of any large city. There are thousands of such 
children to be rescued. 



Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year i8C2, by the 
American Tract Society, in the Clerk's Office of the District Court 
of the Southern District cf the State of Xew Yorli. 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I. 
The Brothers - 5 

CHAPTER II. 
"Butter and Eggs" — 13 

CHAPTER III. 
A Bide 22 

CHAPTER IV. 
The Stone Building--'- 29 

CHAPTER V. 
The Hon. Mr. B - 38 

CHAPTER VI. 
Parting - - --- 49 

CHAPTER VII. 
A Western Farmer -- 53 

CHAPTER VIII. 

Mrs. Jillard Ci 

CHAPTER IX. 
The Confession 72 






CONTENTS. 
CHAPTER X. 



Letters ■ 



CHAPTER XI. 
The Tempted - 87 

CHAPTER XII. 
Business in Town - - - C;0 

CHAPTER XIII. 
Conclusion 98 



BUSTER, AND BABY JIM. 



CHAPTER I. 

THE BROTHERS. 

There is a sunny street-corner in one 
of our cities, which was once the favorite 
lounging-place for the idle boys of all 
that neighborhood. In fair weather or 
foul, a knot of little fellows was sure to 
be collected there, buzzing away like 
bees, if they were not gathering honey. 
They talked and laughed and cracked 
their jokes, and seemed in truth a "mer- 
rie companie ;" yet when the careful 
mothers who lived hard by sent out their 
sons on errands, they were sure to say, 
"Don't stop at the corner," or, "Go 



6 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

round the other way, so that you need 
not pass that corner." 

It was not that the group of bo} r s of 
which we have spoken could not boast 
some well-dressed lads among them, tha^t 
they were condemned ; no, it was not on 
account of their torn, shabby clothing, 
that they were such undesirable associ- 
ates. Wise heads knew that such idle 
loungers were on the road to wicked- 
ness, if they had not already been guilty 
of crime. Passers-by might now and 
then hear an oath from their young lips, 
and the Sunday morning bells did not 
send them to the pleasant Sabbath-school, 
or bid them join happy families on their 
way to church. Two of God's command- 
ments at least they were breaking ; they 
could not be companions which any good 
mother would wish for her son. 

Among the most unfailing frequenters 
of "the corner" were two brothers, who 



THE BROTHERS. 7 

were known among their friends as "Bus- 
ter" and "Baby Jim;" what their real 
names were no one knew, and on this 
point they were as ignorant as everybody 
else. Ever since they could remember 
they had been wanderers in the streets 
of the great city, living by begging, pil- 
fering, or by the doubtful charities of 
people far gone in wickedness. Just 
now they had some new acquaintances 
who seemed to take a great fancy to 
them. Buster and Baby Jim had found 
a house where they could always get a 
comfortable meal, and where rough men 
gave them a hearty welcome and seemed 
to take a special pleasure in counting the 
boys " one of them." Sundry hints had 
been thrown out as to teaching the broth- 
ers how to make a handsome living, and 
"Baby Jim" was led to believe there was 
a very easy way for him to lay up stores 
of money, and ride in? his own carriage one 



8 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

of these days. The little chap could not 
help thinking that this would be much 
more agreeable than his present diver- 
sion of "hanging on behind" in imminent 
clanger of the coachman's whip, though it 
might not be quite as exciting. 

Through the day the boys were at the 
street corner, lounging and chatting, but 
in the evening they were going through 
a course of lessons preparatory to the 
very profitable branch of business on 
which they were expected to enter. 

Poor young things ; without father or 
mother, ignorant and penniless, what 
was to prevent them from starting upon 
a career of crime, to end in prison or on 
the scaffold ? They had no true friend 
to warn them ; no faithful, loving friend 
to call them to the ways of pleasantness 
and peace, and teach them the joy of 
honest labor and the manly satisfaction 
of earning their own bread. 



THE BROTHERS. 9 

As it was, ' the weeks went by, and 
Baby Jim's small face grew more keen, 
eager, and cunning in its expression; 
while Buster's every limb and feature 
spoke of the future ruffian, daily increas- 
ing in strength and daring. 

There was scarcely a year's difference 
between the ages of the boys. They 
knew that, though strangers could hard- 
ly believe it. They well remembered 
when it was their delight to stand side 
by side under the projecting shop win- 
dows, not an inch's difference in their 
height, though Buster even then claimed 
authority as the elder brother. 

Exposure and hard usage had stunted 
little Jim ; but his thin wiry figure seem- 
ed made of springs of steel, and was 
more than a match in strength for many 
i taller, sturdier form ; yet with Buster 
he never presumed to contend. Truly 
Buster was too formidable an adversary 



10 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

for airy of the boys lightly' to engage him 
in battle. The big, burly lad was a kind 
of king among his associates, laying clown 
the law, and sustaining his authority like 
many another monarch, by the irresisti- 
ble argument of brute force. 

Poor, tempted, sinful street-vagrants 
as were Buster and Baby Jim, there yet 
lingered in their hearts one feeling which 
made them akin, though afar off, to saints 
and angels, and even proved them lost 
and wandering children of the God of 
love. 

A true, deep affection for each other 
had somehow sprung up and been fos- 
tered in the midst of the hardening, mis- 
erable life they had led. Sharers of the 
same pangs of hunger and cold, alike 
neglected by all the world, they had 
grown doubly clear to each other through 
sympathy in suffering and loneliness. 

Baby Jim lost his keen, old look when 



THE BROTHERS. 11 

his e} T e fell admiringly on his brother, 
and the innocence of infancy and the 
softness of a woman would for the mo- 
ment hover in his face, beautifying and 
purifying it as it spoke out the real love 
that was stirring within. 

It was when Buster's arm was thrown 
protectingly round his little companion, 
and only then, that one could catch a 
glimpse of the better side of his nature. 
At such times the defiant, swaggering 
young bully would for the moment show 
that union of strength and tenderness, of 
power and forbearance, which gives to a 
bold and manly character a peculiar 
charm. 

It was perhaps as much to their true 
affection for each other that the brothers 
owed their influence among their associ- 
ates, as to Buster's strength or the ac- 
knowledged shrewdness of Baby Jim. 

What is true, noble, and good must 



12 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

ever have its power over the most aban- 
doned of men. While the poor strag- 
gling vagrants of the street corner mock- 
ingly gave to big Buster and little Jim 
the name of "the Twins," each young 
heart in secret yielded its tribute of 
admiration and approval to the faithful 
-love of the brothers. 



"BUTTER AND EGGS." 13 

CHAPTER II: 

"BUTTER AND EGGS." 

All that is learned in the world is not 
gathered from books. A man or boy 
who will keep his eyes and ears open, 
will find out much that was never put 
in print. Many of the lads at the street 
corner could at the best but spell out a 
sign, or slowly -read the headings in great 
letters on an "extra;" yet there was a 
kind of knowledge afloat among them 
which had for them its own use, not 
always of the most innocent kind. 

The passers-by did not need to tell 
these observing boys who they were, or 
what was their business. A lawyer, a 
doctor, a merchant, a clerk, or a me- 
chanic was as well known by them at a 
glance, as if he had his occupation put 



14 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

on the band of his hat, like the porters 
of city hotels. They could distinguish 
the up-town from the down-town peo- 
ple, and the "west-enders" from "east- 
enders." Plain clothing: could not hide 
from them the comfortable, easy look of 
one who has always had his wants grati- 
fied without exertion ; nor could the gay- 
est finery shut their eyes to the empty 
purses of the foolish women who spent 
their all to make a fine show upon the 
public street. A countryman might try 
to look as much at ease as he pleased, 
and deck himself in new-attire from the 
crown of his head to the sole of his feet ; 
they knew where he came from, without 
the help of hob-nailed shoes or homespun 
to tell the story. 

"Butter and eggs,'' said Buster to 
Baby Jim one day. 

Jim followed the direction of his broth- 
er's finger, and saw a stout, cheerful- 



. "BUTTER AND EGGS." 15 

looking woman coming slowly towards 
the group among which he was standing. 
"Yes/ 7 said Jim, nodding assent. 
"First visit to the city. Full purse; 
pocket on the left side drops heavy." 
The subject of these remarks was quite 
unconscious of any thing in her appear- 
ance suggestive either of the dairy or 
the farm-yard, but of neither would she 
have dreamed of being ashamed. She 
did not look like a person to be ashamed 
of any thing she said or did. at home 
or abroad. Her full face, with its rosy 
cheeks and wide-open blue eyes, was 
beaming with truth and kindliness.' She 
felt no mortification about her style of 
dress truly, though a foolish city belle 
would rather have stayed at home from 
church every Sunday for a month, than 
have worn that odd gray linen cottage bon- 
net, or that mouseline de laine, so perfect 
a reflection of the fl5wer-garden in June. 



16 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

Our stranger was perhaps a little proud 
of her appearance, complacent at least, 
but not so far as to despise others less 
fortunate than herself. Her eye softened 
as it fell on the group of ragged boys, 
and her hand instinctively sought the 
left-hand pocket, where, as Jim had 
rightly judged, her funds were reposing. 
Whatever might have been her kindly 
intention, she was not allowed to carry it 
out There was a stir among the boys 
as she approached, and Jim exclaimed 
•■Now for it. Who'll get to the next 

corner first ?" 

At this challenge the whole party set 
off at full speed, rushing past the stran- 
ger as if borne on the wings of the wind 

Unceremoniously crowded and nudged 

by the rude little crew, the good woman 
could hardly keep her place on the sac- 
walk, and the glance she sent af er them 
expressed any thing but approval of their 



"BUTTER AND EGGS." IT 

proceedings. Gathering up her dress, 
she stepped quickly on, making mean- 
while mental comparisons between -the 
manners of the city and the country, in 
which the region of butter and eggs had 
the decided preference. 

At the appointed corner the runners 
stopped. A smile went round the group 
as Jim held up a well-filled purse, which 
in the confusion he had managed to 
take from the pocket of the country 
woman. 

Buster struck it from his hand to the 
pavement, exclaiming, " Police ! Run 
for your lives !" 

Jim and his companions disappeared 
down an alley as if made invisible by a 
spell, while Buster stopped, picked up 
the purse, and proceeded to examine the 
contents, as if he felt himself in perfect 
security. The strong hand of a police- 
man was laid 'upon his shoulder, and 



18 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

there was an exclamation in his ear: "I 
saw it all. No lies, youngster ; I know 
your tricks." 

Buster had acted on the impulse of 
the moment, prompted by the desire to 
save his brother ; and now, when he found 
himself a prisoner, his courage for a mo- 
ment forsook him. He knew that his 
boasted strength was as nothing com- 
pared with the powerful figure of the 
policeman. Swift and stinging were the 
thoughts that rushed through his mind 
as he was hurried rapidly along by his 
captor. Already in imagination the grim 
cold walls of a prison were closing around 
him ; already he was cut off from free- 
dom and sunshine, and gazing sadly at 
the small barred window whose glimmer 
of light cast the only brightness on his 
dark lot. 

Buster was but a lad, scarce twelve 
years old, and big tears forced them- 






"BUTTER AND LGGS." 19 

selves into his eyes as this gloomy pic- 
ture presented itself to his mind. 

The policeman, eager to overtake the 
countrywoman, lost no time in examin- 
ing the face or studying the feelings of 
the culprit. Buster's tears were unno- 
ticed, and the hardened, sullen look which 
he had summoned to conceal his fears 
was all that met the eye of the officer 
when at length he paused beside the ob- 
ject of his pursuit. 

"Is this your purse, madam?" asked 
the policeman. 

The woman put her hand in her pock- 
et, and then exclaimed, "That it is. I 
must have dropped it. I believe I did 
take out my handkerchief a piece back." 

The little group was here joined by a 
gentleman, whose eager inquiries were 
soon answered by a full account of the 
affair from the policeman, in which he 
left no doubt of Buster's guilt. The 



'20 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

stranger was not yet forty years old, 
but he had all the dignity and wisdom of 
age, united with the fresh, loving sympa- 
thies of youth. A thorough Christian in 
heart and life, like his divine Master, he 
gave to the sinful and unfortunate his 
most tender interest. 

His glance was full of yearning pity 
as it fell on Buster's young face. The 
boy looked up suddenly as the stranger 
took his hand and said, " I am sorry for 
all this, my little fellow. Perhaps it may 
not prove so bad as it seems. Suppose 
you tell me the truth about it.' 7 

"I* did n't steal the purse," said Bus- 
ter, for the first time breaking silence. 

"Just as likely as not I dropped it. 
I 'm not used to having money about me 
much," said the woman, now becoming 
uneasy and anxious to be through with 
the disagreeable scene. "Let the boy 
go. I'm to be off in the cars in less 



"BUTTER AND EGGS." 21 

than an hour, and can't stand here talk- 
ing. Look here, my lad, yon are young 
to be walking in bad ways. May the 
Lord take care of you and keep you out 
of sin." 

There was real earnestness in the 
woman's manner, and as she walked 
quickly away, Buster felt as if he were 
losing a friend. 

"You don't get off so," said the offi- 
cer. "I know you, and you've got to 
stand your trial this time. It may keep 
your neck from the gallows to hide in 
the jug a while now ; so come along with 
me, and put on a pleasanter face, if you 
can." 

The rough, coarse manner of the po- 
liceman won from Buster no reply but a 
look of blustering defiance, while from 
the stranger's glance he turned away, as 
if unable to answer its tender pity. 



22 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

CHAPTER III. 

A RIDE. 

We will not follow Buster through the 
scenes of his trial. He could not be 
proved guilty of stealing the purse; but 
he was unable to show that he had any 
home or lawful way of life, and it was 
made plain that the men with whom he 
was known to associate were of the most 
suspicious kind. He was at the best in 
training for a course of guilt, and the 
strong arm of the law was put forth to 
save the community from one villain 
more endangering its peace and safety. 

Buster was not to be sent to the 
gloomy prison whose outer walls he had 
so often surveyed. The stranger, who 
had followed him, had gained permission 
to take charge of the young culprit. 



A RIDE. 23 

Buster soon found himself in a rail- 
road car. He was a prisoner, that was 
plain, for the stranger kept a kind but 
firm hold of his wrist until the train 
started, and resumed it at every stop- 
ping-place. There was no present chance 
of escape, and Buster, with the natural 
elasticity of youth, began to make the 
best of the circumstances in which he 
found himself. 

Along the banks of a wide river the 
swift cars were rapidly flying. The city 
with its din and bustle was soon left far 
behind them, and greenness and beauty 
took the place of brick walls and paved 
streets. For the first time in his life 
Buster was in the open country. There 
was something imposing to him in the 
wide stretch of the landscape, the blue 
mountains lining the distant horizon, the 
noble river tracing its shining way mid 
hills and meadows, and over all the blue, 



24 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

majestic arch of the clear summer sky. 
A singular sense of littleness and loneli- 
ness stole over the heart of the boy. He 
felt within him nothing akin to this pu- 
rity and beauty ; and more welcome to 
him then would have been a footing in 
some narrow filthy lane of the city, than 
the sight of nature in its imposing gran- 
deur. 

In the excitement that had attended 
Buster's capture and trial, he had thought 
but little of his brother; but now, as a 
lonely yearning crept over him, his little 
companion came naturally to his mind. 
" Where was Baby Jim? Would he ever 
know what had become of Buster ?" 

The boy's face softened as he dwelt on 
this theme, and when the stranger turned 
to look at him, he was surprised at the 
expression that had taken the place of 
his hitherto prevailing look of sullen de- 
termination. 



A RIDE. 25 

".What arc you thinking of, my lad? 
You said you had no home, and did 
not know who your parents were, or I 
should fancy you were thinking of your 
mother." 

The gentleman's voice and manner 
were very kind, and Buster instinctively 
answered, "I didn't say I hadn't any 
brother." 

"So you have a brother. You need 
not be afraid to talk to me now. Noth- 
ing you say will go against you or him. 
I think you love your brother, from the 
way you looked when you were thinking 
of him just now," said the stranger. 

"We've been together always, him 
and me. He 's a little un, but knowin. 
I 'm a'most twice as big, but we are near 
about the same age," said Buster. " It 's 
kind o' queer to me not to have him along. 
It 's a lonely place out here, mister ; no 
houses nor nothin." 



26 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

The conversation thus begun was kept 
up, until Buster grew so much at his ease 
that his companion easily won from him 
the story of Baby Jim's theft, and Bus- 
ter's impulsive thrusting himself, into 
clanger in his stead. 

This confession prompted the stranger 
to two silent prayers. He knew not 
whither the young thief had fled, but he 
could follow him with a petition, and beg 
the God of love to check him in his ca- 
reer of crime, and call him to the paths 
of virtue and peace. To Buster his heart 
warmed, and earnestly he prayed that 
the kind natural feelings lingering in the 
boy's rough nature might be cherished, 
and that, sanctified by the Spirit of God, 
he might yet reflect the likeness of Him 
who bore our punishment, and was the 
sufficient sacrifice and satisfaction for the 
sin of the world. 

A sudden checking of the train an- 



A RIDE. 27 

nounced its approach to another stop- 
ping-place. 

" We get out here," said Buster's com- 
panion ; and he led the boy from the car. 

A small wagon was in waiting. Ap- 
parently they were expected. Side by 
side they took their places, and then the 
driver started off the horse at an easy 
trot. 

" Where be you goin to take me?" said 
Buster, his curiosity at length finding 
vent in words. 

"There," said the stranger. " We are 
going there." 

On the top of a high hill stood a large 
stone building, firm and substantial, ris- 
ing, story upon story, until the upper 
windows looked out far, far over the 
broad landscape on every side. 

"This is to be, for a time at least, 
your home," continued Buster's guide. 

The boy was silent. Those stone walls 



28 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

might hide many a dark cell; perhaps 
there was one in store for him. Yet the 
word "home" had a cheerful sound; a 
home the poor lad never had known ; he 
would not banish the pleasant vision that 
its bare mention had conjured up; he 
would patiently wait until his fate should 
be made known to him. 



THE STONE BUILDING. 29 



CHAPTEE IV. 

THE STONE BUILDING. 

Buster's heart beat fast as lie mount- 
ed the stone steps that led to the great 
building that had been pointed out to 
him. 

The door was unlocked, and he entered 
with his companion. 

Through a wide clean hall he passed 
into a neat, comfortable parlor, with its 
rocking-chairs, piano, and every mark of 
comfort. 

" You may sit here a few moments," 
said his companion. "I will return for 
you shortly." 

Buster sat down alone in the large 
room, then rose, walked round it, aston- 
ished to find himself on a carpeted floor 



30 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

and surrounded by so many signs of 
plenty. 

He had hardly completed his survey 
when his conductor returned. Sitting 
down by him, the stranger said, "Bus- 
ter, my boy, you ha ye had enough of a 
poor, miserable, wicked life. I do n't 
want you to grow up to sin and shame. 
I have brought you here to be taught to 
do right, and to learn to lead an honest, 
useful, Christian life. There are mere 
than three hundred bo} T s in this build- 
ing. Some of them, like you, have never 
had any home, and some have been 
brought up in wicked homes, where they 
have never learned any thing good. 
When they come here, we wash them 
and put on them clean clothes, and tell 
them we want them to leave all their dirt 
and wickedness behind them. My boy, 
you have heard of the great God who 
made you. He formed your body by his 



THE STONE BUILDING. 31 

wonderful power, and lie can make your 
bad heart pure. He can help you to 
leave off swearing, lying, stealing, Sab- 
bath-breaking, anger, and every wicked 
way. I want you to kneel down as I do, 
and I will ask hirn to help you and make 
you better, for the sake of his dear Son." 

Buster mechanically knelt clown, but 
kept his eyes open and fixed upon his 
companion's face. 

Yery earnest was the short, simple 
prayer that he heard offered for him, 
and love and sincerity were marked on 
the countenance of the speaker. "You 
aVt a sham, anyhow," said Buster, as 
the gentleman rose from his knees. 

After a moment of silence, he said, 
"Go now, my boy, with the man you 
will find standing at the door. He will 
see that you are properly washed and 
dressed, and after that I will show you 
your new home." 



32 BUSTER AND BABY' JIM. 

"A'n't I going to be shut up? You 
wouldn't come it over me?" said Buster. 

"You will not be shut up here, if you 
do as you are told, and behave yourself 
properly. I have not brought you here 
to punish you, but .to try to make you 
better," was the reply. 

"That's a queer dodge," said Buster; 
"a first-rate one though," and with a 
cheerful step he left the room. 

More than an hour passed before Bus- 
ter returned, so completely transformed 
that Baby Jim would hardly have recog- 
nized him. His thick hair had been 
cropped close to his head, and his brown- 
ed, begrimed face had been washed un- 
til it fairly shone in its cleanliness. Bus- 
ter moved but awkwardly in his new suit 
of plain stout clothing, but he looked 
approvingly at himself as he approached 
the gentleman whom he now considered 
quite as an old friend. 



THE STONE BUILDING. 33 

"Now a'n't I a beater!" he exclaimed, 
as he surveyed himself from top to toe. 

"You do look greatly improved; I 
should hardly know you myself. See to 
it that you leave your badness behind 
you with those old clothes. Now give 
me your hand, and I '11 show you your 
way over the building." 

"Here is the dining-room," said the 
gentleman, opening the door to a large 
hall where several long lines of tables 
were ranged in regular order. Great 
slices of bread were piled in pans that 
were placed along through the centre of 
the tables, and by each boy's plate stood 
a bowl of good sweet milk. "Here is 
where you will eat your supper present- 
ly. Do you think you can relish it, Bus- 
ter?" 

"Now that beats every thing. Do 
them boys all eat here? My!" exclaim- 
ed Buster, lost in astonishment and admi- 



34 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

ration. " Wont I lay in though, when I 
get a chance." 

We will not follow Buster and his 
guide as they passed through chapel and 
school-room, bathing-room and work- 
room, until they reached the large sleep- 
ing apartment, when the gentleman again 
paused to unlock the door. The stranger 
used his bunch of keys to open every 
door ; this alone gave to Buster the idea 
of confinement. This was just what was 
needed to make him feel that though 
kindly cared for, he was still to be under 
wise control. 

The door of the large dormitory was 
thrown wide o|oen. Cool breezes came 
in through the windows, and from white 
scoured floor to white ceiling the air was 
pure and sweet as if it was fresh from 
the mountain-side. Everywhere small 
white beds were standing in long rows 
across the room. "These are the beds 



THE STONE BUILDING. 35 

for the boys. Here is to be your place, 
number 373. That's to be your num- 
ber. I shall hope to hear every thing 
good of 373," said Buster's companion. 

Buster looked curiously at the bed, and 
slowly turned down the spread, examin- 
ing every article of the covering; then 
he exclaimed, "You don't mean I am to 
sleep in there ! why, I sha'n't never want 
to get up. My! but it's soft." Buster 
sat down suddenly on the edge of the 
bed, and looking up into the face of his 
friend, he said, "What makes you do 
so ? What makes you get us boys and 
serve us so, instead of lickin us all to 
pieces, or shuttin us up in the jug, or 
just kickin us and lettin us go ?" 

"Buster," began the stranger, "listen 
to me and I will answer your question 
truly." The boy's attention was caught, 
and his heart softened. He listened — ■ 
listened with tears in his eyes, as he 



36 BUSTER AND BAB.Y JIM. 

heard the story of the Saviour's love, 
how He came to seek and to save that 
which was lost, and had bidden his true 
followers to go and do likewise. 

"And you do it. You go into it 
strong," said Buster as his companion 
ceased speaking. Eough and unsuitable 
as seemed his comment, he yet had felt 
and understood what had been said to 
him. 

' ! You will try, my boy, to learn to be 
better, wont you ?" said the gentleman. 

"I wish Baby Jim was in that 'ere 
bed, long side o' mine. Then I could 
turn in, and feel about right," said Bus- 
ter, following out his own train of thought. 

"When you go to bed every night, 
kneel down by that bed, and say, ' God 
bless me, and help me to be a good boy, 
for Christ's sake. God bless my brother 
Jim, and help him to be a good boy ;' and 
may -be it will all come out right before 



THE STONE BUILDING. 31 

you expect it. The great God who sees 
you and me, sees your little brother, and 
can watch over him and keep him from 
evil." 

"I was n't thinkin about keepin him 
from evil ; he takes to that most too nat- 
'ral. I wish I had him though, there in 
that bed, and I 'cl tell him I 'd thrash the 
skin off from him if he clicl n't mind just 
what you say ; for I hold to it, you are 
the right kind of a man, just uncommon 
different from any I ever come across 
before. Eh, do you think it 's about time 
for them bo} r s to be lajdn in with the 
bread and milk ? 1 7 m ready." 

Buster folded his hands that evening 
with more than three hundred boys, 
while the blessing of G-od was asked on 
the simple bountiful meal before them. 
Very heartily prayed his friend that poor 
Buster might be fed with the bread from 
heaven, and lay hold on eternal life. 



38 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

CHAPTER Y. 

THE HON. MR. B . 

It was hard for Buster to accommo- 
date himself to the regular life of his 
new abode. To eat and sleep, go out 
and come in, study and play, lie down 
and rise up, work and stop working, by 
the clock, were new things indeed, after 
the wandering habits into which the poor 
boy had fallen. Yet to all this he be- 
came by degrees accustomed, and even 
this outward training took from him 
somewhat of the wild, reckless air which 
had marked him before. In the work- 
room and in the class, Buster showed 
any thing but stupidity, and yet the 
friend who had placed him in this kindly 
asylum was still anxiously watching for 
some more satisfactory signs of improve* 



THE HON. MR. B . 39 

ment. In vain he inquired, week after 
week, for good news about Buster. The 
boy often proved turbulent and unman- 
ageable, and more than once he had un- 
dergone the severest punishments in use 
at the institution. Buster was, through 
the force of circumstances, slightly al- 
tered ; but it was plain that he needed 
but to be exposed again to temptation, 
to fall back into all his evil practices. 

Buster had been for several months at 
the asylum, when the boys were one day 
summoned to the chapel at an unusual 
h®ur. In they marched to the sound of 
music, keeping time, and stepping as 
truly as well-trained soldiers. Leading 
one of the long files came Buster, his 
head erect and his great black eyes wan- 
dering hither and thither as if asking 
what was the provocation for this extra- 
ordinary assembly. 

The boys were hardly seated when the 



40 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

superintendent introduced to them the 

Hon. Mr. B of Ohio. At a given 

signal they all rose and politely acknow- 
ledged the introduction. 

Mr. B— — was a splendid specimen of 
Christian manhood. His tall and strong- 
ly built figure at once attracted Buster's 
attention and won his unqualified appro- 
val ; nor could the boy help owning to 
himself that the face of the stranger was 
as attractive as his well-knit form. 

The many voices of the children blend- 
ed in a cheerful hymn of praise, and as 

Mr. B listened to the holy words 

they so sweetly sang, the unbidden tears 
clouded his eyes. Bank upon rank, line 
upon line, rose the heads of the singers. 

In thought Mr. B. wandered to the 

scenes of vice and misery from which 
these poor children had been rescued, 
and angels' work indeed it seemed to 
him to have gathered these neglected 



THE HON. MR. B . 41 

outcasts and taught them even with the 
lips to praise the God of heaven. In a 
kind of touching recitative rose those 
beautiful words of commendation which 
the Lord is said to address to those on 
his right hand at the day of judgment. 
When the children came to the closing 
sentence, "Inasmuch as ye have done it 
unto one of the least of these my breth- 
ren, ye have done it unto me," Mr. 

B could almost imagine the Saviour 

bodily present among them and speaking 
himself the sacred words that came from 
the lips of the singers. 

A Saviour near at hand he seemed ; 

and when Mr. B rose to call upon 

him in prayer, he spoke to him as One 
in the midst of them, yearning with his 
almighty heart of love fully to take to 
his bosom these the least of his Hock, yet 
precious above all price in his eyes. 

When the prayer was over, Mr. B 



42 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

knew that lie was expected to make an 
address to the children. In many public 
places and before many critical audiences 
had his eloquent voice been heard, yet 
now there was a sense of choking in his 
throat, and a growing feeling of inability 
to say what he wished to the young hear- 
ers before him. Like the Syrophenician 
woman, he humbly prayed in silence, 
"Lord, help me." He felt that the mes- 
sage must come from God, if it should be 
blessed to do the work for which he was 
yearning. 

The superintendent glanced at Mr. 

B , and saw by the working of his 

fine face that just now he was too much 
moved to give vent to his feelings in 
words. 

"Boys," began the superintendent, 
" let me tell you that the gentleman who 
is to speak to you to-day has spoken to 
thousands of men, of grown men, and 



THE HON. MR. B . 43 

they have listened with delighted atten- 
tion. In the State he comes from, he is 
looked up to more than if he were the 
governor. I like to show him to you as 
a Christian gentleman, one to whom God 
has given health, talent, and wealth, and 
he delights to use them all to work for 
his heavenly Master. Boys, listen to Mr. 

B . It may never fall to your lot to 

hear such a man again." 

Mr. B stepped out beyond the 

desk which stood upon the raised plat- 
form where he had been sitting. With 
his powerful figure in full sight, and his 
strongly-marked kindly face looking lov- 
ingly upon them, he began. 

"My lads, your superintendent has 
spoken in my praise. Let us grant that 
what he has said is true, true as far as 
the world knows any thing of me ; yet in 
my closet I must bow the knee and cry 
like you, 'God be merciful to me a sin- 



44 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

ner.' Boys, I will tell you a story. I 
knew a child once, a poor, wandering, 
homeless child, who had no mother to 
rock him on her knee, no father to earn 
him daily bread. His little tender hands 
soon learned to steal, his "baby lips could 
speak an oath and laugh while he was 
speaking. "What wonder that he grew in 
wickedness as he gained in years ? I will 
not tell you how he went from step to 
step, till his young heart was hardened 
in sin. Perhaps some of you may know 
too well the evil path he trod. That path 
ended, as it must surely end, in misery. 
He found himself shut up within damp, 
gloomy prison walls. No pleasant sun- 
shine to cheer him now ; no friendly 
voice to bid him take courage. Two 
long years he was to spend in dreary 
confinement. He bowed his head upon 
his hands and cried as if his heart would 
break. There were no rough compan- 



THE HON. MR. B . 45 

ions round him now to laugh at his bitter 
tears. There was no gentle hand to wipe 
those tears away. Alone, alone in his 
guilty misery sat the wicked orphan-boy. 
So the wretched days and weeks came 
and went. One morning there was a vis- 
itor in his lonely cell. A kind motherly 
face was bending over the poor hardened 
boy. He would not answer her gentle 
words ; he would not look into her lov- 
ing eyes. Yet she came again and again. 
Sickness seized upon the weak frame of 
the prisoner. She nursed him as tender- 
ly as if he had been one of the sweet chil- 
dren of her own comfortable home. She 
made him love her; he could not help it; 
and when by and by she talked to him 
of the precious Saviour who had sent her 
to his side, he learned to love that Sav- 
iour too. 

"One long year passed, and then an- 
other, and at last the prisoner was free 



46 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

once more. He might go where he would, 
and find for himself a home. Did lie' turn 
back to the wretched alleys he knew? 
Did he seek the old sinners who had led 
him astray before? No; he had his Bi- 
ble in his hand and his God overhead. 
There was no such path for him now. 
Straight for the open country he went. 
On, on he walked, till the city was far 
behind him. He used his right hand for 
honest labor by day, by night he contin- 
ued his journey. In the wide West he 
found a resting-place. No one knew him 
there. There he began his new life. 
God had forgiven him for Christ's sake, 
and he could cheerfully bear poverty 
and hard work, knowing that he had a 
sure home in heaven. 

" God blessed that poor lad, and gave 
.him friends and a home and wealth, and 
even some share of this world's honors. 
He stands before you now, and thanks 



THE HON. ME. B . 47 

his heavenly Father for all his mercies. 
I have been telling you my own life, my 
boys. I know what it is to be poor and 
homeless and tempted and wicked. These 
are strong enemies, but G.ocl is stronger. 
He can help you, if you will but fight on 
the right side. God can cleanse you and 
strengthen you and bring you off con- 
querors. He will forgive you for the 
sake of his dear Son who died on the 
cross for you. He will help you to lead 
a new life. You will have a hard strug- 
gle for it, but you will win if you fight 
bravely. The coward gains no battle. 
He who is afraid to begin, will never end 
with honor. My clear boys, let this clay 
be, at least for one of you, the most im- 
portant day you have ever known. Go 
in secret to the great God of heaven. 
Ask him, for his Son's sake, to blot out 
all your sins, and help you to live a new 
and better life. 



48 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

"May the Holy Spirit Mess to you 
these words of mine ; and when you shall 
have triumphed over sin and shame, may 
you take poor wandering children by the 
hand, and lead .them to the feet of Jesus. 
Let us pray." 

As sincerely, humbly, earnestly, and 
trustfully as when he first knelt at the 
feet of Jesus, Mr. B now sought for- 
giveness for himself and the children in 
whose name he spoke. One young heart, 
at least, went with him. For the first 
time, Buster prayed, "God be merciful 
to me a sinner. Cleanse thou me, and I 
shall be clean. Wash me, and I shall 
be whiter than snow.' 7 

To Buster it now seemed possible that 
even for such as he there was an upward 
path. God helping him, from this day 
forward he would leave his evil de^ds 
behind him, and strive to be a true ser- 
vant of Christ. 



PARTING. 49 

CHAPTER VI. 

PARTING. 

We have seen the beginning of a Chris- 
tian life, the tiny grain of mustard-seed 
taking root in poor Buster's heart. This 
was the commencement of a good work, 
but it was truly only the commencement. 

Mr. B had rightly said the struggle 

was a hard one. Old habits and old 
temptations would rise again when they 
seemed almost conquered, and new faults 
sprung up where others had been sub- 
dued. Yet Buster persevered. 

Two years Buster continued at the 
Asylum, before his kind friends dared to 
trust him away from their watchful eyes 
and timely counsel. At length there 
was a new party of boys starting for the 
West, to find homes among the farmers 



50 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

of the fast growing states. Busters name 
was on the list. As Buster he still was 
known, but in solemn baptism he had 
taken the Christian name of Paul. He 
chose to be called after the great apostle, 
who, though counting himself the chief 
of sinners, had yet through the grace of 
God become among the chief of saints. 

Again Buster was to take a journey, 
far, far longer than the ride in the swift 
cars that had brought him to his late 
home. What a change had been wrought 
in him since, rough, wicked, and reckless, 
he entered those sheltering walls. The 
friend who had then been his guide was 
now with him to bid him farewell. 

Buster took the hand that was stretch- 
ed out to hinij and grasping it in both of 
his, he exclaimed, "God will bless you, 
sir. I can't thank you. I don't know 
how to say what I feel. I owe every 
thing to you. I '11 try to do you credit. 



PARTING. 51 

May-be you 7 11 hear of me one of these 
days. 7 ' 

" I trust I shall see you at the right 
hand of God, rejoicing among the re- 
deemed, 7 ' said his companion with great 
earnestness. " Be watchful and humble, 
my lad. Hold fast to your Bible. Be 
faithful in prayer. Eesist the very be- 
ginnings of evil, the angry look, the pro- 
fane word, the touching of the slightest 
trifle that is not your own. God bless 
you, and bring you off conqueror." 

"Thank you," said Buster, humbly. 
"But Oh, sir, you will keep a watch for 
him? May-be he'll turn up yet. Ee- 
member, blue eyes, and curly brown hair, ' 
small and slender, and an old, smart look 
in his face. That 's he, that 's Baby 
Jim.' 7 

What was it that unnerved the great 
strong boy ? His hands trembled as they 
gave that final grasp at parting. Ah, the 



52 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

Christian brother but yearned the more 
tenderly for the companion of his child- 
hood, and longed to know him snatched 
from those evil paths whose end is death. 

" I will pray for him, and watch for- 
him, my boy. Trust him to the Lord, 
and labor to be a brother who shall be 
a fit guide and example for him when we 
shall have found him." 

Buster heard the parting words, and 
answered, "Aye, aye, that 's what I will." 
Then with another "good-by," he sprang 
into the cars that were to bear him away 
to the scene of his future life. 



A WESTERN PARMER. 53 

CHAPTER VII, 

A WESTERN FARMER, 

a Among the thirty lads who were start- 
ing for the West, there was not one more 
full of hope than was the tall stout boy 
whom we have known as Buster. As 
mile after mile was left behind him, he 
breathed more and more freely. Sepa- 
rated from the scenes of his early guilt, 
he felt it to be more and more possible 
for him to lead the life he desired. 

Where would his lot fall ? What home 
would be his? To these questions Bus- 
ter could give no answer ; but he found 
vent for the feelings of his heart by sing- 
ing in a low voice the hymn, 

" Father, whate'er of earthly bliss 
Thy sovereign will denies, 
Accepted at thy throne of grace, 
Let this petition rise 



54 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

" Give me a calm, a thankful heart, 
From every murmur free ; 
The blessings of thy grace impart, 
And let me live to thee. 

"Let the sweet hope that I am thine 
My life and death attend ; 
Thy presence through my journey shine* 
And crown my journey's end." 

Buster's hymn attracted no attention 
amid the Babel of sounds made by the 
excited, rejoicing boys. The kind friend 
who had charge of them did not check 
the natural outburst of their feelings, but 
sat among them enjoying the various 
ways in which they chose to manifest 
their glee. 

Somewhat sobered down by the long 
journey, the boys at length reached their 
first stopping-place, at a small town in 
the centre of a rich farming country. 
They were expected, that was plain; for 
many rough wagons were tied along the 
principal street, while their owners join- 



A WESTERN FARMER-. 55 

ed the deputation of the citizens who 
were at the depot to give the young 
strangers a welcome. 

On the large public square an agricul- 
tural fair had lately been held, and the 
seats provided for the ladies were still 
standing. On these the boys were placed, 
while an abundant luncheon was passed 
round for their refreshment. Then fol- 
lowed some singing by the children, and 
a speech from the gentleman who had 
them in charge. He simply stated the 
plan of the institution from which they 
had come, and offered to the farmers as- 
sembled an opportunity of sharing in the 
Christlike work of redeeming these poor 
wanderers from a life of want and crime, 
and training them in honest homes. 
Wherever they went, they were to be 
received as members of the family. 
They were to be encouraged to show by 
their conduct what they were, forgetting 



56 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

whence they came and what they had 
been. 

While the gentleman was speaking, 
many scrutinizing eyes were fixed upon 
the eager faces of the boys. Up and 
down before the rising seats walked a 
small short man, with his head on one 
side as he looked systematically at every 
boy, allowing to each his fair time to 
make an agreeable impression. It was 
evident that the good man was seeking 
a new member for his household, and 
meant to be careful in the selection. 
The process seemed to be an exciting 
one, for he soon took off his homespun 
coat and threw it over his arm, and 
pushed his felt hat back on his head, so 
that his wide forehead might have the 
full benefit of the breeze. There was 
shrewdness in his small clear blue eyes 
and long, sharp nose ; but the quizzical, 
kindly expression about the mouth was 



A WESTERN FARMER. 5? 

sufficient to reassure the stranger who 
might at first be afraid to find him close 
at a bargain. He soon became a great 
favorite among the boys, and cries of 
'J Take me," "I'm the chap for you," 
sounded out from the lines as he pursued 
his methodical examination. 

Before Buster the little farmer at 
length made a decided stand. " Would 
I suit you? Do you think you could 
close hands with me ?" he said confiden- 
tially. 

Buster reached his big hand over the 
heads of the little boys below him, and 
gave the inquirer a hearty grasp as he 
replied, "First-rate." 

"All settled," said the farmer, going 
back to the crowd and listening as faith- 
fully to the concluding remarks of the 
speaker as if he intended to report them 
for the county newspaper. A report of 
the speech he knew he would have to 



58 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

give to one person at least, and that a 
party whom he was far more anxious to 
please than the uncertain public, who 
might applaud to-day and decry to-mor- 
row. 

"My Mrs. Jillard," as he was wont to 
call his wife, would demand a circum- 
stantial account of that day's proceed- 
ings, he was sure, and he meant to be 
prepared upon at least one department 
in which he would be examined. 

No objection being made to Mr. Jil- 
lard's selection by the gentleman in charge 
of the boys, the worthy farmer seemed 
inclined to carry off his prize at once. 

"Then we may as well be moving," 
he exclaimed, taking Buster protectively 
by the arm. Buster was a full half head 
taller than his new acquaintance, and 
would have been a dangerous enemy for 
him in a pitched battle ; and the big boy 
could hardly help smiling at the tender, 



A WESTERN FARMER. 59 

careful way in which he was taken in 
hand. 

Mr. Jillarcl had proposed the move, 
and yet he lingered and kept fumbling 
meditatively in his coat pocket. It was 
plain that he felt he was making a bar- 
gain in which the advantage was too 
much on his side, and yet he did not 
know how to mend the matter. At length 
he broke out, "It seems as if I ought to 
do something. I do n't like to pay mon- 
ey. That looks ugly, as if I bought the 
boy. But see here ; may n't I give you 
something to go to clothing and feeding 
some poor little chap that 's just picked 
out of the gutter, and isn't fit to be let 
loose on honest folks ? Hicks Jillarcl 
would like to have that ten dollar note 
put to that account. ' Will that be all 
right?" 

Mr. Jillard's contribution was cheer- 
fully received, and he had the promise 



60 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

of a letter describing the boy for whose 
benefit it should be used. 

"Now for it," said the farmer* and 
starting off at a round rate, he soon 
made Buster realize that he would have 
to be a fast walker if he kept up with 
him. 

At a post where two quiet farm-horses 
were tied, Mr. Jillard stopped. "Were 
you ever on a horse, boy ? What 's your 
name ?" 

"Never, but I should n't mind trying," 
said Buster, his eyes sparkling. 

"What's your name?" repeated the 
questioner. 

"Buster I've always been called; but 
I was baptized Paul just before I left 
home," said the boy. 

"Baptized; I like that," said Mr, Jil- 
lard. "A good beginning. Hold to it, 
and don't go backwards. Breaking is 
dangerous in boys as well as horses. 



A WESTERN FARMER 6] 

Paul Jillarcl, that's your name. Can 
you write ?■' 

"Yes, sir," said Buster promptly. 

"Then write Paul Jillarcl in your 
books. Do n't cut P. J. now everywhere, 
as if you owned all the world and want- 
ed to put your mark on it. I don't hold 
to that. Knives have their uses ; but this 
cutting of letters round is putting good 
tools to a bad job. Yes, Paul Jillard is 
your name, but I shall call you Buster, 
because you are used to it; my Mrs. 
Jillard may do as she pleases. Now get 
up on to that horse as quick as you can. 
She '11 be expecting us." 

Buster made several vain attempts to 
mount from the ground, while Mr. Jillard 
looked on laughing till his eyes were full 
of tears. "There, now, why can't you 
do as I do?" said the farmer, hopping 
lightly to the back of the other tall horse. 

Buster watched the operation closely, 



62 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

and managed to follow at once with a 
tolerable imitation. 

"Here, so," said Mr. Jillard, telling 
Buster how to hold the reins. ''Sit 
steady. Do n't be afraid." 

"With no further preface or prepara- 
tion, Mr. Jillard started off his horse at 
a round trot, and its "match" briskly 
kept it company. Buster had his own 
qualms as he felt himself fairly borne 
along without the exercise of his own 
will; but he was determined to acquit 
himself bravely, and did not once call 
out for quarter during the five minutes 
in which the unmerciful trotting was 
kept up. 

" Now we '11 take it slower," said Mr. 
Jillard, slackening his own pace. "You'll 
feel easier for finding you can ride fast 
without falliug off. We 've ten miles be- 
fore us, so we must n't tire out too much 
at the start." 



A WESTERN PARMER. 63 

By the time the ten miles were over, 
Buster felt as if he and Mr. Jillard were 
old acquaintances. All dread of meeting 
the farmer's wife had been overcome by 
various remarks concerning her which 
the proud husband had let fall during 
the ride. In his heart Buster already 
thanked God that the lines had fallen 
unto him "in pleasant places." 



64 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

MRS. JILLARD. 

Mr. Jillard's farm had no fanciful 
name. It had never been called Wood- 
land, after the primeval forest that tow- 
ered just beyond the wheat-fields, nor 
Clear-springs, for the bright water that 
welled up on every hill-side and danced 
its way to the valleys below. Mr. Jillard 
was content to talk about "our house," 
without having the great red wooden 
building photographed to put at the head 
of his letters or to frame and hans; in his 
clean parlor. 

It was just sunset when Buster's first 
ride on horseback was over, and his 
"gallant steed" walked quietly into a 
barn-yard and held up his head at his 
accustomed post. Buster would have 



MRS. JILLARD 65 

found dismounting a stiff and awkward 
business, if Mr. Jillard had not come to 
him, saying, "I'll help you to-day; next 
time you must get clown as spry as I 
do." 

Just as Buster stood fairly on the 
ground, his attention was fixed by a fig- 
ure which came round the corner of tho 
barn. Mrs. Jillard had been milking 
and in each hand she held a full bucket, 
which showed her abundant success. 
Thus doubly balanced, she could move 
but slowly, a gait which well suited her 
tall, comely figure. Her round face was 
pink with the flush of health, and the 
kindly dimples were dotting her cheeks 
as she exclaimed, 

"Home again, Hicks. You are a 
punctual fellow. And this is the boy. 
You are right welcome, my lad. Here, 
take the buckets, Hicks, and let me shake 
him by the hand." 



86 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

Buster stood aghast as that kind hon- 
est face beamed full upon him. He too 
well remembered it. The scene at the 
street corner rushed back upon his mem- 
ory. The cry, "Butter and eggs," the 
race, the arrest, all, all were present tc 
him. 

"Bashful, I suppose. Poor boy," said 
Mrs. Jillard to her husband, as Buster 
hung down his head and did not offer to 
take the outstretched hand. 

"There 's no accounting for boys," said 
the farmer in a low voice. "Why, we've 
been just like chums all along the way. 
I never saw anybody either that did n't 
take to you before. I believe he 's tired 
all to pieces, and just feels it getting off 
the horse. Supper '11 make him all 
right." 

Neither supper nor Mrs. Jillard's kind 
efforts to draw him into conversation 
could bring all right with poor Buster 



MRS. JILLARD. 61 

He was glad when he was sent off to his 
sleeping quarters, to get rid of his sup- 
posed fatigue and consequent shyness. 

"This is to be your room, Buster," 
said Mrs. Jillard, as she opened the door 
into a small chamber, the very picture 
of neatness and comfort. ' ' Stay in it as 
much as you please, when you are not at 
work ; but leave your boots at the door ; 
that will keep the floor clean, you see. 
Good-night, my boy. Do n't forget your 
prayers. May God bless you in your 
new home.''* 

Poor Buster! every added word of 
kindness was as a dagger sending anoth- 
er pang to his bleeding heart. 

Mrs. Jillard set the candle down on 
the small bureau, and withdrew. Buster 
turned the button which was the only 
fastening to the door, and then he bowed 
his head upon his hands, in utter misery. 
Here, where he had hoped to begin a 



68 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

new, an honest, and an honored life, his 
sins had found him out. In the home 
where he had been so warmly received, 
he must ever be reminded of his guilty 
career. It could be no pure and perfect 
home to him. In the bitterness of his 
spirit, he longed for those heavenly man- 
sions where sin and sorrow are known 
no more, and where nothing can be laid 
to the charge of God's elect, who are for 
ever clothed in the white robes of the 
righteousness of Christ. Faint-hearted, 
he sank down in despair. He could not, 
through long years, bear the burden of 
his sin and shame, and the deep cry of 
his soul was, "Oh that I had wings, like 
a dove! for then would I fly away, and 
be at rest," 

Slowly, very slowly, comfort came to 
Buster. In grateful humility, he was at 
length enabled to see that it was little, 
comparatively, that he should here be 



MRS. JILLARD. CO 

even branded as having once belonged 
to a gang of young villains, while his 
eternal punishment had been laid upon 
One who had for his sake been willing* 
to be nailed to the cruel cross. Relying 
on that Saviour, he would go forward on 
his pilgrimage, striving to bear patiently 
his appointed trials. 

But would Mrs. Jillard tolerate him 
under her roof? It was plain she had 
not yet recognized him. Was he so al- 
tered that she might never remember to 
have seen him before ? Would it be just 
and right to be daily receiving her kind- 
ness with such a secret in his heart ? It 
had been specially agreed that no ques- 
tions should be asked of the boys as to 
their past lives: why should Mrs. Jillard 
be an exception ? 

It was'in vain that Buster so reasoned 
with himself. There was a something 
within him which prompted him to tell 



70 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

the whole truth, and abide the conse- 
quences. The party which he had ac- 
companied to the West were to remain 
For some days at the neighboring town, 
and there would still be an opportunity t 
for Mr. Jillard to make another selec- 
tion, and for Buster to obtain another 
situation. Such a home it was not likely 
would be again open to him. Perhaps 
Mrs. Jillard would not cast him out. He 
could but try the effect of a plain state- 
ment of the truth, and this he determin- 
ed to do, as soon as the morrow should 
dawn. 

What a privilege it seemed to Buster, 
that night, to speak to his merciful Sav- 
iour, who knew both his sins and his re- 
pentance; who, pure himself, could yet 
love his wandering children with an ever- 
lasting love. 

Poor Buster saw, ere he slept, that 
much of human ambition had mingled 



MRS. JILLARD. 71 

with his desire to lead a new, unsullied 
life. He had hoped to make a great and 
honorable name in the West; now he 
should be thankful if as a forgiven pen- 
itent, he might have the loving shelter 
of a retired, kindly, Christian home. 



72 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

CHAPTER IX. 

THE CONFESSION. 

Buster's sorrowful, anxious thoughts 
did not prevent him from having sound, 
refreshing sleep. The glimmer of early 
dawn recalled him to himself, and to the 
anticipation of the painful duty before 
him. Earnestly the poor boy prayed 
that morning that he might be sustained 
by the consciousness of the continual 
presence of the loving Saviour, and so 
bear whatever measure of deserved hu- 
miliation, and sorrow might be in store 
for him. 

"What, up already?" said Mr. Jillard, 
as he heard a stirring in Buster's room 
as he passed. "That's a good sign. 
When you are dressed, come down stairs, 
my lad, and we '11 have prayers at once. 



i THE CONFESSION. 73 

Mrs. Jillard has got our breakfast read}', 
I '11 warrant. She 's the early bird." 

In the large clean kitchen Mr. and 
Mrs. Jillard were sitting when Buster 
made his appearance. They were side 
by side, and together looking over the 
pages of a great Bible, as if to decide 
where to begin in their morning reading. 
"Have you ever read the Bible through, 
my boy ?" said the farmer, as if to call 
the new inmate into the family counsel. 

"No, sir, not all through; but I know 
the place where it tells a fellow to speak 
the truth, and that's what I want to do, 
right, straight, no matter what becomes 
of me." Buster was evidently excited. 
His shy and awkward manner of the 
evening before had gone, and a strange 
haunting memory of something in the 
past flitted across Mrs. Jillard's mind, as 
she looked full into his troubled face. 

"Speak out, and never fear," said the 



74 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

kind host. "This is your home, and the 
very place to tell what 's troubling you." 

Mr. Jillard spoke warmly, but there 
wag a sad misgiving at his heart that he 
was going to hear something that would 
give him a disagreeable surprise. 

We will not follow Buster through his 
short, painful story. He did not hide 
the fact that though he did not steal the 
purse, he had been familiar with deeds 
of the kind, and merely chanced that 
time not to be the real culprit. The re- 
membrance of the boy he had been was 
full upon him, and he could not too 
strongly express his sense of his worth- 
less, guilty condition. "It can't hurt 
Baby Jim now, ma'am, for me to tell the 
whole truth out here. He 's likely clone 
worse than that by this time, and has, 
may-be, had no friend to show him bet- 
ter. I 've told you all, just what I was 
when you saw me and I saw you. It is 



THE CONFESSION. 75 

right you should know. I think you 'd 
find me another fellow now, but you 
must make your choice. I can go back 
and join the boys there, and may-be 
somebody else would choose me ; but I 
know no other place could be like this." 
Buster stopped. "Poor boy!" ex- 
claimed honest Mrs. Jillard. "My heart 
ached for you when I turned my back 
on you, for I saw they were not going to 
let you off. It feels tenderer still to you 
now. Go away from here! Indeed you 
sha'n't. You shall stay, and be an hon- 
est western farmer. It was just think- 
ing of those little fellows I saw when I 
was in the city that made me tell Hicks, 
When that'lot of boys comes through here 
you must take one, and we '11 do by him 
as if he were our own, and God will add 
his blessing. That was what I said, 
was n't it, Hicks ? We '11 stand by it, 
wont we ?" 



76 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

Hicks Jillard had been perfectly silent 
while all this was going on, but now it 
was his turn to speak, and he stood up 
to give his words their full force. "I 
had a good mother, a real pious, smart 
woman. She set me right when I first 
put my two feet on the floor, and told 
me what was what and which way to 
walk. She folded my two hands, and 
made me pray at her knee before even 
I knew what the good words meant I 
had the best kind of a bringing up ; but 
the Lord have mercy upon me! where 
would I be if, at the judgment-day, the 
wickedness of my boyhood was to stand 
against me? Many a wrong thing I did 
which it cuts me to think of now, I who 
had the right way just chalked out for 
me, and nothing to do but let her that 
loved me lead me along in it. It little 
becomes me to be hard on you, my poor 
boy. God bless them that took you in 



THE CONFESSION. 17 

and made you with His help what you 
are. May we be just a father and mother 
to } T ou. That's all I have to say. Your 
name I told you was Paul Jillard. I be- 
lieve you'll do credit to it yet; and if 
you should n't, I'll never be sorry I gave 
you my right hand and called you my 
son. Here, let me hear if you can say 
'father,' and 'mother' too. A'n't she a 
woman any boy might be proud to call 
mother ?" 

Poor Busier almost shrunk away as he 
said, "I a'n't fit. You are too good to 
me." 

" We a'n't any of us fit. "We all have 
what 's too good for us. We ought all to 
be on our knees thanking God for the 
least of his mercies to us, and asking him 
to help us do our duty to one another. 
Let us pray." 

That was a real prayer, a true, faith- 
ful speaking to God on the part of every 



78 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

member of the kneeling group. When 
Buster rose, it was as if a great load bad 
been rolled from bis soul. 

When he went off to bis work that 
morning, Mrs. Jillard called out cheeri- 
ly, "Good-by, my son ; look out for your 
father, and do n't let him drink out of 
that cool spring "when be 's overheated." 

"Aye, aye, mother," was Buster's re- 
ply- 

Mother ! What a thrilling, lingering, 
soothing echo that word called up in the 
heart of the once wandering orphan-boy. 



LETTERS. T9 

CHAPTER X. 

LETTERS. 

Buster had been three months at the 
farm, when Mr. Jillard called him to his 
side one evening, and said, " I got a let- 
ter when I was up in town yesterday. 
May-be yon 7 d like to have me read it 
to you. It is from the gentleman who 
brought you boys out here. So sit down 
there and listen." 

Hicks Jillard had not wasted his time 
at school, and he was not ashamed to 
read before any body ; indeed, it was 
rather a pleasure to him, he thought he 
did the thing so well. In a clear voice 
he began : 

"ME. JILLAED: 

"Dear Sir — You may perhaps remem- 
ber the ten dollars you gave me to use 



SO BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

for purposes connected with our society." 
"I wish it had been twenty," interposed 
the reader. "I want to tell you how it 
has lately been appropriated. A few 
weeks ago, one of our citizens was awak- 
ened at night by some one entering his 
open window, which was at the back of 
the house. He drew a pistol from under 
his pillow, and shot at once at the spot 
from whence the noise proceeded. There 
was a sound of something falling into the 
little yard below. The gentleman sprang 
up, summoned the police from the front 
window, and then hastily dressing him- 
self, went to the yard. There he found 
the apparently lifeless figure of a little 
boy, who had been employed by older 
villains to climb the light grape-trellis 
under the window, that he might either 
steal for them, or give them an entrance 
into the house. The guilty rascals ran 
off, leaving the poor little fellow to his 



LETTERS. 8] 

fate; one of them, however, was after- 
wards taken, and through him the police 
are on the scent of the whole gang. The 
boy was baclly injured. His right arm 
had to be amputated, as inflammation set 
in when he was wounded ; and in addi- 
tion his whole frame was so jarred and 
bruised by the fall, that he will be a sad 
cripple for life. He does not sit up at 
all yet. We have him at the asylum, 
and are doing all we can to bring about 
a cure of mind and body. Your kind 
donation has been applied to his benefit, 
and I am sure you will feel a special in- 
terest in him and give him the help of 
your prayers. We do not k^iow his name. 
When asked to tell it, he said he never • 
had any ; folks called him just what they 
liked, and changed it pretty often too. I 
am glad to hear that Buster is doing so 
well. We never sent out a boy in whom 
we had more confidence. Tell him his 



82 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

last letter was read to all the boj T s, and 
they were greatly interested in it. He 
must let us know from time to time how 
he is getting on. 

"Yours very truly." 

Mr. Jillard had had a very attentive 
listener, and when he closed, Buster burst 
forth, "Oh, Mr. Jillard, if that should be 
Baby Jim! That was what they were 
getting him ready for; I knew it very 
well, though they never said it in words. 
Wont you write and ask just how he 
looks? I sha'n't rest till I know certainly 
about it." 

The very day after the arrival of Mr. 
Jillard's letter, Buster himself had one 
from the friend who understood better 
than any one else his deep anxiety for 
his brother. It was as follows. 

"Dear, Buster — I believe we have 
found him. I have been on the watch 
for him ever since we parted. I think 



LETTERS. 83 

we have Baby Jim with us, though he 
will not own to the name. He was bad- 
ly wounded, as you heard through the 
letter to Mr. Jillard, and if he ever re- 
covers he will be without his right arm, 
and crippled otherwise. I wish I could 
tell you something hopeful about his 
mind. He seems hardened and indiffer- 
ent, and all the kindness we have shown 
does not appear to have moved him at 
all. Don't be discouraged, my boy; 
God has so far answered your prayers : 
persevere, and he may yet give them a 
perfect fulfilment. You will wonder why 
I am sure that it is Baby Jim. He cor- 
responds to your description, and when 
I first called 'Baby Jim' in his presence, 
he started and was much confused. The 
poor child seems constantly fearing de- 
tection, and afraid to speak out frankly. 
I told him we once had a boy here named 
Buster, whom we all loved. You should 



84 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

have seen his eyes open and glisten, when 
I spoke of you. Yet he was perfectly 
silent, and has never asked me a ques- 
tion about you. Perhaps it would be 
well for you to write to him." 

Buster did not need to have it twice 
suggested to him that he should write to 
his long lost brother. Again and again 
he wrote, but received no word from 
Baby Jim. 

Buster heard that he listened in silence 
while his brother's letters were read to 
him, keeping his face covered with his 
only hand so that no one could see the 
working of his poor pale features, but 
never offered to send even a message in 
return. This was a hard time for Bus- 
ter. He longed to go at once to see 
Baby Jim, and strive to bring up in his 
eyes that pleasant old look of other days. 
He knew the thing was impossible, and 
did not dare to speak out the yearning 



LETTERS.* 85 

that was daily increasing, until it was 
almost uncontrollable. 

"Our Buster is worth two common 
boys,' 7 said Mr. Jillard one day, while 
talking with a neighbor. "I never saw 
the lad like him for work; so steady 
too." 

This praise, spoken in his hearing, was 
very welcome to Buster ; it had for him 
a double value. That evening he said 
to Mr. Jillard, "Do you really think I 
am a good worker ?" 

"Indeed I do," was the hearty reply. 

"May-be I could do the work of two 
boys, if I were to try. I 'd be willing. 
I 'd get up early and keep on after night. 
If I could do for him and me, and had a 
place where I could keep him and see 
him sometimes. The loft in the barn 
Baby Jim would think plenty good. No- 
body need be troubled with him. If we 
could only get him here." "Pshaw, Bus- 



86 BUSTETR AND BABY JIM. 

ter, you'd kill yourself for that boy," 
said Mr. Jillard. "My Mrs. Jillard 
would n't rest with a poor cripple sleep- 
ing in her barn, while she was on the 
feather-bed her mother gave her when 
she was married. Be industrious, my 
boy, and there 's no knowing what you 
may be able to do when you are a man. 
We '11 see ; we '11 see." 

" When you are a man!" That seem- 
ed a dreary distant time to Buster. Who 
could understand the impatient yearning 
of his impulsive young spirit? 



THE TEMPTED. 87 



CHAPTER XI. 



THE TEMPTED. 



Mr. Jillard had been selling some of 
his fine cattle. He had been paid in 
gold. Buster had seen the mpney. count- 
ed out on the kitchen-table. He knew 
where it was locked up for safe keeping. 
He knew where the key of the corner 
cupboard was hidden in a tea-cup on a 
high shelf in the pantry. Sad, sad know- 
ledge for Buster. Why was it that it 
haunted him after he lay down to sleep? 
Why did the glimmer of the gold contin- 
ually glitter before his eyes? He jumped 
up and thrust his head out into the cool 
air to calm his fevered brain. He but 
saw how low was the window, how easy 
to jump from it and be far away before 
the morning light. With that bag: of 



88 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

gold, what might he not do for Baby 
Jim ? Once his own master, he would 
take charge of his little brother, and 
teach him to lead an honest Christian life. 

So whispered the tempter, and Buster 
listened, listened till in fancy he had the 
treasure in his hands and was speeding 
over t^ie fields with his ill-gotten gains. 
The sins of his youth had risen up to claim 
Buster as their victim. Would he fall? 

Ah, there was One stronger than the 
great adversary on the side of the tempt- 
ed boy. There was a power mightier 
than the force of old habits, or the deceit- 
ful allurement of doing evil that good 
might come. One who had suffered be- 
hig tempted, was able to succor him when 
he was tempted. He had a High-priest 
who is touched with a feeling of our in- 
firmities, and he therefore dared to come 
boldly to the throne of grace to find help 
in his time of need. 



THE TEMPTED. 89 

Buster turned quickly from the win- 
dow and threw himself upon his knees. 
"God be merciful to me a sinner. Christ 
save me. Help, or I perish," he cried in 
the anguish of his spirit. 

Deep and sincere was his repentance 
for having allowed his mind to be sul- 
lied even for a moment by such guilty 
thoughts. Now for the first time he real- 
ized how great had been his want of faith 
in feeling that he must take charge of his 
brother in person, or else all would go 
wrong. He saw that safer far would be 
Baby Jim in the keeping of a merciful 
Saviour, than under the most watchful 
care of his weak and tempted brother. 
To that Saviour he now committed him 
in perfect trust. Having cast his care 
on Him who is ready to bear all our bur- 
dens, Buster lay down to sleep, more 
calm and hopeful than he had been for 
many a long day. 



90 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 



CHAPTER XII. 

BUSINESS IN TOWN. 

Buster was roused the next morning 
at an early hour by an unusual stir in 
the house. Mrs. Jillard might be heard 
flying hither and thither, and there was 
a lumbering sound, as of heavy articles 
being moved, while the farmer and his 
wife were deep in earnest conversation. 

"Now, Buster, up with you, and be 
down as quick as you can," said Mr. 
Jillard's voice at the foot of the stairs. 
"We must be off for town as soon as we 
can. I have business to do there, and 
shall want you with me." 

Buster was not to go on horseback 
this day. Mr. Jillard's long wagon was 
put in requisition for the trip, and Bus- 



BUSINESS IN TOWN. 91 

ter was promised the pleasure of driving 
a pair for the first time in his life. The 
bag of gold was brought out, and Buster 
soon concluded that to deposit this treas- 
ure in the bank was the object of the 
trip. Mrs. Jillarcl favored her good hus- 
band with many parting injunctions, such 
as, "Be careful. Remember you are not 
a woman." This last caution Buster could 
not help thinking was particularly inap- 
propriate, when he remembered how easy 
it had been to rob a certain honest woman 
on her first trip to the city. 

It was no temptation to Buster now to 
see the bag of gold counted over once 
more before his eyes. He did not covet 
one single dollar of it. He was thankful 
that the miserable suggestions of the con- 
quered enemy were not again presented 
to his mind. He had placed his little 
brother in the care of One who can com- 
mand the riches of the earth for his wise 



92 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

purposes, and make even kings do his 
bidding. 

Mrs. Jillard at the last moment came 
staggering under the burden of a mon- 
strous bundle, which she rolled in on the 
clean straw in the wagon. 

Buster wondered much what it could 
contain, but he asked no questions, sure 
that Mr. Jillard would only give him a 
mysterious joking answer. Hicks Jillard 
did not like to have even his Mrs. Jillard 
too curious as to his plans and projects. 

Straight to the bank drove the farmer, 
as soon as he entered the town. When 
the money was deposited, he turned his 
horses' heads towards the railroad de- 
pot, and then stood anxiously awaiting 
the arrival of the train, 

11 Company coming to our house?" Bus- 
ter ventured to inquire. 

"May-be," was the laconic answer. 
• There was the welcome whistle at last, 



BUSINESS IN TOWN. 93 

then the black locomotive was seen far 
down the narrow valley through which 
the road was built. Hicks Jillard jump- 
ed into the wagon, untied the bundle and 
arranged some pillows and bed-quilts to 
his satisfaction, and then was down again 
in a moment, so as to be at his place when 
the train fairly stopped. 

Anxiously he passed his eye along the 
line of cars ; at length he seemed to see 
the object he desired. At a side-door a 
strong man appeared carrying a crippled 
boy. Buster needed no prompting now. 
He sprang to receive the precious bur- 
den in his arms, exclaiming, "Baby Jim! 
I should have known him anywhere. 7 ' 

The poor little fellow dropped his head 
upon Buster's shoulder, and cried like a 
baby. 

"You know me, don't you? You 
know Buster? You ha'n't forgot me?" 
said the big brother in appealing tones. 



94 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

"All right," murmured little Jim, 
clinging the closer to the stout arms that 
held him. 

"Here, lay him in here. I Ve got it 
all ready," said Mr. Jillard, moving tow- 
ards the wagon. " I thought you ; d like 
the job I had for you, Buster." 

That meeting of the brothers had been 
worth more to Hicks Jillard than the bag 
of gold he had laid by that morning He 
charged his memory to store away a per- 
fect picture of it for Mrs. Jillard. 

Baby Jim did not want to lie on that 
good soft bed. He liked best to be held 
firmly by the only being in the wide 
world who had ever loved him. It was 
not until he was in a sound sleep that his 
head was gently placed on the pillow, and 
he was covered up as carefully as if he 
were the heir apparent of a throne. 

Buster had no words in which to thank 
Mr. Jillard for his kindness, though he 



BUSINESS IN TOWN. 95 

vainly tried to express the deep grati- 
tude he felt. 

"Don't say a word, boy," said the 
honest farmer ; "I meant it from the first, 
but I did n't dare to tell you, for fear it 
could n't be. I was n't sure he could be 
moved, or there 'd be any body to bring 
him. The Asylum folks, however, stick 
at nothing that 's for the good of the 
boys. God bless them." 

"You '11 have a blessing too, sir, that ? s 
sure," said Buster warmly. 

"I hav'n't done any thing. It was 
more Mrs. Jillard. She's hankered after 
that little chap ever since she heard 
about him. She 's an idea that her Dol- 
ly's sweet milk will fetch him up, and 
straighten him out ; and I do n't know but 
she thinks his arm will grow right on 
again, if she once gets the care of him. 
The nights she talked about it to me, 
and planned over it ! Why, she 's got a 



96 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

mattress all fixed up for the settee in the 
kitchen, and she means to have him there 
all day, where she can look after him, 
she says. A'n't she a woman, now ?" 

"And to think she lets me call her 
mother! I wish I might be a right son 
to her," said Buster. 

"And so you will. And so will he 
too. He '11 serve her for a daughter in 
the house, where she can see him all the 
time and have somebody to talk to. My 
Mrs. Jillard likes a good listener, 7 ' said 
Hicks, with a funny quirk of his mouth. 

Buster thought of his moment of temp- 
tation the night before, the terrible strug- 
gle that had sent him trembling to his 
knees. Ah, if he had yielded, where 
now would have been the cheerful pros- 
pect that was opening before him? What 
sorrow and disappointment he would 
have brought upon the friends who had 
so kindly sheltered him. How sure 



BUSINESS IN TOWN. 01 

would have been his own utter falling 
back into wickedness and misery. 

With devout thanksgiving, Buster si- 
lently praised the God who had watched 
over him in his hour of peril, and brought 
him off conqueror, though the enemy of 
souls had striven to drag him down to 
eternal death. 



«?>. BUSTER AKD BABY JIM. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

CONCLUSION. 

Suffering and weakness made Baby 
Jim seem even smaller and younger to 
his brother's eyes than when they parted. 
Rough companions and hard usage had 
been his lot since then. His life had 
been risked as of little value, where older 
villains would not willingly trust their 
own necks. No ledge along a house was 
thought too narrow for him to find a 
footing, no trellis too slender for him to 
climb. He was told that if he fell, there 
would be nobody to cry ; and if he suc- 
ceeded, a golden reward was promised 
him, still promised him, though as yet he 
had barely daily bread. "While Buster 
was at his side, even grown men would 
not so have treated Baby Jim. The boy 



CONCLUSION. 39 

knew it, and often and longingly had his 
thoughts turned towards the lost com- 
panion of his childhood. Baby Jim had 
found the way of transgressors hard in- 
deed, with few rays of sunshine to cheer 
the dreary path. 

Now he was to be nursed and petted 
as if he were some precious thing. He 
had fallen among God's true children, 
who count every sufferer as tfoe peculiar 
charge of Christ, to be loved and cared 
for as if sent by the Crucified himself. 
"Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one 
of the least of these my brethren, ye 
have done it unto me," were heart- 
appreciated words to Mr. and Mrs. Jil- 
lard, and they rejoiced that a way was 
yet left them of ministering to His neces- 
sities, who while on earth had not where 
to lay his sacred head. 

All clay long Baby Jim would lie quiet- 
ly on his easy couch, taking a sort of re- 



LOO BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

fleeted comfort from Mrs. Jillard's kind, 
cheerful face ; but when the farmer and 
Buster came into the kitchen, he claimed 
a little more attention. He raised him- 
self at once to be taken into Buster's 
arms, where he chiefly loved to find him- 
self; and it was thus that he took his 
place at the table, where the tenderest 
morsels and the fairest fruit were always 
selected for him. 

For Mr. Jillard's quizzical smile and 
playful greeting, Baby Jim had a quiet 
twinkle of the eye, that told that the far- 
mer's fun was welcome, though it won no 
spoken response. 

Jim gained slowly but constantly in 
bodily strength, though as yet he gave 
no sign of that true, inward progress 
which was most at his brother's heart. 
When approached on religious subjects, 
he was pertinaciously silent, and Buster 
at length despairingly said to Mr. Jil- 



CONCLUSION. 101 

lard, "I don't believe he'll ever comt 
right. I am all discouraged about him.' 
Mr. Jillard's reply was prompt and plain. 
" You do act, Buster, as. if you had to 
be on the ridge-pole, or else the house 
would blow down. You Ve got nothing 
to do with making Jim a Christian 
You 've asked the Lord to do it, and 
are sure he'll hear you; but it will be 
in His time and way. What more do 
you want? Here your brother has all 
day long a Christian woman to watch; 
where will you find her equal ? He sees 
the working of the thing. Then the Bi- 
ble is read in his ears every morning, 
and our prayers are going up for him, 
where he can't help but hear them. You 
and I must do what we can by way of 
making our religion show it is the real 
thing in us, and that will be sure to tell. 
I do n't mind your now and then trying 
to persuade him ; that is all natural and 



102 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

right, if you believe you are on the true 
track : but do n't keep at him all the- 
tirae. Do } r our duty and trust the Lord. 
The sun don't dart up like a shooting- 
star ; the wheat do n't make the air whiz 
with its fast growing. The best works 
go on slowly. I 've great hopes for that 
boy. He 's been brought through a great 
deal, and I believe there 's a white robe 
for him and a place in the many man- 
sions, though we can't see it yet." 

Buster profited by Mr. Jillard's plain 
talking. He remembered the Baby Jim 
of .old — keen and cautious, slow to come 
to a conclusion; but once fixed, not to 
be easily turned from his purpose. He 
could not expect, in one so differently 
constituted, the same religious experi- 
ence he had himself passed through. 
He would pray, and be patient. Yet 
when Buster felt Baby Jim's clinging 
arms around him, and saw the small face 



CONCLUSION. 103 

looking up lovingly to his, in his heart 
he yearned to have his brother seek the 
Saviour's bosom, and look up to the eyes 
which "closed in death to save him." 
Such yearnings are in themselves of the 
nature of the truest prayer, the soul ap- 
pealing to the present God for the choic- 
est blessings for its dear ones. 

Through the long winter Baby Jim 
was but as a tender house-plant, needing 
the most unwearied care and attention ; 
but as the breath of spring touched the 
tre.es and flowers, he too seemed to re- 
vive. His eyes grew brighter, and a 
new strength awoke in his young frame. 
When Mrs. Jillard's boasted hyacinths 
were in blossom on the sunny side of the 
house, little Jim was able to get out to 
look at them, and as he lingered on the 
door-step the very pride of them all was 
placed in his hands. There he sat look- 
ing at the rows of full, pink-tinted bios- 



104 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

soms, while- Mrs. Jillard glanced from 
him to the flower, her eye falling on them 
both with equal satisfaction. 

"I'm not pretty, like it," said Baby 
Jim, expressing involuntarily his feeling 
of wonder that Mrs. Jillard should gaze 
so lovingly at him. 

The poor bent, crippled boy, with his 
pale, thin, old-looking face, was in truth 
very unlike the pure sweet flower in its 
perfection of beauty. 

"You dear fellow, it does my heart 
good to see you out in the fresh air once 
more," said Mrs. Jillard, and she sat 
down beside Baby Jim and put her kind 
motherly arm about him. 

Jim leaned against her as he whisper- 
ed, "I a'n't fit to live here with you, 
after where I've lived, and what I've 
seen, and done myself too. I a'n't like 
this," and he pointed again at the flower. 

"It grew up out of the dark, dirty 



CONCLUSION. 105 

ground. God made it so sweet and beau- 
tiful, and I do n't mind if it has an ugly 
old root all covered up in the earth. I 
do n't care where my Jimmy has lived. 
I love him, and I think God is making 
him one of his own dear children. Is n't 
it so, Jimmy ? Tell your mother." 

Baby Jim pressed his one hand against 
Mrs. Jillard's, and slowly bowed his head 
two or three times. She kissed him a 
fond loving kiss as she murmured, "Bless 
you, clear, God bless you." 

Baby Jim rose up slowly, and moved 
in his unsteady way round the corner of 
the house. Mrs. Jillard did not follow 
him. He could go about safely by him- 
self now, though he never strayed far 
from the kind face that had beamed so 
cheerily upon him through the long win- 
ter. 

Mrs. Jillard's clean parlor was rarely 
opened. The green paper curtains shut 



106 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

out the light, and within all was neatness 
and darkness. At the side windows the 
lilac bushes held their undisturbed reign. 
They had grown until they nearly reach- 
ed the roof, and in the centre of the clus- 
ter of bushes was a shaded spot which 
Mrs. Jillard thought only visited by the 
robins who had their nests in the shrub- 
bery. Other feet however found their 
way to this hidden retreat, for hither 
Baby Jim quietly crept. He pushed his 
way through the outside undergrowth, 
and then was lost from sidit. 

"Mother," said Buster coming quickly 
up to Mrs. Jillard, who was still busy 
among her flowers, "Mother, father wants 
his new knife. He has broken his old 
one." 

"Go into the parlor and get it, my 
boy; it is in the little chimney cupboard, 
on the left-hand side." 

Buster fumbled about in the dark 



CONCLUSION. 107 

room, then stepped to the window to 
give himself more light. Sunshine and 
joy indeed burst upon him,- such joy as 
angels know in heaven. There in his 
chosen retreat knelt Baby Jim, his face 
uplifted with the sweet, loving, tender 
look in it which Buster knew so well. 

From the depths of his softened heart 
little Jim was thanking the Lord who 
had mercifully brought him to such a 
home, and praying that he might be made 
worthy of the loving care bestowed upon 
him. 

Buster mechanically snatched the knife, 
and then quickly left the room. In an- 
other moment a strong arm was round 
little Jim, and the brothers knelt side by 
side. It was Buster's voice that spoke 
the deep gratitude of his soul as he drew 
the "lost and found" still closer to his 
side. 

Buster could not linger, duty called 



f08 BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

him away. Fast over the fields he was 
soon speeding with a springing, joyous 
step, and forth on the air sounded his 
hymn of praise : 

" For good is the Lord, inexpressibly good, 
And we are the work of his hand ; 
His mercy and truth from eternity stood, 
And shall to eternity stand." 

Love, true Christian love had sought 
the poor wandering wicked brothers, and 
brought them to the feet of Jesus. 

And can the depraved children of the 
city be so reformed and made useful 
members of society — of the communion 
of Christ's church on earth, and of the 
redeemed in heaven? The Holy Spirit 
of power can wash away the darkest 
stains, and purify the foulest heart. 
' ' With God all things are possible." But 
has this great and wonderful work ever 
been accomplished ? Go ask the benev- 
olent men who labor for such institutions 



CONCLUSION. 109 

as we have described, and hear their 
cheering reply. Yes, blessed be God, 
many such wanderers have been reclaim- 
ed: some are adorning earthly homes; 
some, we trust, are shining in heaven. 

The eternal mansions are opened wide, 
the Master's feast is ready. To us comes 
the message, "GJ-o out quickly into the 
streets and lanes of the city, and bring 
in hither the poor — that my house may 
be filled.'"' 



Beauflftd ®@@ki 

FOR CHILDREN AND YOUTH. 



Flowers of Spring-time. Combining amusement nn<] 
Instruction in most attractive forms. One hundred and 
fifty Engravings. Quarto size. 

Home Scenes. An elegant small quarto for the family, 
with fourteen photographic pictures, fac-similes of fine 
Engravings. 

Views from Nature. Forty scenes in nature and art 
Finely printed in tint. . 

Hours with Mamma. By Mrs. S. E. Dawes of Bos- 
ton, Mass. Charming reproductions of Bible narratives, 
for young children. These pictures of persons and scenes 
of never-failing interest are sketched by a practised hand. 
Thirty-three fine Engravings. 

Songs for the Little Ones at Home. Attractive as 
over. Beautifully illustrated. 

Lullabies, Ditties, and Tales. Original short Poems 
for the Children, containing Tales, Songs, and Dialogues. 
With eighty-four Engravings. 

Home Pictures. 72 pages. A fine Cut on each page. 

My Picture-book. 64 pages. Sixty-one Engravings. 

Fireside Pictures. 64 pages. With a Cut on each 

sage. 

The Illustrated Tract Primer. The Children's favor* 
ito. Finely Illustrated. 

Published by the American Tract Society, and for 
sale at tlie Tract House, 150 Nassau-street, JVev? 
Yorli, by the Society's agents, and by booksellers. 



