J. ^/f 



PRESENTED TO THE LIBRARY 



OF 



PRINCETON THEOLOGICAL SEMINHRY 



BY 



|VIi»s. Alexander Ppoudfit. 

BV 4801 .H36 1866 
Harsha, D. A. 1827-1895. 
The Christian's present for 
all seasons 



"i-^^SSrs^-'i- _;^- 



ciK'.^-- 




/ - 



'•"/' 



■W^^ 



f -^^ 



n/ij,a/ric 



THE 



CONTAINING 



DEYOTIOIAL THOUCxHTS 

OP 

EMINENT DIVINES, 

FROM 

JOSEPH HALL TO WILLIAM JAY, 



SELECTED, AND EDITED 



By D. a. HARSHA, M.A., 

Author of The Star of Bethlehem, a Guiiie to the Saviour ; the Heavenly Token ; 
Life and Times of Philip Doddri<ige, eto. 



WITH AN 



mTRODUCTORY ESSAY ON DEVOTION, 



W. B. SPRAGUE, D.D. 



Devotion.—' O God, raise my spirits more and more to that 
heavenly employment.'— JJp. Patrick. 



PUBLISHED BY THE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

loO NASSAU STREET, NEW YOKK. 



Eiuerei according to Act of Congress, in the year 1S66, by 
D. A. HARSHA, 

In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the United States for the 
Northern District of New York. 



INTRODUCTORY ESSAY. 



Devotion may be considered in reference either 
to the act performed, or tlie spirit in which the act 
originates. Between the act and tlie spirit there is 
an indissoluble connection — the latter could not 
lone: exist without manifestino; itself in the former — 
the former without the latter w^ould be simple 
hypocrisy. As the heart, being the fountain of all 
moral action, gives complexion to the life, so the 
devotional habits of an individual will be deter- 
mined by his devotional feelings. There may 
indeed be the appearance of devotion where there 
is not the reality; but insincerity even towards God 
wdll be almost sure to betray itself to the observation 
of men. 

But while all devotion recognizes a God, or at least 
a being who is called God, it is obvious that the 
devotion must assume a type corresponding with 
the character of the being who is the object of it. 
The Pagan bows before an image of wood or stoue; 



IV INTRODUCTORY ESSAY. 

but the homage that he renders, is an offence not 
only against the living and true God, but against 
the dignity of his own nature. The Deist profes- 
sedly acknoAvledges the God who is revealed by 
the light of nature; and he ascribes to Him infinite 
perfection; and owns himself dependent upon his 
l)ounty and his care; but he forgets that he has to 
approach Him as a sinner, and that God is of purer 
eyes than to behold iniquity, and therefore cannot 
be approached except in the new and living way 
which He hath himself ordained. It is Christianity 
alone that puts us into legitimate communion with 
the Father of our spirits. This shows us that the 
only way to the throne of mercy leads by the Cross; 
that it is only through the gracious intercession of 
the Lord Jesus, founded on the merit of his atoning 
sacrifice, that our prayers, offered in humility and 
faith, can find acceptance. 

Th<^ spirit of devotion may be regarded as an 
epitome of the Christian graces — these graces arc 
combined in the exercise of this spirit; and more 
than that, they react with a quickening power upon 
the spirit itself. The truly devout Christian bows 
with reverence before the Divine perfections; takes 
counsel of the word and providence of God for 
intimations of the Divine will; laments the preva- 



INTRODUCTORY ESSAY. V 

lence of indwelling sin; relies on the merits of 
Christ and the power and grace of the Holy Spirit; 
and prays for an increasing conformity to the pre- 
cepts of the Gospel, and for the universal preva- 
lence of truth and righteousness. And with these 
exercises are identified humility, trust, submission, 
charity, zeal in doing good, — every thing that ele- 
vates human character, and constitutes the appropri- 
ate preparation for Heaven. 

If then the spirit of devotion is so important in 
its exercises and results, if it is that with which the 
tone of Christian character is pre-eminently identi- 
fied, surely it is not less the interest than the duty 
of every Christian to guard against all those influ- 
ences by wdiich its exercise is impeded. And what 
are some of those influences? 

There is the influence of a low state of relio-ion 
in the heart. The process of sanctification, thougli 
on the whole progressive, is marked by great irre- 
gularity and inconstancy, and sometimes even seems 
to assume a retrograde course. There are times, in 
the experience of many Christians at least, when 
most of the graces seem to have passed into an 
eclipse, and the world triumphantly inquire in 
respect to them, — "What do they more than 
others?'' The sense of Christian obi illation has 



VI INTRODUCTORY ESSAY. 

been greatly lowered; the estimate of God's word 
and ordinances has sunk proportionally; and the 
atmosphere which they breathe most freely is not 
that which is sanctified by the presence of the Holy 
Spirit. In such a heart surely the spirit of devotion 
cannot but languish; and the waking np of that 
spirit is to be looked for only in a return to all the 
duties of the Christian life. 

Closely connected wdth the preceding, and even 
identified with it, is the prevalence of ungodly pas- 
sion, which forms so large an element in our corrupt 
nature. As men differ in their original constitu- 
tions, — some possessing one quality in a higher 
degree, and some another, — so the evil passions 
and propensities that remain in the heart, after the 
regenerating work is performed, exist in different 
individuals in various deofrees of stren2:th. Here there 
is an undue appreciation of worldly honour, and cor- 
respondiug efforts to attain it. There deceitful 
riches play upon the imagination and the heart with 
a power that proves irresistible. And yonder is 
another who indulges in covetousness, or envy, or 
who even suffers the viper revenge, under some 
misnomer, to linger in his bosom. But can any 
thing be more hostile than these ungodly passions 
to the spirit of devotion? Ts it not manifest that. 



INTRODUCTORY ESSAY. vii 

just in proportion as they prevail in the soul, there 
must be a disinclination, an absolute disability, for 
communion with God? 

And there is an influence from the outer world, 
co-operating with that from the inner, tendiug to 
the same result. Here we have, for the present, our 
home, — our place of residence, our field of labour. 
Such has been the ordering of our lot that we are 
kept, at various points, in contact Avith the Avorld; 
and, in yielding tp this arrangement and acting in 
accordance with it, we only obey a divinely ordained 
necessity of our earthly condition. Nor is there 
any thing in this arrangement that necessarily inter- 
feres with the exercise of a devotional spirit — on 
the contrary, there is much, which, if viewed aright, 
is fitted to encourage and cherish it; and yet all 
experience proves that, by perversion, it becomes a 
powerful means of counteracting the soul's upward 
tendencies, and sometimes of absolutely chaining it 
down to earth. So long as we can plead that we 
are obevins^ the Divine mandate in attendino* to our 

I/O o 

secular concerns, and that to "be diligent in busi- 
ness" is required by the same authority as to "pray 
without ceasing," there is danger, great danger, that 
we shall sufier the world to gain an undue dominion 
over us; and, as a consequence, that a proportional 



Vlll INTRODUCTORY ESSAY. 

irregularity and formality will pervade our devo- 
tions. But wliile this effect may be produced by 
tlie mere want of watchfulness in our necessary 
worldly engagements, let it be remembered that the 
world is little less than " a show-box of tempta- 
tions;" that the wealth of the world, and the pomp 
and show of the world, and the official stations of 
the world, have each their respective attractions; 
while the world itself is full of "evil men and 
seducers who wax worse and worse." Now, when it 
is remembered that these varied influences for evil 
have to act upon hearts in which the love of evil 
has been only partially removed, and in which there 
is still more or less of sympathy with surrounding 
temptation, who does not perceive that there is 
imminent danger lest the principle of the new life 
should languish, involving of course the vigorous 
actings of the spirit of devotion? What observing 
Christian is there, whose memory is not the deposi- 
tory of many sad cases in which the world has so 
far triumphed in the heart of the professed disciple 
of Christ, that prayer, which had once been his 
vital breath, has come to seem indiflEcrent,- if not 
positively distasteful? 

But if it is important that we Avatch against those 
influences which tend to deaden the spirit of devo- 



INTRODUCTORY ESSAY. ix 

tion, equally necessary is it that we avail ourselves 
of all the helps within our reach for its exercise 
and culture. 

One of these is to be found in the careful keep- 
ing of the heart. He who keeps his heart with all 
diligence will not only be secure against the inroads 
of temptation, but will be sure also to keep a con- 
science in a good degree void of offence; and this 
will render an approach to the throne of grace easy 
and pleasant to him. So too there will be associ- 
ated with this a deep sense of dependence; for it is 
impossible that one should explore diligently and 
habitually his own heart, without realizing that the 
sanctifying work that is to be carried forward there, 
can never proceed independently of an influence 
from on high, — an influence not to be hoped for 
except in answer to fervent prayer. Indeed, the 
very exercise of keeping the heart not only serves 
to keep alive a devotional spirit, by direct minis- 
tration, but that spirit may be regarded as its pri- 
mary element — the two essentially coexist, and 
inhere in each other. 

A religious observance of the dispensations of 
Providence, whether in respect to ourselves or 
others, tends to the same result. Notwithstanding 
the order of events proceeds according to fixed 

1^ 



X INTRODUCTORY ESSAY. 

laws, aud in this very uniformity the Atheist finds 
an aro'ument as^ainst the existence of a God, still 
every religious observer of Avhat is passing must see 
evidences the most conclusive of the movements of 
a Divine hand. And if God is always i^resent with 
me to supply my wants and crown me with his 
goodness, shall I not be drawn near to Him in acts 
of devout thanksgiving? If I become forgetful of 
his benefits or remiss in my duty, and He adminis- 
tel's a orracious chastisement with a view to humble 
and reform me, shall I not betake nwself at once to 
the throne of mercy, there to humble m^^self for my 
sin, and to accept reverently the Divine correction? 
And so, when I look around me and notice the vari- 
ous ways in which my fellow-creatures are led; 
when I see blessings crowding upon the footsteps 
of some, and fearful calamities accumulating in the 
path of others; when I extend my view and take in 
the nation or the world, and mark the wonderful 
changes that are going forward everywhere — here 
perplexity and disaster, there success and triumph; 
here the reign of the deepest moral darkness, and 
there the clouds passing off" as the Sun of Kighte- 
ousness breaks forth; — I say, when I take such a 
broad view as this, can I fail to find material for 
devotion every where? Must I not adore the hand 



INTRODUCTORY ESSAY. xi 

that can work such changes? Must I not praise the 
hand that can pour forth such blessings? Must I 
not tremble before the hand that can inflict such 
terrible evils? Must I not be more than ever desir- 
ous to dwell in the secret place of the Most High? 

There is that also in frequent and intimate Chris- 
tian intercourse, that is fitted to strengthen the 
habit of devotion. B}^ communing frequently with 
each other, Christians come to know more not only 
of one another's hearts but of their own; and thus 
they come to the throne of grace, sharing one 
another's burdens, and supplicating more intelli- 
gently as well as more earnestly for themselves. 
Let a company of Christian friends be assembled to 
take counsel of each other in respect to their trials, 
or duties, or prospects, or any thing pertaining to 
the Christian life, and while they will almost of 
course crown the interview with united prayer, they 
will carry away with them a spirit that will make 
their closets more dear to them, and render them 
fellow helpers there unto the kingdom of God. 

Yet another aid to the spirit of devotion is found 
in the diligent study of God's word, and other 
books of spiritual tendency. As the Bil)le is an 
immediate revelation from God, containing a record 
of his doings in the past and predictions of what lie 



Xll INTRODUCTORY ESSAY. 

will do hereafter; as it illustrates the great princi- 
ples of his government, and teaches ns all that 
it is necessary we should know in respect to the 
economy of our salvation; as it brings us in con- 
tact with truths and facts, bearing not upon indi- 
viduals merely, but upon the race, and as not a 
small portion of its contents actually take on the 
form of confession, supplication and praise, — it can- 
not otherwise be, in view of all these considerations, 
than that the earnest student of the Bible, — admit- 
ting that he approaches it with a proper spirit, — 
should, at the same time, possess, in large measure, 
the spirit of prayer. It certainly is not to be 
denied that the Bible may be studied, and that too 
with great zeal and carefulness, for the mere grati- 
fication of curiosity, or for the still worse purpose 
of disproving its Divine authority; and in every 
such case of course nothing but evil can be expected 
as the result; but let it be studied as the word of 
God, with a sincere desire to find out and digest its 
precious meaning, and the effect will be that the 
individual concerned will be sensible of constantly 
growing attractions in the throne of grace, and with 
the increase of his scriptural knowledge there will 
be a corresponding growth of his devotional fervour. 
And though the Bible is the Book above all 



INTRODUCTORY ESSAY. xiii 

others, yet it is by no means the only book, from 
which the spirit of devotion is to be inhaled — the 
world is fnll of books which have draAvn their 
materials substantially from the Bible; some of 
which are designed simply to explain its meaning; 
others to enforce and impress its blessed truths; and 
not a few, like the Psalms of David, bring the soul 
into direct communion with its God. We are 
obliged indeed to admit that in this almost endless 
variety of books, purporting to bear a religious 
character, there are not a few that are worse than 
useless; while some strike at the very roots of that 
religion of which they profess to appear as advo- 
cates. But, notwithstanding the deluge of trash 
that has come in under the assumed character of 
religious literature, the world abounds with works 
that reflect the truths of the Bible in sunbeams, and 
that bring these truths in direct contact with the 
conscience and the heart. Such works, judiciously 
selected, it is desirable that every Christian should 
avail himself of, in the prosecution of his religious 
course; and in so doing, while the general tone of 
his spiritual life will be quickened, he will secure 
to himself a larger measure of that dependent, 
grateful,- confiding spirit that loves to breathe out 
its ofierings at the throne of the Heavenly grace. 



xiv INTRODUCTORY ESSAY. 

Among the many excellent works adapted espe* 
cially to help the Christian iu his devotions, that to 
which this brief Essay is designed as an introduc- 
tion, holds a prominent place. The Compiler seems 
'to have ran2:ed throus^h almost the whole field of 
devotional literature, and to have gathered up all 
the Ijrightest gems that came iu his way; and so 
successful has he been that one may open the book 
at random, as often as he will, and will never find 
his eye resting upon any thing that he can afford to 
pass over, or that does not supply the elements of 
rich devotional thought. It is difficult to say which 
is most to be admired, the Compiler's good judg- 
ment and taste, or his extraordinary patience in 
research, that has brought to us the heavenly 
thoughts of so many saints and sages. Of all the 
contributions that Mr. Harsha has made to our 
Christian literature, it may reasonably be doubted 
whether there is one for which posterity will, hold 
him in more grateful remembrance, than this beau- 
tiful compilation of "Devotional Thoughts." 

W. B. S. 



PRE FAC E. 



It is more than ten years since tlie preparation of the present 
volume was commenced. During all this time, the selection of these 
beautiful i3assages has been slowly but steadily carried on. Tlie 
work was undertaken in connection with the editing of a TAhrary 
of Christian Authors, embracing Memoirs of Eminent Divines, and 
their choice works — a series whose preparation is not yet completed. 
In performing this long and arduous labor, and Avhile carefully 
perusing the works of our best authors, from the 17th century to 
the present time, passages in each author, which the editor regarded 
as among the finest specimens of devotional and practical writing, 
were selected for the present volume. In this manner have these 
' calm and holy thoughts' of those who have shone as stars in the 
firmament of the Christian Church, been brought together; and it 
is believed that in the following pages will be found some of the 
choicest gems of English sacred literature — gems which ' within 
small compass, and in purest gold, will preserve their lustre for 
ages.' 

The selections are from forty writers, whose names are given in 
chronological order, with the dates of their birth and death. By 
far the most copious selections are from the works of Bishop Hall, 
one of the most devotional, and at the same time, most evangelical 
of our Christian authors. Among the others, a large space is also 
given to Archbishop Leighton, who exhibits a truly devotional spirit, 
and of whom Coleridge has justly remarked: 'If there could be 
an intermediate space between inspired and uninspired writings, 
that space would be occupied by Leighton.' 

The selections are made from the latest or best editions of the 
works of the various authors, in the editor's private library; and 
the most of the following specimens of devotional and practical wri- 
tings, are from volumes not easily accessible to the general reader. 

' There are remains of great and good men,' says Mattliew Henry, 
' which, like Elijah's mantle, ought to be gathered up and preserved 
by the survivors; their sayings, their Avritings, their examples; 
that as their works follow them in the reward of them, they may stay 
behind in the benefit of them.' And here are some of those ' remains",' 
gathered from the writings of some of the excellent of the earth, 
which are fitted to fill the mind of the Christian with delightful 
thoughts of the Saviour, and of His glorious work of redemption; 



18 PREFACE. 

to excite devotional feelings, and to raise the affections to that hetter 
land, — 

' AVhere beauty smiles eternally, 
And pleasure never dies.' 

It has been well remarked by Bishop Hall, that ' the soul that 
is rightly affected to God, is never void of a holy devotion. Where- 
ever it is, whatever it doth, it is still lifted up to God, and fastened 
upon Him, and converses with Him; ever serving the Lord in fear, 
and rejoicing in Him with trembling.' Most gladly would the edi- 
tor of this volume say to the Christian reader, in the words of the 
same excellent divine: ' If I have given your devotions any light, 
it is well ; the least glimpse of this knowledge is worth all the full 
gleams of human and earthly skill.' 

In the sincere hope of assisting the believer in Jesus in the hea- 
venly exercise of devotion, and of solacing his mind amidst the 
various trials, conflicts, sorrows and bereavements of life, the present 
manual is now offered to the Christian public. 

May the precious thoughts in this volume soothe and cheer the 
Christian in his pilgrimage through a vale of tears, endearing the 
Saviour in His personal excellencies, and in His mediatorial work, 
more and more to his heart, till fully prepared by divine grace for 
the joys of heaven, his sanctified soul is carried at the hour of 
death, by ministering angels, to the realms of bliss, there to be ever 
with the Lord, and to praise Him in those ' many mansions' of our 
Father's house, where God wipes away the last tear of sorroAv. O 
happy close of life's weary pilgrimage, to depart and to be with 
Christ ! What Christian, as he thinks of the glory reserved for liim 
in heaven, does not now feel like breathing the prayer of the Chris- 
tian poet: — 

' Oh, when life's sunset draAvs around me, 

Closing my eventful day, 
Let Thy love, Christ, upon me 

Shed its pure and spirit ray. 
Up the starry steeps of even, 

Let Thy Spirit be my guide, 
Till in the deathless light of heaven, 

Lost to earth, my spirit glide. 

' There, where daylight ever lingers. 

O'er the vernal, flower-clad plains, — 
There, where morning's rosy fingers 

Wreathe with light the azure main, — 
There, where all Ave dream of brightness, 

Joy or peace, to make us blest, 
May the wrapt soul on wings of lightness 

Find rest, ah, yes: eternal rest.' 

Argyle, N. Y../an. 18G7. D. A. II. 



CO N T E N r S . 



Joseph Hall, D. D. : Page. 

The Saviour in Gethsemane 2'^ 

Christ the Smitten Kock 30 

Blessedness of Salvation <^1 

Meditation on Death 32 

The Divine Mercy in Eedemption 36 

Pardon for the Most Guilty - 38 

TheFear of Death-- 41 

Behold God as Keally Present -Ip 

Thoughts of God in the Devout Person 43 

Thoughts at the Communion Table 41 

Do this in Remembrance of Me 46 

Thoughts after the Communion 47 

True Kepentance -- 48 

Mercy for the Vilest 48 

All are Pilgrims 5? 

Death but a Sleep ^1 

Prayer ^j. 

Redemption ^"^ 

The Christian in his Devotion ^4 

The Christian in his Death »^*^ 

The Christian's Home - ^J* 

Heavenly and Earthly Things- ^^ 

HumiUty - - ^^ 

Eternity f ^ 

The Celestial City ^f 

The True Christian Happy - " *^}^ 

The Saviour's Agony - y} 

The Night of Death - ^: 

Heavenly Joys ^"^ 

Honey fi-om the Rock J,"^ 

The Heavenly Manna Jj^ 

The Happy Return Home y^ 

The Felicity of Heaven Jf^ 

God Manilest in the Flesh ^^ 

The Saviour received up into Glory ^1 

Heavenly Mindedness ;L" 

Heavenly Recognition ^ --- ^3 

The Glory of Heaven - - - - ^jj 

The Saviour's Sufferings and Glories --- ^^l 

Paradise - - i'. 

Unchangeable Duration /;' 



__ 80 

Life a Pilgrimage "- 



Rest in God . 



On the Length bf the Way **'- 

'J'he Divine Love 

ElCHAKD SiBBES, D. D. : 
Grace ^'^ 



H7 

J. lit! iiuv >3pirit our Guide °' 

Beholding of Christ, a Transforming Sight »-' 



20 CONTENTS. 

Comfort in Distress - 90 

Pardoniug Mercy 90 

Prayer and Praise 91 

Praising God 93 

God our Refuge 96 

Spiritual Desertion - 97 

God our Portion -- 98 

Comfort in the Hour of Death 100 

Jeremy Taylob, D. D.: 
Prayers, I. 102 

n 103 

III. - 104 

IV. - 105 

V. 106 

VI.--- - - 107 

•VII. - 108 

VIII. 109 

Evening Prayers, I. 109 

II. - 110 

Prayer for one in Trouble Ill 

Prayer for one in Sickness - 112 

Prayer before a Journey - 113 

Prayers on receiving the Sacrament, I. - 114 

II. 115 

Prayers for Pardon of Sins, I. 115 

" II. 116 

On Prayer- 117 

Advantages of Prayer 119 

The Righteous Safe 120 

Consolation 121 

God's Mercy 123 

The Repenting Sinner ■ 124 

Robert Leighton, D. D.: 

Salvation 125 

Free Grace - 126 

Redemption the Admiration of Angels - 127 

The Scriptures -- 128 

Prayer 129 

True Rest 131 

The Christian Warfare 131 

Communion vrith Christ in Suffering 133 

The Believer's Joy at the Revelation of Christ 134 

Glory of Christ at the Last Day 135 

Steadfastness in the Faith 135 

Eternal Glory % 136 

Meditation on the Eighth Psalm 137 

Spiritual Desire of Death 138 

Come to the Saviour--- 139 

Christ the Light of the Christian 140 

Happiness of the Life to Come ----^ 140 

Prayers, I. 143 

IL 144 

" III. 145 

IV. IIG 

V. 147 

VL 148 

VIL 149 

" Vin. 151 

Richard B.\xter: 

Walking with God 153 

Prayer in the Hour of Death 155 

Language and Power of Faith ^ 156 



CONTENTS. 21 

Second Coming of Christ 153 

The Saints' Joy " -i/.i 

The Word of God '.'/.'.'."[ 163 

Love of God - - loi 

Everlasting Joys of Heaven 1(55 

Kepose of the Soul jg^ 

How to Live a Pleasant Life Iq^ 

- Thanksgiving and Praise Igy 

The Redeemed in Glory 17 j 

Heavenly Recognition 173 

Love to Saints in Heaven I75 

Loss of Pious Friends jyg 

Live by Faith 177 

Comtemplation of God 178 

Sohtude 180 

Infinite Goodness of God 18i 

The Saviour's Condescension and Love 18:3 

Heavenly Aspirations I85 

Prayer for the Penitent 18g 

Crucified to the World 187 

Now or Never I87 

John Owen, D. D. : 

Praj-er to Christ in Seasons of Distress 189 

Communion of Behevers in Heavenly Worshii) IJO 

Visions of Celestial Glory - 1<J2 

The Saints' Rest ]<j3 

The Word of God T95 

A Hiding Place from the Wind 1<)G 

A Covert from the Tempest I97 

Faith Ti-iumphant in the Hour of Death 198 

Fulness of Christ 198 

Beholding the Glory of Christ 189 

Sa\ing Grace - 201) 

Flourisliing of the Righteous ooo 

Spiritual Decays in tlie Christian 2t)-2 

Recovery from Backsliding 20:J 

How to Die Comfortably 204 

The Departing Soul 2 ,'5 

True Pleasiires 207 

William Bates, D. D. : 

Heavenly Joy - - 208 

Heavenly Conversation -- 209 

The Music of Heaven 210 

Death and Heaven 211 

Death of Pious Friends 212 

Perpetuity of Bhss 213 

Ever with the Lord 211 

Symon Patbick, D. D. : 
Prayers, L 216 

n. 218 

" in. 220 

lY. 223 

John Flavel, B. A. : 

Efficacy of the Blood of the Cross 225 

Fountain of Life 227 

The Study of Christ 228 

Vision of God in Glory 228 

Divine Care - 230 

Faith in God's Unchangeableness 232 

Walking with God 233 

Rest in God -- 233 



22 CONTENTS. 

Commiiuiou with God - - 234 

Christ's Love manifest from the Cross --- 335 

Free Grace 236 

Grace of God 237 

Pardon for the most Heinous Sins 237 

Peace to the Soul - - 238 

Joj'in the Holy Ghost - 239 

Foretastes of Heaven - 241 

The Longing Soul's Reflection 243 

Reflection of a Growing Christian 244 

Lost and Found - 245 

The Ocean of Divine Mercy - 245 

Joy of the Redeemed 246 

Assurance 247 

Constancy of Christ's Love - 248 

Maturity of Grace 249 

End of the Christian's Tiials 250 

Stephen Chabnock, B. D. : 

Meditation on the Glory of Christ 251 

Christ our Advocate - 254 

Christ Presenting the Memorials of his Death ---257 

Perpetuity of Christ's Intercession 259 

Eflicacy of Christ's Intercession 261 

Love to Clu'ist as our Advocate - - 262 

The Glorified Redeemer - 263 

The Substance of the Gospel 264 

Love of God 265 

Our Access to God 265 

The Covenant of Redemption 266 

Christ Filled with the Spirit 267 

Infijiite Compassion of God - 268 

The Saviour's Agony 269 

Christ's Love as Manifested in His Death - 271 

God Spared not His Son 271 

Our Acceptanee in Christ 272 

The Gospel 275 

Comfort against Death - 276 

God to be Praised in Reconciliation 277 

John Buntan : 

On Prayer 279 

Grace of Christ 280 

Christ made Sin for us 281 

Coming to God by Christ - 282 

Christ's Intercession ■ — 282 

Giving Glory to Christ - 283 

Church Fellowship ' 284 

Gi'ace 285 

The Pilgrims Entering the Celestial City 285 

Last Words of Mr. Standfast 287 

Comfort in Christ's Intercession 288 

The New Song in Glory 289 

John Tillotson, D. D.: 

Eternal Happiness 291 

Glorified Bodies of the Righteous 293 

Earthly and Heavenly Joys 294 

Resurrection of Christ 295 

Excellency of Heavenly Things 296 

Isaac Baerow, D. D. : 

Duty of Thanksgiving 298 

Imitation of Christ 300 

Consolation in Aflliction 302 

Our Life 303 



CONTENTS. 23 

Incarnation of Christ - - 305 

The Great Physician 306 

Resurrection of Christ 307 

Our Saviour's Ascension and Glorification 308 

The Life Everlasting 310 

John Howe, M. A.: 

Anticipation of the Joys of Heaven 312 

HumiUty *- - 314: 

The Righteous willing to Die 315 

Christian Hope --- - 317 

Meditation on Heavenly Things 319 

The Saint's Delight in God 321 

Live with Eternity in View - 327 

EzEKiEL Hopkins, D. D. : 

The Christian's Joy 328 

Inconstancy of Earthly Enjoj-ments 329 

Pardon of Sin 329 

Grace Opposing Sin 331 

Heavenly Rest 331 

Heavenly Hope 331 

The Work of Grace and Sanctification - - 332 

Comfort in the Death of Pious Friends 333 

Thoilvs Ken, D. D.: 

A Prayer for Spiritualized Affections 335 

On Communion T\dth God - 336 

On the Love of the Saviour 337 

On the Joys of Heaven --- 337 

A Prayer for One in Affliction - - 338 

The Righteous Eternally Secure 340 

Thomas Comber, D. D. : 

Meditations on the Lord's Supper, I. 34:1 

a <« <' " II. 342 

« <« << '< ni. 343 

Benjamin Jenks: 

A Morning Prayer 344 

An Evening Prayer 346 

A Prayer on Going Abroad 348 

A Prayer for Faith and Trust in God 349 

A Prayer for Increase of Grace - 3o0 

A Prayer for God's Gracious Presence 351 

A Prayer on Preparation for Death 352 

Matthew Henky: 

Pleasui'es of Communion with God 355 

Exercise of Holy Joy and Praise p56 

Meditations on the Heavenly Rest 357 

The Bible 3o9 

Pious Ejaculations ^'l^ 

A Life of Communion with God 360 

The Soul's Triumph over Death 360 

Divine Knowledge 361 

A Sacramental Petition 30L 

Thomas Wilson, D. D.: 

Afflictions ^f^ 

The Saviour's Patience ^Jj* 

A Prayer for Submission of Spirit .^V* 

A Morning Prayer "f^^. 

An Evening Prayer "^"' 

Isaac Watts, D. D.: 

Holy Breathing ^!?|^ 

Holy Fortitude **"• 



24 CONTENTS. 

Fly to the Mercy Seat 372 

Uucertaiuty of Life 372 

Awake to God 373 

Heavenly Rest - 375 

No Sorrow in Heaven 376 

Our Pious Departed Friends -•- 377 

The Lord's Supper - 379 

The End of Time - 380 

No Pain among the Blessed 380 

No Night in Heaven -• 381 

Joy at the Resurrection 383 

Death of a Pioixs Youth ' 385 

Death of Christian Relatives 385 

The BeUever 's Possessions - 388 

The Christian's Hidden Life in Heaven- 389 

All-sufficiency of God 390 

Thoivlvs Adam: 

The Man of Prayer 392 

Pravers, L 393 

^' IL 393 

in. •- 394: 

IV. 395 

Philip Doddeldge, D. D. : 

Praising the Lord - 396 

The Water of Life - 397 

A Devout Meditation 398 

Our Great Intercessor - 3 9 

A Prayer for Gospel Blessings 401 

My Father's House 4:02 

Heaven our Home 402 

Death to the BeUever - 404 

A Prayer on Committing the Soul to Jesus 404 

Safe in Jesus 405 

Advice to the Afflicted - 405 

Mutual Joy of Christ and BeUevers in Heaven 406 

A Model of Devotion for the Evening - 408 

Salvation Near 409 

Jonathan Edwabd8, A. M. : 

On Reli gious Affections 41] 

The Saint's Love to God 412 

Christ's Invitations - 413 

Spiritual Light - 416 

Pardon for the Greatest Sinner 418 

Attractions in the Saviour 420 

Our Journey towards Heaven -- 423 

John Wesley, A. M. : 

Religion in the Heart - 425 

Walking by Faith 426 

Our Redemption Near 427 

Second Coming of Christ - 428 

Felicity of Heaven 429 

The Poor in Spirit 430 

William Rom-une, A. M. : 

Pri\dleges of Prayer 431 

Prayers, I. 432 

IL 433 

Praise and Prayer 435 

Institution and Benefits of the Lord's Supper 436 

The Full Vision and Enjoyment of Christ 437 

Robert Walker : 
On Prayer 439 



CONTENTS. 25 

The Believing Soul's Address to Christ - 439 

The Heavy Laden Invited to Christ - 44^ 

Crrace "442 

Resignation to the Divine Will 440 

Christ's Presence with Believers at Death 443 

Samuel Da vies, A. M. : 

Excellency of the Divine Being 445 

Love of God in the Gift of His Son 44(5 

The Saint's Hapi)iness at the Judgment Day 447 

The Preciousness of Christ • 448 

Christ the only Foundation - 44;) 

The Saviour in His Exaltation --- 450 

Hope of the Righteous in Death 451 

Hope of a Happy Immortality 453 

Christ Precious in His Instructions 453 

Eternity 455 

John Newton: 

Trials 456 

Devotion to Christ 45(; 

The Believer Safe 457 

Assurance - 453 

The Christian Soldier 453 

Happy State of the Believer- 459 

Intercourse with Heaven 459 

Pi'ayer and Reading the Scriptures - 4r.l 

Faith's View of Christ Crucified 401 

The Sabbath an Earnest of Heaven - 4G2 

Divine Guidance 463 

Blessed Fruits of Affliction 463 

Thomas Scott, D. D. : 

Morning Praj'ers for a Family, I.--- -- 465 

II. - 4C,H 

A Family Prayer for Saturday Evening ■. 47I 

John Logan, F. R. S. : 

The Message which Jesus Brings-- 475 

The Christian's Victory over Death 477 

Passing Away - - 480 

Timothy Dwight, D. D., LL. D. : 

The Blessings to which the Saviour invites ua 481 

Without an Interest in Christ • 482 

The Love of Christ - - - 483 

The Saviour's Goodness to the Believer - 484 

The Sinner Invited to Return to God 485 

Advantages of AiHiction 486 

Consolation for the Afflicted 487 

The Desire of Immortality 488 

Blessings of Prayer 489 

On Prayer for Revivals of Religion 490 

Heaven our Home --- 491 

Heaven in View 492 

Our Father's House 492 

Heaven and Earth Compared -- 493 

Christ the Light of Heaven - 494 

Andrew Fuller: 

Life of Faith 495 

Christ Crucified - 49« 

Progressive Character of Heavenly Bliss - 497 

Blessedness of Heaven 498 

Robert Hall, A. M. : 

Reunion of Good Men in Heaven 500 

Friendship Founded on Religion COl 

2 



26 CONTENTS. 

How a Minister shonld Preacli 502 

The Pursuit of Salvation - ■--. 502 

Funeral Obsequies of a Lost Soul 503 

A Penitent on liis Knees - 50i 

Preparation for Judgment and Eternity 504 

The Lamb of God - - 505 

The Eye of Faith 506 

The Divine Promises 50G 

Continual Virtue of Christ's Blood --- 507 

Importance of the Christian Ministry - - 508 

Salvation to the Uttermost - - 509 

Gratitude to the Saviour r 510 

Come to the Saviour Now 511 

A Prayer 511 

John M. Mason, D. D. : 

Redemption tkrough the Blood of Christ 514 

Death to a Child of God 515 

Blessed Effects of the Gospel 516 

Forgiveness of Sins Final 516 

Contemplation of the Love of Christ 517 

Our Duty and Happiness 518 

Thomas Chalmers, D. D., LL. D. : 

Choose Christ 519 

Human Life Perishable - 520 

Hope of Immortality 521 

Come to Christ 522 

Death WiU Come 523 

A Christian's Love for the Sabbath 524 

Our Great High Priest 525 

Omnipresence of God 526 

Irayers, L 527 

IL --- 528 

Reginald Heber, D. D. : 

Life like a River 529 

Heaven and Earth - 530 

Christ is Ours 530 

Fear of Death Removed 530 

Our SalvationjDf Grace - 531 

Hymn Before the Sacrament - 532 

Edward Bickersteth : 

Meditations and Prayers on the Lord's Supper, I. 533 

IL 534 

" " " " III. 536 

" " « " " IV. 53& 

V. -"•- 537 

" " " " " VI. 538 

WiLLLiJM Nevins, D. D. : 

Heaven 539 

Heaven's Attractions - 540 

The Saint near to Heaven - - 545 

Christ's Love and that of the Christian .- 545 

Sympathy of Christ for the Believer 546 

WiLLLVM Jay: 

The Bible - - 547 

Death of Christian Friends - 548 

On Prayer 549 

A Family Prayer for the Morning - - 550 

A Family Praj'er for the Evening 553 

A Family Prayer for Sabbath Morning 556 

A Family Prayer for Saljbath Evening 559 



DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 




JOSEPH HALL, D. D. 
1574-1656. 

The Sayiour in Gethsemane. 

Y soul is exceeding sorroivfid, even unto 
death. Matt. xxvi. 38. What was it, what 
could it be, Saviour, that lay thus heavy 
upon Thy Divine Soul ? Was it the fear 
5/) "^ of death? Was it the f orefelt pain, shame, 
torment of Thine ensuing crucifixion? O poor and 
base thoughts of the narrow hearts of cowardly and 
impotent mortality! How mau}^ thousands of Thy 
blessed martyrs have welcomed no less tortures, 
with smiles and gratulations; and have made a 
sport of those exquisite cruelties, wdiich their very 
tyrants thought unsufierable! Whence had they 
this strength but from Thee? If their weakness 
were thus undaunted and prevalent, what was Thy 
power? No, no; ijt was the sad weight of the 
sin of mankind; it was the heavy burden of Thy 



28 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Father's wrath for our sin, that thus pressed Thy 
soul, and wrung from Thee these bitter expressions. 

What can it avail Thee, O Saviour, to tell Thy 
grief to men? Who can case Thee, but He of whom 
thou saidst. My Father is greater than 19 Lo, to 
Him Thou turnest; Father^ if it he possible, let 
t/iis cup pass from me. 

While Thy mind was in this fearful agitation, it 
is no marvel, if Thy feet were not fixed. Th}^ place 
is more changed than Thy thoughts. One while, 
Thou walkest to Thy drowsy attendants, and stirrest 
Dp their needful vigilancy; then Thou returnest to 
Thy passionate devotions. Thou fallest again upon 
Thy face. 

If Thy body be humbled down to the earth. Thy 
soul is yet lower; Thy prayers are so much more 
vehement, as Thy pangs are: And being in an 
agony, He prayed more earnestly, and His sweat 
ivas as it ivere great drops of blood falling down to 
the ground, 

O my Saviour, what an agony I am in, while I 
think of Thine! What pain, what fear, what strife, 
what horror was in Thy sacred Breast! How didst 
Thou struo'frlc under the wei^'ht of our sins, that 

CO o ' 

Thou thus sweatest, that Thou thus bleedest! All 
was peace with Thee: Thou wcrt one with Thy co- 
eternal and co-essential Father; all the angels wor- 
shiped Thee; all the powers of heaven and earth 
awfully acknowledged Thine infiniteness. It was our 
l^erson that fcoffed Thee in this misery and torment: 
in that. Thou sustainedst Thy Father's wrath and our 



JOSEPH HALL. 2D 

curse. If eternal death be unsufFerable, if every sin 
deserve eternal death, what, Oh! what was it for 
Thy soul, in this short time of Thy bitter passion, 
to answer those millions of eternal deaths, which 
all the sins of all mankind had deserved from the 
just hand of Thy Godhead? I marvel not, if Thou 
bleedest a sweat, if Thou sweatest blood. If the 
moisture of that sweat be from the body, the tinc- 
ture of it is from the soul. As there never was such 
another sweat, so neither can there be ever such a 
sufferino:. It is no wonder, if the sweat were more 
than natural, when the suffering was more than 
human. O Saviour, so willing was that precious 
blood of Thine to be let forth for us, that it was 
ready to prevent Thy persecutors; and issued forth 
in those pores, before Thy wounds were opened by 
Thy tormenters. Oh that my heart could bleed 
unto Thee, with true inward compunction for those 
sins of mine, which are guilty of this Thine agony; 
and have drawn blood of Thee, both in the garden 
and on the cross. Woe is me: I had been in hell, 
if Thou hadst not been in Thine agony; I had 
scorched, if Thou hadst not sweat. Oh let me ab- 
hor my own wickedness, and admire and bless Thy 
mercy. 

But, O ye blessed spirits, which came to comfort 
my conflicted Saviour, how did ye look upon the 
Son of God, when ye saw Him laboring for life 
under these violent temptations! With Avhat aston- 
ishment, did ye behold Ilim bleeding whom yc 
adored! In the AVilderness, after His duel with 



30 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Satan, ye came and ministered unto Him; and now 
in the Garden, wliile He is in a harder combat, ye 
appear to strengthen Him. O the wise and marvel- 
ous dispensation of the Ahnighty! Whom God 
will afflict, an angel shall relieve; the Son shall 
suffer, the servant shall comfort Him; the God of 
angels droopeth, the angel of God strengthens Him. 
Blessed Jesus, if as man Thou wouldst be made a 
little loiver than the angels, how can it disparage 
Thee to be attended and cheered up by an angel? 
Thine humiliation would not disdain comfort from 
meaner hands. How free was it for Thy Father, to 
convey seasonable consolations to Thine humbled 
soul, by whatsoever means! Behold, though Thy 
cup shall not pass, yet it shall be sweetened. What 
if Thou see not, for the time, Thy Father's face? 
yet. Thou shalt feel His hand. What could that 
spirit have done, without the God of Spirits?' O 
Father of Mercies, Thou mayest bring Thine into 
a<ronies, but Thou wilt never leave them there. In 
the midst of the sorroics of my heart, Thy comforts 
shall refresh my soul. Whatsoever be the means of 
my supportation, I know and adore the Author. 

Christ tiie Smitten Rock. 

BEHOLD the Rock, which was smitten, and the 
waters of life gushed forth. Behold the foun- 
tain, that is set ojpen to the house of David, for sin 
and for uncleanness: a fountain, not of water only, 
but of blood too. O Saviour, b}^ Thy water we arc 
Avashed; by Thy blood we arc redeemed. Those 



JOSEPH HALL. 31 

two sacraments, Avhicli Thou didst institute alive, 
flow also from Thee dead, as the last memorials of 
Thy love to Thy Church: the water of baptism; the 
blood of the N'ew Testament shed for remission of 
sins: and these, together with the Spirit that gives 
life to them both, are the three witnesses on earth, 
whose attestation cannot fail us. O precious and 
sovereign wound, by Avhich our souls are healed! 
Into this cleft of the Eock, let my Dove fly and 
enter; and there safely hide herself from the talons 
of all the birds of prey.* 

Blessedness of Salvation. 

DAVID saith, OJt taste, and see hoiv sweet the 
Lord is. In meditation we do both see and 
taste; but we see before we taste: sight, is of the 
understanding; taste, of the affection: neither can 
we see, but we must taste, we cannot know aright, 
but we must needs be affected. Let the heart, 
therefore, first conceive and feel in itself the sweet- 
ness or bitterness of the matter meditated: which is 
never done, without some passion; nor expressed, 
without some hearty exclamation. 

'O blessed estate of the saints I O glory not to 
be expressed, even by those which are glorified! O 
incomprehensible salvation! What savour hath this 
earth to thee? Who can regard the world, that 

* What Christian that reads these solemn and impressive words, 
does not think of the tender and beautiful lines of Toplady, — 

' Rock of Ages! cleft for me' ! 



32 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

believetli Thee? Who can think of Thee, and not 
be ravished with wonder and desire? Who can 
hope for Thee, and not rejoice? Who can know 
Thee, and not be swallowed np with admiration at 
the mercy of Him that bestoweth Thee? O bless- 
edness, worthy of Christ's blood to purchase Thee! 
worthy of the continual songs of Saints and Angels 
to celebrate Thee! How should I magnify Thee! 
How should I long for Thee! How should I hate 
all this world for Thee! 

Meditation on Death. 

HE, that is the Lord of Life, and tried what 
it was to die, hath proclaimed them blessed 
that die in the Lord. Those are blessed, I know, 
that live in Him; but they rest not from their labors: 
toil, and sorrow, is between them and a perfect 
enjoying of that blessedness, which they now pos- 
sess only in hope and inchoation: when death hath 
added rest, their happiness is finished. 

O death, how sweet is that rest, wherewith thou 
refreshcst the weary pilgrims of this vale of mor- 
tality! How pleasant is thy face to those eyes, that 
have acquainted themselves with the sight of it, 
which to strangers is grim and ghastly! How wor- 
thy art thou to be welcome, unto those, that know 
whence thou art, and whither thou tendest! Who 
that knows thee, can fear thee? Who, that is not 
all nature, would rather hide himself amongst the 
baggage of this vile life, than follow thee to a 
crown? What indifferent judge, that should see 



JOSEni HALL. 33 

life painted over with vain semblances of pleasures, 
attended with troops of sorrows on the one side, 
and on the other with uncertainty of continuance 
and certainty of dissolution; and then should turn 
his eyes unto death, and see her black, but comely, 
attended on the one hand with a momentary pain, 
with eternity of glory on the other, would not say, 
out of choice, that which the prophet said out of 
passion. It is better for me to die than to live? 

But, O my soul, what ails thee to be thus suddenly 
backward and fearful? No heart hath more freely 
discoursed of death, in speculation: no tongue hath 
more extolled it, hi absence. And now, that it is 
come to thy bed's side, and hath drawn thy curtains, 
and takes thee by the hand, and offers thee service, 
thou shrinkest inward; and, by the paleness of thy 
face and wildness of thine c^^e bewray est an amaze- 
ment at the presence of such a guest. That fiice, 
which was so familiar to thv thouo-hts, is now un- 
welcome to thine eyes. I am ashamed of this weak 
irresolution. Whitherto have tended all thy serious 
meditations? What hath Christianity done to thee, 
if thy fears be still heathenish? Is this thine imi- 
tation of so many worthy saints of God, Avhoni 
thou hast seen entertain the violentest deaths Avitli 
smiles and songs? Is this the fruit of thy long and 
frequent instruction? Didst thou think death would 
have been content with words? didst thou hope it 
would suffice thee to talk, while all others sutler? 
Where is thy faith? Yea, Avhere art thou th}'- 
self, O my soul? Is heaven worthy of no more 

2* 



34 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

thanks; no more joy? Shall heretics, shall pagans 
<2:ive death a better welcome than thon? Hath 
thy Maker, thy Redeemer sent for thee; and 
art thou loth to go? hath He sent for thee to put 
thee in possession of that glorious inheritance, which 
thy wardship hath cheerfully expected; and art 
thou loth to go? Hath God, with this sergeant of 
His., sent His angels to fetch thee; and art thou loth 
to go? Rouse up thyself for shame, O my soul; 
and, if ever thou hast truly believed, shake off 
this unchristian diffidence; and address thyself joy- 
fully for thy glory. 

Yea, O my Lord, it is Thou, that must raise up 
this faint and drooping heart of mine: Thou only 
canst rid me of this weak and cowardly distrust: 
Thou that sendest for my soul, canst prepare it for 
Thyself: Thou only canst make Thy messenger wel- 
come to me. Oh, that I could but see Thy face 
through death! Oh, that I could see death, not as 
it was, but as Thou hast made it! Oh, that I could 
heartily pledge Thee, my Saviour, in this cup; that 
so I might drink new wine with Thee, in Thy 
Father's kins^dom! 

But alas, O my God, nature is strong and weak in 
me, at once! I cannot wish to welcome death, as it 
is worthy: when I look for most courage, I find 
strongest temptations: I sec and confess, that when 
I am myself. Thou hast no such coward as I. Let 
me alone, and I shall shame that, name of Thine, 
which I have professed: every secure w^rdliug 
shall laugh at my feebleness. O God, were Thy 



JOSEni HALL. 35 

martyrs thus haled to their stakes? might they not 
have been loosed from their racks, and choose to 
die in those torments? Let it be no shame, for 
Thy servant to take up that complaint, Avhich Thou 
madest of Thy better attendants: The spirit is ivil- 
ling hut tJie flesh is loeah. 

O Thou God of spirits, that hast coupled these 
two together, unite them in a desire of their disso- 
lution: weaken this flesh to receive, and encourage 
this spirit either to desire or to contemn death; and 
now, as I grow nearer to my home, let me increase 
in the sense of my jo3^s. I am Thine, save me, O 
Lord. It was Thou that didst put such courage 
into Thine ancient and late witnesses, that they 
either invited or challenged death; and held their 
persecutors their best friends, for letting them loose 
from these gives of flesh. I know Thy hand is 
not shortened; neither any of them hath received 
more proofs of Th}^ former mercies. Oh, let Thy 
goodness enable me to reach them, in the comforta- 
ble steadiness of my passage. Do but draw this 
veil a little, that I may see my glory; and I cannot 
but be enflamed with the desire of it. It was not I, 
that either made this body for the earth, or this 
soul for my body, or this heaven for my soul, or 
this glory of heaven, or this entrance into ghn-y: 
all is Thine own work. Oh, perfect what Thou hast 
])egun; that Thy praise and my happiness may be 
consummate at once. 

Yea, O my soul, Avhat needcst thou Avish the God 
of Mercies to be tender of His own honor? Art 



36 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

thon not a member of that body, whereof Thy 
Saviour is the Head? Canst thou drown, wdien 
thy Head is above? Was it not for thee that He 
triumphed over death? Is there any fear in a 
foiled adversary? O my Redeemer, I have already 
overcome in Thee: how can I miscarry in myself? 
O my soul, thou hast marched valiantly! Behold, 
the damsels of that Heavenly Jerusalem come forth 
with timbrels and harps to meet thee, and to ap- 
plaud thy success: and now, there remains nothing 
for thee but a croivn of righteousness^ xMcli that 
righteous Judge shall give thee, at that day: death, 
vjhere is thy sting? grave, ivhere is thy victory? 
Return notv imto thy rest, my soul; for the 
Lord hath been beneficial unto thee. Lord God, 
the strength of my salvation. Thou hast covered my 
head in the day of battle: my God and IBng, 1 
will extol Thee, and idll bless Thy name for ever 
and ever. I will bless Thee daily, and praise Thy 
Name for ever and ever. Great is the Lord, and most 
worthy to be praised, and His greatness is incompre- 
hensible: L vnll meditate of the beauty of T.hy glori- 
ous Majesty, and thy wonderful loorJis: Hoso.nna, 
Thou that dwellest in the highest heavens. Amen. 

The Divine Mercy in Redemption. 

GREAT is Thy mercy, that Thou may est be 
feared, saith the sweet singer of Israel. Lo, 
power doth not more command this holy fear, than 
mercy doth; though both here meet together: for 
as tbere was infinite mercy mixed with power, in 



JOSEPH HALL. 37 

thus creating us; so also, there is a no less mio-hty 
power mixed with infinite mercy, in our redemption. 
What heart can but awfully adore Thy sovereioii 
mercy, O Blessed God, the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, in sending Thine only and coequal Son, 
the Son of Thy love, the Son of Thine eternal 
essence, out of Thy bosom, down from the height 
of celestial glory, into this vale of tears and death, 
to abase Himself, in the susception of our nature; to 
clothe Himself with the rags of our humanity; to 
endure temptation, shame, death, for us? O Bfes- 
sed Jesus, the Redeemer of Mankind, what soul can 
be capable of a sufficient adoration of Thine incon- 
ceivable mercy, in Thy mean and despicable incar- 
nation; in Thy miserable and toilsome life; in Thy 
bloody agony; in Thine ignominious and tormenting 
passion; in Thy woeful sense of Thy Father's wrath, 
in our stead; and lastly, in Thy bitter and painful 
death? Thou, that knewest no sin, wert made sin for 
us: Thou that art Omnipotent, wonkiest die; and, 
by Thy death, hast victoriously triumphed over death 
and hell. It is enough, O Saviour, it is more than 
enough to ravish our hearts with love, and to bruise 
them with a loving fear. O Blessed Spirit, the God 
of Comfort, who but Thou only, can make our .souls 
sensible of Thy unspeakable mercy, in applying to 
us the wonderful benefit of this our dear redemp- 
tion; in the great work of our inchoate regeneration; 
in the mortifying of our evil and corrupt aflections; 
in raising us to the life of grace, and preparing us 
for the life of glor}^? O God, if mercy be proper to 



38 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

attract fear, liow must our hearts, in all these re- 
spects, needs be filled with an awful regard unto 
Thy divine bountyl 0/^, Jioio great is the goodness, 
that Thou hast laid up for those that fear Thee^ even 
before the sons of men! Psalm xxxi. 20. 

Pardon for the most Guilty. 

HEAR this then, thou drooping soul: thou art 
dismayed with the heinousness of thy sins, and 
the sense of God's anger for them; dost thou know 
with whom thou hast to do? hast thou heard Him 
proclaim His own style ? The Lord, the Lord 
merciful and gracious; long-suffering and abundant 
in goodness and truth; keeping mercy for thousands; 
forgiving iniquities, and transgressions, and sins: 
Exod. xxxiv. 6, 7; and canst thou distrust that infi- 
nite goodness? Lo, if there were no mercy in 
heaven, thou couldst not be otherwise affected. 
Look up and see that glorious light, that shines 
about thee: With the Lord there is mercy, and with 
Him is plenteous redemption: Psalm cxxx. 7. And 
is there plenteous redemption for all, and Jione for 
thee? Because thou hast wronged God in His just- 
ice, wilt thou more wrong Him in His mercy? and, 
because thou hast wronged Him in both, wdlt thou 
wrong thyself in Him? Know, O thou weak man, 
in what hands thou art. He that said, Tliy mercy, 
O Lord, is in the heavens, and Thy faithfulness 
reachethunto the clouds: Psalm xxxvi. 5: said also, 
21iy mercy is great above the heavens, and Thy truth 
reachethunto the clouds: Psalm cviii. 4. It is a sure 



JOSEril HALL. 39 

comfort to tlicc, that He cannot fail in His faithful- 
ness and truth. Thou art upon earth, and these 
reach above thee to the clouds; but if thy sins 
could be so great and high, as to over-look the 
clouds, yet His mercy is beyond them, for it reach- 
eth unto heaven: and, if they could, in a hellish pre- 
sumption, reach so high as heaven; yet His mercy is 
great above the heavens; higher than this they can- 
not. If now thy heinous sins could sink thee to the 
bottom of hell, yet that mercy, which is above the 
heavens, can fetch thee up again. 

Thou art a grievous sinner: we know one, that 
said he was the chief of sinners^ who is now one of 
the prime saints in heaven. Look upon those, whom 
thou must confess worse than thyself Cast back 
thine eyes but upon Manasseh, the lewd son of a 
holy parent: see him, rearing up altars to Baal; 
worshipping all the host of heaven; building altars 
for his new gods in the very courts of the house of 
the Lord; causing his sons to pass through the fire; 
trading with witches and wicked spirits; seducing 
God's people to more than Amoritish wickedness;* 
fiUino^ the streets of Jerusalem with innocent blood: 
2 Kings xxi. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 16: say if thy sin 
can be thus crimson; yet, behold this man a no less 
famous example of mercy than wickedness: and 
what? Is the hand of God shortened, that lie cannot 
noiD save? Or, hath the Lord cast off for ever? and 
ivlll lie he favorable no more? Is His mercij clean 
gone for ever? hath God forgotten to be gracious? 
hath lie in anger shut up His tender mercies? Psalm 



40 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Ixxvii. 7 — 10. O man, say justly, JSfo: TMs is mine 
infirmity: thine infirmity, sure enough; and take 
heed, if thou persist to distrust, that it be not worse. 
These misprisions* of God are dangerous. The 
honor of His mercy is justly dear to Him: no marvel 
if He cannot endure it to be questioned. When the 
temptation is blown over, hear what the same tongue 
says: The Lord is merciful and gracious^ slow to 
anger, and ])lenteous in mercy. He icill not always 
cJdde^ neitJier ivill He he^p his anger for ever. He 
hath not dealt icith us after our sins] nor rewarded 
lis after our iniquities: for^ as the heaven is high 
above the ecaih, so greed is His mercy toicards them 
that fear Him: Psalm ciii. 8 — 11. Oh, then lay 
hold on the large and illimited mercy of thy God, 
and thou art safe. What cares the debtor, for the 
length of a bill that is crossed? what cares the con- 
demned person, for the sentence of death, while he 
huth his pardon sealed in his bosom? 

Thou art a heinous sinner: wherefore came thy 
Saviour? wherefore suffered He? If thy sin remain, 
wherefore serves His blood? If thy debt be still 
called for, wherefore was thine obliiration cancelled? 
If thou be still captive to sin and death, wherefore 
Avas that dear ransom paid? why did He stretch forth 
His blessed hands upon the cross, but to receive thee? 
why did He bow down His head, but to invite thee? 
why was His precious side opened, but that He might 
take thee into His heart? Thou depisest Him, if 

* Mtsprision: the act of misprizing, misapprehension; miscon- 
ception; mistake. [Obsolete or rare.] Wcbslcr. 



JosErn HALL. 41 

thou trustest Him not, Judas and thou shall sin 
more in despairing, than in betraying Him. Oh, 
then gather heart to thyself, from the merits, from 
the mercies of thine All-sufficient Redeemer, against 
all thy sinfulness: for, who is it, that shall be once 
thy Judge? before what tribunal shalt thou appear 
to receive thy sentence? Is it not thy Saviour, that 
sits there? He, that died for thee, that He mioht 
rescue thee from death; shall He, can He doom thee 
to that death, from which He came to save thee? 
Comfort th^'self then with these words: and, if thou 
wouldest keep thy soul in an equal temper, as thou 
hast two eyes, fix the one of them upon God's just- 
ice, to keep thee low and humble, and to quit thee 
from presumption; fix the other upon His transcend- 
ent mercy, to keep thee from the depth of sorrow 
and desperation. 

The Fear of Death. 

THOU fearest death: is it not that, thy Saviour 
underwent for thee? Did thy Blessed Redeem- 
er drink of this cup; and art thou unwilling to 
pledge him? His was a bitter one, in respect of 
thine; for it was besides, spiced with the wrath of 
His Father due to our sins: yet He drank it up to 
the very dregs, for thee; and wilt thou shrink at an 
ordinary draught, from His hand? And why did He 
yield to death, but to overcome him ? WJiy was 
death suffered to seize upon that Lord of Life, but 
that, by dying, He might pull out the sting of death? 
The sting of death is sin: 1 Cor. xv. 5G. So then, 



42 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

death has lost his sthig: now thou mayest carry it 
in thy bosom: it may cool thee; it cannot hurt thee. 
Temper then thy fear with these thoughts; and that 
thou mayest not be too much troubled with the sight 
of death, acquaint thyself with him, beforehand: 
present him to thy thoughts; entertain him, in thy 
holy and resolute discourses. 

Behold God as Keally Present. 

NEITHER doth the devout heart see his God 
aloof off, as dwelling above, in the circle of 
heaven, but beholds that infinite spirit really 

PRESENT WITH HIM. 

The Lord is upon thy right hand: saith the Psalm- 
ist. Our bodily eye doth not more certainly see our 
own flesh, than the spiritual eye sees God, close by 
us; yea, in us. A man's own soul is not so intimate 
to himself as God is to his soul: neither do we move 
by Him only, but in Him. 

What a sweet conversation therefore, hath the holy 
soul with his God! What heavenly conferences 
have they two, which the world is not privy to; 
while God entertains the soul with the divine mo- 
tions of His Spirit, the soul entertains God with gra- 
cious compliances! 

Is the heart heavy with the grievous pressures of 
affliction? the soul goes in to his God and pours 
out itself before Him, in earnest bemoanings and 
supplications: the God of Mercy answers the soul 
again with seasonable refreshings of comfort. 

Is the heart secretly wounded and bleeding with 



JOSEPH HALL. 43 

the conscience of some sin? it speedily betakes itself 
to the great Physician of the Soul; Avho, forthwith, 
applies the balm of Gileacl, for an unfailing and pre- 
sent cure. 

Is the heart distracted with doubts? the soul re- 
tires to that inward oracle of God, for counsel: He 
returns to the soul a happy settlement of just reso- 
lution. 

Is the heart deeply affected with the sense of 
some special favor from his God? the soul breaks 
forth into the passionate voice of praise and thanks- 
giving: God returns the pleasing testimony of a 
cheerful acceptation. 

O blessed soul, that hath a God to go unto, upon 
fill occasions! O infinite mercy of a God, that vouch- 
safes to stoop to such entireness with dust and ashes! 
It was a gracious speech of a worthy divine* upon 
his death-bed, now breathing towards heaven: That 
he should change his place, not his company. His 
conversation was now, beforehand, with his God and 
His holy angels: the only difference was, that he 
was now going to a more free and full fruition of the 
Lord of Life, in that region of glory above; whom 
he had truly, though with weakness and imperfec- 
tion, enjoyed in this vale of tears. 

Thoughts of God in the Devout Person. 

THERE is nothing that he sees which doth not 
BRING god to his THOUGHTS. 

Indeed, there is no creature, Avhercin there arc not 
* Dr. Preston. 



44 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

manifest footsteps of Omnipotence; yea, which hath 
not a tono^ue to tell us of its Maker. The heavens 
declare the glory of God^ and the firmament sheweth 
His handy ivork: one day telleth another^ and one 
night certifieth another: Psalm xix. 1, 2. Yea, O 
Lord^ how manifold are Thy worlds! in -wisdom hast 
Thou made them all. The earth is full of Thy 
riches: so is the great and icide sea, ivhere are things 
creejnng innumerahle, both small and great beasts: 
Psalm civ. 24, 2^. Every herb, flower, spire of 
grass, every twig and leaf, every worm and fly, every 
scale and feather, every billow and meteor, speaks 
the power and wisdom of their Infinite Creator. 
Solomon sends the sluggard to the ant: Isaiah sends 
the Jews to the ox and the ass: our Saviour sends 
His disciples to the ravens, and to the lilies of ilie 
field. There is no creature, of w^hom we may not 
learn something. We shall have spent our time ill 
in this great school of the world, if, in such store of 
lessons, we be non-proficients in devotion. 

Thoughts at the Communion Table. 

WHAT intention of holy thoughts, what fervor 
of spirit, what depth of devotion, must we 
now find in ourselves! Doubtless, out of heaven, no 
object can be so worthy to take up our hearts. 

What' a clear representation is here, of the great 
work of our redemption! How is my Saviour, by 
all my senses, here brought home to my soul! How 
is His passion lively acted before mine eyes! for lo, 
my bodily eye doth not more truly sec bread and 



JOSEPH HALL. 45 

wine, than the eye of my faith sees the body and 
blood of my Dear Redeemer: thus was His sacred 
body torn and l)roken: thus w^as His precious blood 
poured out for me. My sins, wretched man that I 
am! helped thus to crucify my Saviour; and, for the 
discharge of my sins, would He l^e thus crucified. 

Neitlier did He only give himself for me upon the 
Cross; but lo, He both offers and gives Himself to 
me, in this His blessed Institution. 

What had this general gift been, without this ap- 
plication? Now, my hand doth not more sensibly 
take, nor my mouth more really eat this bread, than 
my soul doth spiritually receive and feed on the 
bread of life. O Saviour, Thou art the living Ijread, 
that came down from heaven. Thy flesh is meat 
indeed, and Thy blood is drink indeed. Oh, that I 
may so eat of this bread, that I may live for ever! 
He that cometh to Thee, shall never hunger: he 
that believeth in Thee, shall never thirst. Oh, that 
I could now so hunger and so thirst for Thee, that 
my soul could be for ever satisfied with Thee! Thy 
people, of old, were fed with manna in the wilder- 
ness; yet they died: that food of angels could not 
keep them from perishing: but oh, for the Hidden 
Manna, which giveth life to the world, even Thy 
blessed Self! Give me ever of this bread, and my 
soul shall not die, but live. 

Oh, the precious juice of the fruit of the vine, 
wherewith Thou refreshest my soul! Is this the 
blood of the grape? Is it not rather Tliy blood of 
the New Testanient, thai is poured out for me? 



46 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Thou speakest, O Saviour, of new wine that Thou 
wouldest drink with Thy disciples, in Thy Father's 
kingdom: can there be any more precious and plea- 
sant than this, wherewith Thou cheerest the believing 
soul? Our palate is now dull and earthly, which 
shall then be exquisite and celestial: but, surely, no 
liquor can be of equal price or sovereignty with Thy 
blood. Oh, how unsavory are all earthly delicacies, 
to this .heavenly draught! O God, let not the sweet 
taste of this spiritual nectar ever go out of the mouth 
of my soul. Let the comfortable warmth of this 
blessed cordial ever work upon my soul; even till 
and in, the last moment of my dissolution. 

Do THIS IN Eemembrance of Me. 

DOST Thou bid me, O Saviour, do this in remem- 
brance of Thee ? oh, how can I forget Thee ? 
how can I enough celebrate Thee, for this Thy un- 
speakable mercy? Can I see Thee thus crucified be- 
fore my eyes, and for my sake thus crucified, and not 
remember Thee? Can I find my sins accessary to this 
Thy death, and Thy death meritoriously expiating 
all these my grievous sins, and not remember Thee? 
Can I hear Thee freely ofiering Thyself to me, and 
feel Thee graciously conveying Thyself into my soul, 
and not remember Thee? I do remember Thee, O 
Saviour: but oh that I could yet more effectually 
remember Thee; with all the j)^ssionate affections 
of a soul sick of Thy love; with all zealous desires 
to glorify Thee; with all fervent longiugs after Thee 



JOSEPH HALL. 47 

and Thy salvation! I remember Thee in Thy suffer- 
ings; oh, do Thou remember me in Thy gloiy.* 

Thoughts after the Communion. 

OH, what a blessing have I received to-day! no 
less than my Lord Jesus, with all His merits; 
and, in and with Him, the assurance of the remission 
of all sins and everlasting salvation. How happy 
am I, if I be not wanting to God and myself ! How 
unworthy shall I be, if I do not strive to ansAver this 
love of my God and Saviour, in all hearty affection, 
and in all holy obedience! 

And now, after this heavenly repast, how do I feel 
myself? What strength, what advantage hath my 
faith gotten? How much am I nearer to heaven 
than before? How much faster hold have I taken 
of my blessed Redeemer? How much more firm 
and sensible is my interest in Him? 



* It seems to us that under the impression of such devout 
language James Montgomery must have composed these beauti- 
ful lines : — 

'Gethsemane can I forget? or there Thy conflict see, 
Thine agony and bloody sweat, and not remember Thee? 
When to the cross I turn mine eyes, and rest on Calvary, 
Lamb of God, my sacrifice! I must remember Thee! 
Eemember Thee in all Thy pains, and all Tliy love to me; 
Yea, while a breath or pulse remains, I will remember Thee! 
And when these failing lips grow dumb, and mind and memory flee, 
When Thou shalt in Thy kingdom come, Jesus remember me.' 



48 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

True Penitence. 

TRUE penitence is strong and can grapple with 
the greatest sin; yea, with all the powers of 
hell. What if your hands be red with blood? be- 
hold tlie blood of your Saviour shall wash away 
yours. If you can bathe yourself in that, your 
scarlet soul sliall be as white as snow. This course 
alone shall make your cross the way to the paradise 
of God. This plaster can heal all the sores of the 
soul, if never so desperate. Only, take heed that 
your heart be deep enough pierced, ere you lay it 
on; else, under a seeming skin of dissimulation, your 
soul shall fester to death. 

Meecy for the Vilest. 
• (^^ HAPPY message,' thou say est, ' Avere it as sure 

Vv' as it is comfortable! But, alas, my heart finds 
many and deep grounds of fear and diffidence, which 
will not easily be removed. That smites me, while 
you offer to acquit me; and tells me, I am in a worse 
condition than a looker-on can imagine. My sins 
are, beyond measure, heinous: such as my thoughts 
tremble at: such, as I dare not utter to the God that 
knows them, and against whom only they are com- 
mitted. There is horror in their very remembrance: 
wliat will there then be, in their retril)ution?' 

They are bitter things, that thou urgest against 
thyself, my son: no adversary could plead worse. 

But I admit thy vileness. Be thou as bad as 
Satan can make thee: it is not either his malice, or 
tliy wickedness, tliat can sluit tliee out. from mercy. 



JOSEPH HALL. 49 

Be thou as foul as sin can make thee: yet there is a 
fountain oj)ened to t/ie house of David, a bloody 
fountain in the side of thy Saviour, for sin and f 07" 
inicleanness: Zcch. xiii. 1. Be thou as leprous as 
that Syrian was of old, if thou canst but wash seven 
times in the waters of this Jordan, thou canst not 
but be clean: thy flesh shall come again to thee, like 
to the flesh of a little child: 2 Kino-s v. 14, thou 
shalt be, at once, sound and innocent. Be thou stuns: 
unto death, with the fiery serpents of this wilderness: 
yet if thou canst but cast thine eyes to that brazen 
serpent which is erected there, thou canst not fail 
of cure. 

Wherefore came the Son of God into the world, 
but to save sinners? add, if thou wilt, whereof I am 
chief: thou canst sa}^ no worse by thyself, than a 
better man did before thee; who, in the right of a 
sinner, claimeth the benefit of a Saviour: 1 Tim. i. 
15. Were it not for our sin, what use were there 
of a Redeemer? Were not our sins heinous, how 
should it have required such an expiation as the biood 
of the Eternal Son of God? 

Take comfort to thyself, my son: the greatness 
of thy sin serves but to magnify the mercy of the 
Forgiver. To remit the debt of some few far- 
things, it were small thank; but, to strike ofl" the 
scores of thousands of talents, it is the height of 
bounty. Thus doth thy God to thee: He hath suflcr- 
ed thee to run on in Ilis book? to so deep a sum, 
that, when thy conscious heart hath proclaimed thee 
bankrupt, He may infinitely ol)lige thee and glorify 



50 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

His own mercy, in crossing the reckoning and acquit- 
ting thy soul. 

All sums are equally dischargeable to the munifi- 
cence of our 2:reat Creditor in heaven: as it is the 
act of His justice, to call for the least; so of His 
mercy, to forgive the greatest. Had we to do with 
a finite poAver, we had reason to sink under the bur- 
den of our sins: now there is neither more nor less 
to that, which is infinite: only let thy care be, to lay 
hold on that infinite mercy which lies open to thee: 
and, as thou art an object fit for mercy, in that tliou 
art in thyself sinful and misera])le enough; so, find 
thyself, as thou art, a subject meet to receive this 
mercy, as a penitent believer. Open and enlarge 
thy bosom, to take in this free grace; and close with 
thy blessed Saviour; and, in Him possess th^^self 
of remission, peace, salvation. 



All ake Pilgrims. 

THOU art out of thy country: — Who is not so? 
We are all Pilgrims together with Thee: 1 Pet. 
ii. 11. Heb. xi. 13. While 2ce are at home in thehody^ 
loe are absent from the Lord: 2 Cor. \. 6. Miserable 
are w^e, if our true home be not above. That is the 
better country which we seek, even a heavenly: Heb. 
xi. 16; and thither thou mayest equally direct thy 
course, in whatsoever region. This centre of earth 
is equidistant from the glorious circumference of 
heaven: if we may once meet there, what need we 
make such difference in the wav- 



joseph hall. 51 

Death but a Sleep. 

I^HOU art afraid of death: — When thou art weary 
- of thy day's labor, art thou afraid of rest? 

Hear what thy Saviom*, who is the Lord of Life, 
esteems of death; Our friend Lazarus sleepetli: John 
xi. 11: and of Jairus's daughter; The maid is not 
dead; hut sleepeth: Matt. ix. 24. Luke viii. 52. 

Neither useth the Spirit of God any other hmguage, 
concernino^ His servants under the Old Testament: 
N'oio shall I sleep in the dust, saith holy Job: eh. 
vii. 21: and of David, When thy days be fulfilled^ 
and tliou shalt sleep with thy fathers: 2 Sam. vii. 12. 

Nor yet under the New: For this cause, many are 
weak and sicJdy among you, and many sleep, saith the 
apostle: 1 Cor. xi. 30. 

Lo, the philosophers of old were wont to call 
sleep the brother of death: but God says, death is 
no other than sleep itself: a sleep, both sure and 
sweet. When thou liest down at night to thy repose, 
thou canst not be so certain to awake again in the 
morning: as, when thou layest thyself down in death, 
thou art sure to awake in the morning of the resur- 
rection. Out of this Ijodily sleep, thou mayest be 
affrightedly startled with some noises of sudden 
horror: with some fearful dreams; with tumults, or 
alarms of war; but here, thou shalt rest quietly in 
the place of silence (Psalm xciv. 17.), free from all 
inward and outward disturl:>ances: while, in the mean 
time, thy soul shall see none but visions of joy and 
blessedness. 

But, oh the sweet and heavenly expression of our 



52 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

last rest, and the issue of our happy resuscitation, 
which our gracious apostle hath laid forth, for the 
consolation of his mournful Thessalonians! For. if 
we believe^ saith he, that Jesus died and rose again; 
even so them also, ivhich sleejp in Jesus, ivill God 
bring ivith Him. Lo, our belief is antidote enough 
against the worst of death. And why are we troubled 
with death, when we believe that Jesus died? and 
what a triumph is this over death, that the same 
Jesus, who died, rose again! and what a comfort it 
is, that the same Jesus, who arose, shall both come 
again, and bring all His with Him in glory! and, lastly 
what a strong cordial is this to all good hearts, that 
all those which die well, do sleep in Jesus! Thou 
thoughtest, perhaps, of sleeping in the bed of the 
grave; and there, indeed, is rest: but he tells thee 
of sleeping in the bosom of Jesus; and there is im- 
mortality and blessedness. O blessed Jesus, in TJiy 
jjresence is the fulness of joy, and at Thy right hand 
are pleasures for ever-more. Who would desire to 
walk in the Avorld, when he may sleep with Jesus? 

Prayer. 

FASHIONABLE suppliants may talk to God: 
but, be confident, he that can truly pray, can 
never be truly miserable. Of ourselves we lie open 
to all evils: our rescue is from above: and what in- 
tercourse have we with heaven, but by our prayers? 
Our prayers are they that can deliver us from dan- 
gers, avert judgments, prevent mischiefs, procure 
lilessings; that can obtain pardon for our sins, furnish 



JObEl'II II.ALL. 53 

US with strength against temptations, mitigate the 
extremity of our suflcrings, sustain our infirmities, 
raise up our dejectedness, increase our graces, abate 
our corruptions, sanctify all good things to us, 
sweeten the bitterness of our afflictions, open the 
windows of heaven, shut up the bars of death, van- 
quish the power of hell. Pray, and be both safe and 
happy. 

Redemption. 

REDEMPTION was the great errand, for which 
the Son of God came down into the world; and 
the work which He did, while He was in the Avorld; 
and that which, in way of application of it. He shall 
1)0 ever accomplishing, till He shall deliver up His 
Mediatory kingdom into the hands of His Father. 
In this He begins, in this He finishes, the great busi- 
ness of our salvation: for those who, in this life, are 
enlightened by His wisdom, justified by His mer- 
its, sanctified by His grace, are yet conflicting 
with manifold temptations, and struggling with 
varieties of miseries and dangers; till, upon their 
happy death and glorious resurrection, they shall be 
fully freed, by their ever-blessed and victorious Ee- 
deemer. 

He, therefore, who, by virtue of tliat hcavenl}- 
union, .is made unto us of God, wisdom, righteous- 
ness, sanctification ; is also, upon the same ground, 
made unto us our full redemption. 



54 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

The Christian in his Devotion. 

HE is so perpetually resident in heaven, that he 
is, often in every clay, before the throne of 
grace; and he never comes there, Avithout supplica- 
tion in his hand: wherein also he loves to be importu- 
nate: and he speeds accordingly; for he never departs 
empty; while other cold suitors, that come thither 
but in some good fits of devotion, obtain nothing 
but denials. 

He dares not press to God's footstool in his own 
name: he is conscious enous^h of his own unworthi- 
ness: but he comes in the gracious and powerful 
name of his righteous Mediator, in whom he knows 
he cannot but be accepted: and, in an humble bold- 
ness, for His only sake craves mercy. 

No man is either more awful or more confident. 

When he hath put up his petition to the King of 
heaven, he presumes not to stint the time or manner 
of God's condescent; but patiently and faithfully 
waits for the good hour, and leaves himself upon that 
infinite wisdom and goodness. 

He doth not affect length so much as. fervor: 
neither so much minds his tongue, as his heart. 

His prayers are suited according to the degrees 
of the benefits sued for. He, therefore, begs grace 
absolutely, and temporal blessings with limitation; 
and is accordingly affected in the grant. 

Neither is he more earnest in craving mercies, than 
he is zealously desirous to be retributory to God 
when he hath received them; not more heartily suing 
to be rich in grace, than to improve his graces to the 
honor and advantage of the bcstower. 



JOSEril HALL. 55 

With an aAvfiil and broken heart, doth he make 
his addresses to that infinite Majesty; from whose 
presence he retnrns with comfort and joy. 

His soul is constantly fixed there, whither he pours 
it out. Distraction and distrust are shut out from 
his closet: and he is so taken up with his devotion, 
as one that makes it his work to pray. And, when 
he hath ofiered up his sacrifices unto God, his faith 
listens, and looks in at the door of heaven to know 
how they are taken. 



The CHRiSTLiN in his Death. 

THE Christian therefore, now laid upon his last 
bed, when this frrim messenc^er comes to fetch 
him to heaven, looks not so much at his dreadful 
visage, as at his happy errand: and is willing not to 
remember what death is in itself, but what it is to 
us in Christ; by whom it is made so useful and bene- 
ficial, that we could not be happy without it. 

Here, then, comes in the last act and employment 
of faith; for after this brunt passed, there is no more 
use of faith, but of vision: that heartens the soul in 
a lively apprehension of that blessed Saviour, who 
both led him the way of suffering, and is making 
way for him to everlasting glory: that shews him 
Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our faith, ivho, 
for the joy that luas set before Him, endured the cross, 
despising the shame, and is set dozen at the right hand 
of the throne of God: that clings close unto him: and 
lays unremovable hold upon His person, His merits, 



56 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

His blessedness. Upon the wings of this fiiitb, is 
the soul ready to mount up toward that heaven, 
which is open to receive it; and, in that act of evo- 
lation, puts itself into the hands of those blessed 
angels, who are ready to carry it up to the throne 
of glory. 

The Christian's Home. 

I AM a stranger here below^: my home is above; 
yet I can think too w^ell of these foreign vanities, 
and cannot think enough of my home. Surely, that 
is not so far above my head, as my thoughts; neither 
doth so far pass me in distance, as in comprehension: 
and yet, I would not stand so much upon conceiving, 
if I could admire it enough; but my strait heart is 
filled with a little wonder, and hath no room for the 
greatest part of glory that remaineth. O God, what 
happiness hast Thou prepared for Thy chosen ! What 
a purchase was this, worth}^ of the blood of such a 
Saviour. As yet I do but look towards it, aftir ojff; 
but it is easy to see by the outside, how goodly it is 
within: although, as Thy house. on earth,, so that 
above, hath more glory within, than can be bewrayed 
by the outward appearance. The outer part of Thy 
tabernacle here below, is but an earthly and base 
substance; but w^ithin, it is furnished with a living, 
spiritual, and heavenly guest : so the outer heavens, 
though they be as gold to all other material crea- 
tures; yet they are but dross to Thee. Yet how are 
even the outmost Avails of that house of Thine beau- 
tified with glorious lights, whereof every one is a 



JOSEni HALL. 57 

world for bigness, and us a heaven for goodliness ! 
Oh teach me by this to long after, and wonder at the 
inner part, before Thou lettest me come in to l)ehold 
it. 

Heavenly and Earthly Things. 
r^r^HE estate of heavenly and earthly things is 
JL plainly represented to us, by the two lights of 
heaven, which are appointed to rule the night and 
the day. Earthly things are rightly resembled by 
the moon, wdiich, l)eing nearest to the region of mor- 
tality, is ever in changes, and never looks upon us 
twice with the same face; and, when it is at the full, 
is blemished with some dark spots, not capable of 
any illumination. Heavenly things are figured by 
the sun, whose great and glorious light is both natu 
ral to itself, and ever constant. That other fickle 
and dim star is fit enough for the night of misery, 
wdierein w^e live here below. And this firm and 
beautiful light is but good enough for that day of 
glory, Avhich the saints live in. If it be good living 
here, Avhere our sorrows are changed wath joys: 
what is it to live above, where our joys change not ? 
I cannot look upon the body of the sini; and yet I 
cannot see at all without the light of it: I cannot 
1)ehold the glory of Thy saints, O Lord; yet w^ithout 
the knowledge of it, I am blind. If Tliy creature be 
so glorious to us here below; how glorious sliall 
Th^^self be to us, Avhen we are above the sun ! This 
sun shall not shine upward, where Thy glory shineth: 
the 2:reater lic-ht extins^uisheth the lesser. O thou 



58 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Sun of Righteousness, which shalt 011I3' shine to me 
when I am glorified, do Thou heat, enlighten, com- 
fort me with the beams of Thy presence, till I be 
glorified. Amen. 

Humility. 

THE nearer our Saviour drcAV to His glory, the 
more humility He expressed. His followers 
were first His servants, and He their Master; John 
xiii. 16: then, His disciples, and He their Teacher; 
John XV. 8: soon after, they were His friends, and 
He theirs; John xv. 13: straightway s after His insur- 
rection and entrance into an immortal condition, they 
were His brethren. Go to my brethren, and say unto 
them, I ascend to my Father and your Father; John 
XX. 17: lastly, they are incorporated into Him, and 
made partakers of His glory. That they also "may he 
one icith us, saith He, / in them, and thou in me; 
that they may he made jyerfect in one; and tlie glory 
which TJiougavest me, I have given them; John xvii. 
21, 22, 23. O Saviour, was this done for the de- 
pressing of Thyself, or for the exaltation .of us, or 
rather for both? How couldest Thou more depress 
Thj'Self, than thus to match Thyself with us poor 
wretched creatures? How couldest Thou more exalt 
us, than to raise us unto this entireness with Thee, 
the All-Glorious and Eternal Son of God ? How 
should we learn of Thee, to improve our highest 
advancement to our deepest humilitj-; and so to 
regard each other, that, when we are greatest, we 
should be least ! 



E 



joseph hall.. 59 

Eternity. 
TEKNITY is that only thing, which is worthy 
to take np the thoughts of a wise man: that 
being aclLled to evil, makes the evil infinitely more 
intolerable; and, being added to good, makes the 
good infinitely more desirable. O Eternity! thou 
bottomless abj^ss of misery to the wicked: thou inde- 
terminable pitch of joy to the saints of God: what 
soul is able to comprehend thee? What strength 
of understanding is able to conceive of thee? Be 
thou ever in my thoughts, ever before mine eyes. 
Be thou the scope of all my actions, of all my 
endeavors; and, in respect of thee, let all this visi- 
ble world be to me as nothing: and, since only the 
tilings^ loJdcJi are not seen by the eye of sense, are 
eternal, Lord, sharpen thou the eyes of \nj faith, 
that I may see those things invisible; and may, in 
that sight, enjoy Thy blessed eternity. 

The Celestl^l City. 
TT^HE city that is of God's building is deep and 
JL firmly grounded upon the rock of His eternal 
decree; and hath more foundations than one, and all 
of them both sure and costly. God's material house, 
built by Solomon, had the foundation laid with great 
squared stone: but the foundations of the walls of 
this city of God are garnished with all manner of 
precious stones; Rev. xxi. 19. Glorious tilings are 
spoken of thee, O thou city of God. Why do I set 
up my rest in this house of clay, which is ever}^ day 
falling on my head, while I have the assured expcc- 



60 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

tation of so glorious a dwelling above? For ive 
knoiv, that if our earthly house of this tabernacle 
loere dissolved^ we have a building of God, a house 
not made ivith hands, but eternal in the heavens; 2 
Cor. V. 1. 

The True CimisTiiiN Happy. 

THE true Christian is in a very happy condition; 
for no man will envy him, and he can env}^ no 
body. None will envy him; for the world cannot 
knoAV how happy he is: how happy, in the favor of 
a God; how happy, in the enjoyment of that favor. 
Those secret delights, that he finds in the presence 
of his God; those comfortable pledges of love and 
mutual interchanges of blessed interest, which pass 
between them; are not for worldly hearts to conceive: 
and no man will envy an unknown happiness. On 
the other side, he cannot envy the world's greatest 
favorite under heaven; for he well knows how fickle 
and uncertain that man's felicity is: he sees him 
walking upon ice, and perceives every foot of his 
sliding, and threatening a fall; and hears that brittle 
pavement, at every step, crackling under him, and 
ready to give way to his swallowing up; and, withal, 
finds if those pleasures of his could be constant and 
permanent, how poor and unsatisfying they are, and 
hoAV utterly unable to yield true contentment to the 
soul. The Christian, therefore, while others look 
upon him with pity and scorn, laughs secretly to 
himself in his bosom; as well knowing there is none 
but he truly happy. 



joseph hall. 61 

The Saviour's Agony. 

WHAT is this that I see? my Saviour in an 
agony, and an angel strengthening him ! Oh 
the wonderful dispensation of the Almighty! That 
the Eternal Son of God, who promised to send the 
Comforter to his followers, should need comfort ! 
That He of whom the voice from heaven said, TJiis 
is my beloved Son, in ivhomi am well 'pleased, should 
he strufifsrlino: with his Father's wrath even to blood ! 
That the Lord of Life should, in a languishing hor- 
ror, say, Mij soul is exceeding sorroicfal, even unto 
death! These, these, O Saviour, are the chastise- 
ments of our peace; which both Thou wonkiest suffer, 
and Thy Father would inflict. The least touch of 
one of those pangs would have been no less than a 
hell to me, the whole brunt thereof Thou enduredst 
for my soul : what a wretch am I, to grudge a little 
pain from or for thee, who wert content to undergo 
such pressure of torment for me, as squeezed from 
thee a sweat of blood : since my miserable sinfulness 
deserved more load, than Thou, in Thy merciful com- 
passion, wilt lay upon me; and thy pure nature and 
perfect innocence merited nothing but love and 
glory! Li this sad case, what service is it, that an 
angel offers to do unto Thee? Lo, there appears to 
Theea?! angel from heaven strengthening Thee; Luke 
xxii. 43. Still more wonder ! Art not Thou the 
God of Spirits? Is it not Thou, that gavest being, 
life, motion, power, glory to all the angels of heaven? 
Shall there be need of one single created spirit, to 
administer strength and comfort to his Creator ? 



G2 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Were this the errand, why did not all that blessed 
corps of celestial spirits join their forces together, 
in so high an employment ? Where are the multi- 
tudes of that heavenly host, which, at Thy birth, 
smig,Glo)ytd God in the highest^ and on earth peace? 
Luke ii. 13, 14. Where are those angels which min- 
istered to Thee, after Thy combat of temptations in 
the wilderness? Surel}^, there was not so much use 
of their divine cordials in the desert, as in the gar- 
den. O my God and Saviour, thus Thou wouldest 
have it. It is Thy holy will, that is the rule and 
reason of all Thine actions, and events. Thou, that 
wouldest make use of the provision of men for Thy 
maintenance on earth, Avouldest employ Thy servants 
the angels for the supply of Thy consolations; and 
Thou, that couldest have commanded legions of those 
celestial spirits, wouldest be served by one: not but 
that more were present, but that only one appeared: 
all the host of them ever invisibly attended Thee, as 
God; but, as man, one only presents himself to Thy 
bodily eyes: and Thou, who madest Thyself, for (^ur 
sakes, a little lower than the angels (Heb. ii. .9) which 
Thou madest, wouldest humble Thyself to receive 
comfort from those hands, to which Thou gavest the 
capacity to bring it. It is no marvel, if that, which 
was Thy condescent, be our glory and happiness. I 
am not worthy, O God, to know what conflicts Thou 
hast ordained for my weakness: whatever they be. 
Thou, that hast appointed Thine angels to be minis- 
tering spirits for the behoof of them ivho shall he 
heirs of salvation, (IIcl). i. 14.) sufTer not Thy ser- 



josErn HALL. G3 

vant to want the presence of those blessed emissaries 
of Thine, in any of his extremities: let them stand 
by his soul, in his last agony; and, after a happy 
eluctation, convey it to Thy glory. 

The Night of Death. 

TNDEED, Lord, as Thou sayest, tlit night cometh 
ivhen no man can ivorJc. What can we do, when 
the light is shut in, but shut our eyes, and sleep? 
When our senses are tied up, and our limbs laid to 
rest, what can we do, but yield ourselves to a neces- 
sary repose? O my God, I perceive my night has- 
tening on apace: my sun draws low: the shadows 
lengthen: vapors rise; and the air begins to darken. 
Let me bestir myself, for the time: let me lose none 
of my few hours: let me work hard, awhile; because 
I shall soon rest everlastingly. 

Heavenly Joys. 

DOUBTLESS, O God, Thou, that hasfr given to 
men, even Thine enemies, here upon earth, so 
excellent means to please their outward senses; such 
beautiful faces and admirable flowers, to delight the 
eye; such delicate scents from their garden, to please 
the smell; such curious confections and delicate 
sauces, to please the taste; such sweet music from 
the birds, and artificial devices of ravishing melod}' 
from the art of man, to delight the car; hast much 
more ordained transcendent pleasures and infinite 
contentments for Thy glorified saints al)Ove. My 
soul, while it is thus cloixged and confined, is too 



()^ DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

strait to conceive of those incomprehensible ways 
of spiritual delectation, which Thou hast provided 
for Thy dear chosen ones, triumphing with Thee in 
Thy heaven. Oh, teach me to wonder at that which 
I cannot here attain to know; and to long for that 
happiness, which I there hope to enjoy with Thee 
for ever. 

Honey feom the Rock. 

OGOD, Thou didst miraculously refresh Thy 
murmuring Israel of old with water, out of 
the rock, in that dry wilderness: and now I hear 
Thee say, If they had hearkened to Thy voice, and 
walked in Thy ways, with honey out of the rock 
Thou wouldest have satisfied them; Pslam Ixxxi. 16. 
Lo, that which Thou wouldest have done to Thine 
ancient people if they had obeyed Thee, Thou hast 
abundantly performed to Thine evangelical Israel: 
with honey, out of the Rock, hast Thou satisfied 
them: the Rock, that followed them, was Christ my 
Saviour; 1 Cor. x. 4. Lo, out of this Rock hath 
flowed that honey, whereby our souls are satisfied. 
Out of IBs side, saith the evangelist, came water and 
blood. This Rock of our Salvation afibrdeth both 
what Israel had, and might have had. Surely, O my 
God, there can be no honey so sweet, as the efiect of 
the precious blood of my Saviour to the soul of the 
believer: by that blood, we have eternal redemption 
from death, and remission of all our sins; Hcb. ix. 
12. Eph. i. 7: by that blood, are Ave justified in the 
sight of our God, and saved from the wrath to come; 



JOSEPH HALL. 05 

Eom. V. 9: by that blood, we have our peace made 
in heaven, and are fully reconciled to ouv God; Col. 
i. 20: by that blood, we are cleansed and pt^^'^V^d 
from all our iniquity; Heb. ix. 22: by that blood, 
we are sanctified from our corruptions; Heb. xiii. 12. 
1 Pet. i. 2: by that blood, we receive the pro7nises 
and possessions of an eternal inheritance; Heb. ix. 
15. O the spiritual hoiiey so sweet, that the material 
honey is but bitterness to it ! Jonathan of old did 
but dip his spear in the honey of the wood ; and, with 
but one lick of that sweet moisture, had his e^^es 
cleared, and his spirits revived ; 1 Sam. xiv. 29. O 
God, let me but taste and see how sweet the Lord 
Jesus is, in all His gracious promises, in all His mer- 
ciful and real performances; I shall need no more to 
make me happy. Thy Solomon bids me to eat honey; 
Prov. xxiv. 13. Lo, this is the honey that I desire 
to eat of: give me of this honey, and I shall receive 
both clearness to my eyes, and vigor of my spirits 
to the foiling of all my spiritual enemies. This is 
not the honey, whereof I am bidden not to eat too 
much; Prov. xxv. 16. No, Lord, I can never eat 
enough of this celestial honey: here I cannot siu'feit; 
or, if I could, this surfeit would be my health. O 
God, give me still enough of this honey out of the 
Rock: so shall my soul live, and bless Thee, and be 
blessed of Thee. 



66 ' DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

The Heavenly Manna. 

VICTORY itself is the great reward of our figbt; 
but wliat is it, O God, that Thou promisest to 
give us, as the reward of our victory? even the HuJ- 
den Ifanna: surely, were not this gift exceeding pre- 
cious, Thou wouldest not reserve it, for the remuner- 
ation of so glorious a conquest. Behold that mate- 
rial and visible manna, which Thou sentest down 
from heaven, to stop the mouth of murmuring Israel, 
perished in their use; and, if it were reserved but to 
the next clay, putrefied; and, instead of nourishing, 
annoyed them: but the hidden manna, that was laid 
up in the ark, was incorruptible; as a lasting monu- 
ment of Thy power and mercy to Thy people. But 
now, alas, what is become both of that manna, and 
that ark? Both are vanished, having passed through 
the devouring jaws of time, into mere forgetfulness. 
It is the true Spiritual Manna, that came down from 
the highest heaven, and, ascending thither again, is 
hidden there, in the glorious ark of eternity, that 
Thou wilt give to Tliy conqueror: that is it, which 
being participated of here below, nourisheth us to 
eternal life; and beins: communicated to us "above, is 
the full consummation of that blessed life and glory. 
Oh, give me so to fight, that I may overcome; that 
so overcoming, I may be feasted with this manna. 
Thou, that art, and hast given me Thyself, the Spir- 
itual Manna, which I have fed on b}^ faith; and the 
symbolical manna, whereof I have eaten sacramen- 
tally; give me of that heavenlj^ manna, whereof I 
shall partake in gh)ry. It is yet a hidden manna. 



JOSEPH HALL. 07 

hid from the eyes of the AV(>i'ld ; yea, in a sort, from 
our own; hid, in light inaccessible: for, Our life is 
Jdd'ioitJt Ohrisi in God; Col. iii. 3. but shall then be 
fully revealed: for it shall then not only cover the 
face of the earth round about the tents of Israel, 
but spread itself over the face of the whole heaven; 
yea, fill both heaven and earth. I well thought, O 
my God, that if heaven could aftbrd anything more 
precious than other. Thou wouldst lay it up for Thy 
victor; for it is a hard service, that Thy poor infan- 
try here upon earth are put unto, to conflict Avdth so 
mighty, so malicious, so indefatigable enemies; and 
therefore the reward must be so much the greater, 
as the warfare is more difiicult. Oh, do Thou, who 
art the great Lord of Hosts, give me courage to fight, 
perseverance in fighting, and power to overcome all 
my spiritual enemies; that I may receive from Thee 
this hidden manna, that my soul may live forever, 
and may forever bless Thee. 

The Happy RETUPtN Ho]me. • 

I~pVERY creature naturally affects a return to the 
.-J original, whence it first came. The pilgrim, 
though faring well abroad, yet hath a longing home- 
ward: fountains and rivers run back, with what speed 
they may, to the sea, whence they were derived: all 
compound bodies return to their first elements: the 
vapors, rising up from the earth and waters, and con- 
densed into clouds, fall down again to the same earth, 
whence they were exhaled: this bod^', that avc bear 
about us, returns at last to that dust, whereof it was 



63 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

framed. And why then, O my soul, dost not thou 
earnestly desire to return home to the God that made 
thee? Thou knowest thy original is heavenly: why 
are not thy affections so? What canst thou find here 
below, worthy to either withdraw or detain thee from 
those heavenly mansions? Thou art here, in a region 
of ^n; of misery and death: glory waits for thee 
above: fly then, O my soul, fly hence to that blessed 
immortality, not as yet, in thy dissolution; for which 
thou must wait on the pleasure of thy dear Maker 
and Redeemer: yet, in thy thoughts, in thy desires 
and afiections, soar thou up thither, and con- 
verse there with that blessed God and Father of 
spirits, with those glorious orders of angels, and 
with the souls of just men made perfect: and, if the 
necessity of these bodily affliirs must needs draw 
thee off for a time, let it be not without reluctation 
and hearty unwillingness, and with an eager appe- 
tite of quick return to that celestial societ}^. It will 
not be long, ere thou shalt be blessed with a free 
and unintel'rupted fruition of that glorious eternity: 
in the mean time, do thou prepossess it, in thy hea- 
venly dispositions; and, contemning this earth, 
wherewith thou art clogged, aspire to thy heaven, 
and be happy. 

The Felicity of Heaven. 

THEKE, there shalt thou, O my soul, enjoy a per- 
fect rest from all thy toils, cares, fears: there 
shalt thou find a true vital life, free from all the 
incumbrances of thy miserable pilgrimage; free from 



JOSEPH HALL. 69 

the clangers of either sins or temptations: free from 
all anxiety and distraction; free from all sorrow, 
pain, perturbation; free from all the possibility of 
change or death: a life, wherein there is nothing but 
pure and perfect pleasure; notliing but perpetual 
melodv of ano-els and saints, sino^ino' sw^eet Hallelu- 
jahs to their God: a life, which the most glorious 
Deity both gives, and is: a life, wherein thou hast 
the full fruition of the ever-blessed Godhead, the 
continual society of the celestial spirits, the blissful 
presence of the glorified humanity of thy Dear Sa- 
viour: a life, wherein thou hast ever consort with 
the glorious company of the apostles, the goodly 
fellowship of the patriarchs and prophets, the noble 
army of martyrs and confessors, the celestial synod 
of all the holy fathers and illuminated doctors of 
the Church; shortly, the blessed assembly of all the 
faithful professors of the name of the Lord Jesus, 
that, having finished their course, sit now shining in 
their promised glory. See there that unapproacha- 
ble light, that divine magnificence of the Heavenly- 
King: see that resplendent crown of righteousness, 
wdiich decks the heads of every one of those saints; 
and is ready to be set on thine, when thou hast 
happil}^ overcome those spiritual powers, wherewith 
thou art still conflicting: see the joyful triumphs of 
these exulting victors: see the measures of their 
glory dilferent, yet all full, and the least unmeasure- 
al^le: lastly, see all this happiness not limited to 
thousands, nor yet millions of vears, but commea- 
sured ])y no less than eternity. 



70 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

God Manifest in the Flesh. 

O BLESSED Saviour, Thou, the true God mam'' 
fested in the flesh, be Thou pleased to manifest 
unto the soul of Thy servant the unspeakable riches 
of Thy love and mercy to mankind, in that great 
work of our redemption. Vouchsafe to affect my 
heart, with a lively sense of that infinite goodness 
of Thine, towards the wretchedest of Thy creatures: 
that, for our sake, Thou camest down, and clothedst 
Thyself in our flesh: and clothedst that pure and 
holy flesh, with all the miseries that are incident to 
this sinful flesh of ours; and wast content to undergo 
a bitter, painful, ignominious death from the hands 
of man; that, by dying, Thou mightest overcome 
death, and ransom him from that hell, to which he 
was, without Thee, irrecoverably forfeited; and fetch 
him forth to life, liberty, and glor}^ Oh, let me not 
see only, but feel, this Thy great m3^stery of Godli- 
ness effectual 1}^ w^orking me to all hearty thankful- 
ness for so inestimable a mercy; to all holy resolu- 
tions to glorify Thee, in all my actions, in all my 
sufferino's. Didst Thou. O Saviour, beino^ God Eter- 
nal, take flesh for me; and shall not I, when Thou 
callest, be willing to lay down this sinful flesh for 
Thee again? Wert Thou content to aln-idge Thyself, 
for the time, not only of Thy heavenly miignificence, 
but of all earthly comforts, for my sake; and shall 
not I, for Thy dear sake, renounce all the wicked 
pleasures of sin? Didst Thou wear out the days of 
Thy flesh in poverty, toil, reproach, and all earthly 
hardship; and shall I spend my time, in pampering 



JOSEPH HALL. 71 

this flesh in wanton dalliance, in the ambitious and 
covetous pursuit of vain honors and deceivable riches? 
Blessed Lord, Thou wert manifested in the flesh, not 
only to be a ransom for our souls; but to l^e a prece- 
dent for our lives: far, far be it from me, thus to 
imitate the great pattern of holiness. O Jesus, the 
Author and Finisher of my faith and salvation, 
teach me to tread in Thy gracious steps; to run, 
with patience, the race that is set before me; to en- 
dure the cross, to despise the shame; to l)e crucified 
to the world; to work all righteousness. 

The Saviour receia^ed up into Glory. 
BLESSED Saviour, how is my soul ravished 
with the meditation of Thy glorious reception 
into Thy heaven ! Surely, if the inhabitants of those 
celestial mansions may be capable of any increase of 
joy, they then both found and shewed it, when they 
saw and welcomed Thee, entering, in Thy glorified- 
Humanity, into that Thy eternal palace of blessed- 
ness; and, if there could be any higher or sweeter 
ditty of Hallelujah, it was then sung by the choir 
of angels and saints. And may Thy poor servants, 
warfaring and wandering here upon earth, even sec- 
ond them, in those heavenly songs of praises and 
gratulations: for wherein stands all our safety, hope, 
comfort, happiness, but in this, that Thou, our Jesus, 
art received iij) into glory ; and having conquered all 
diverse powers, sittest on the right hand of God the 
Father, crowned with honor and majesty? 

O Jesus, Thou art our Head, we arc Th}^ body: how 



72 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

can the body but participate of the glory of the 
Head? As for Thyself therefore, so for us, art Thou 
possessed of that heavenly glory: as Thou sufferedst 
for us, so for us Thou also reignest. Let every knee 
therefore bow unto Thee, of things in heaven, and 
things on earth, and things under the earth; Phil. ii. 
10. O blessed be Thy name for ever and ever: 
Thine, Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and 
the glory, and the victory, and the majesty; for all 
that is in the heaven, and in the earth is Thine: Thine 
is the kingdom, Lord, and Thou art exalted as head 
over all; 1 Chr. xxix. 11. 

And now, O Saviour, what a superabundant 
amends is made to Thy glorified Humanity, for all 
Thy bitter sufferings upon earth ! Thine agony was 
extreme; but Thy glory is infinite: Thy cross was 
heavy; but Thy crown transcendently glorious: Thy 
pains were uncoj^ceivably grievous, but short; Thy 
glory everlasting; if Thou wert scorned by men. 
Thou art now adored by angels: Thou that stoodest 
before the judgment seat of a Pilate, shalt come, in 
all heavenly magnificence, to judge both -.the quick 
and the dead: shortly, Thou, which wouldest stoop 
to be a servant upon ' earth, rulest and reignest for- 
ever in heaven, as the Kiug of Eternal Glory. 

Heavenly jMindedness. 

OTHEN, my soul, seeing thy Saviour is received 
uj) into this infinite glory, with what intention 
and fervor of spirit shoiddest thou fix thine eyes 
upon that heaven, where He lives and reigns. How 



JOSEPH HALL. 73 

canst thou be but Avholly taken up with the sio-ht 
and thought of that place of blessedness? How 
canst thou abide to grovel any longer on this base 
earth, where is nothing but vanity and vexation; and 
refrain to mind the things above, where all is felicity 
and glory? With what longings and holy ambition 
shouldest thou desire to aspire to that place of eter- 
nal rest and beatitude, into which thy Saviour is 
ascended; and with Him to partake of that glory 
and happiness, which He hath provided for all that 
love Him ! O Saviour, it is this clog of Avretched 
infidelity and earthliness, that hangs heavy upon my 
soul; and keeps me from mounting up into Thy 
presence, and from a comfortable fruition of Thee. 
Oh, do Thou take off this sinful weight from me, 
and raise up my affections and conversation unto 
Thee: enable me constantly to enjoy Thee, by a 
lively faith, here; till, by Thy mercy, I shall be re- 
ceived into glory. 

Heavenly Recognition. 

AS then, we shall perfectly love God, and His 
saints in Him, so shall we know both: and, 
though it be a sufficient motive of our love in heaven, 
that we knoAV them to be saints, yet it seems to be 
no small addition to our happiness, to knoAv that 
those saints were once ours. And, if it be a just 
joy to a parent here on earth to see his child gra- 
cious, how much more accession shall it be to his joy 
above, to see the fruit of his loins glorious; wdien 
both his love is more pnre, and their improvement 

4 



74 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

absolute! Can we make any doubt, that the blessed 
angels know each other? How senseless were it, to 
grant that no knowledge is hid from them, but of 
themselves! Or, can we imagine that those angeli- 
cal spirits do not take special notice of those souls, 
which they have guarded here, and conducted to 
their glory? If the}^ do so, and if the knowledge 
of our beatified souls shall be like to theirs, why 
should we abridge our souls more than them, of the 
comfort of our interknowing? Surely, our dissolu- 
tion shall abate nothing of our natural faculties; our 
glory shall advance them, so as what we once knew 
we shall know better: and, if our souls can then per- 
fectly know themselves, why should they be denied 
the knowledge of others? 

Doubt not then, O my soul, but thou shalt once 
see, besides the face of thy God whose glory fills 
heaven and earth, the blessed spirits of the ancient 
patriarchs and prophets; the holy apostles and 
evangelists; the glorious martyrs and confessors; 
those eminent saints, whose holiness thou wert wont 
to magnify; and amongst them, those in Avhom nature 
and grace have especially interested thee: thou shalt 
see them; and enjoy their joy, and they thine. How 
oft have I measured a long and foul journey, to see 
some good friend; and digested the tediousness of the 
way, with the expectation of a kind entertainment, 
and the thought of that complacenc}^ which I should 
take in so dear a presence! and yet, perhaps, when 
I have arrived, I have found the house disordered, 
one sick, another disquieted, myself indisposed: 



JOSEPH Pli^LL. 75 

with what cheerful resolution should I undertake 
tills my last voyage, where I shall meet with my 
best friends, and find them perfectly happy, and 
myself with them ! 

The Glory of Heaven. 

HOW often have I begged of my God, that it 
would please Him to shew me some little 
glimpse of the glory of His saints! It is not for 
me, to wish the sight, as yet, of the face of that Di- 
vine Majesty: this was too much for a Moses to sue 
for: my ambition only is, that I might, if but as it 
were, through some cranny or key- hole of the gate 
of heaven, see the happy condition of His glorious 
servants. 

I know what hinders me; my miserable unworth- 
iness, my spiritual blindness. O God, if Thou please 
to wash oif my clay with the waters of Thy Siloam, 
I shall have eyes: and, if Thou anoint them with 
Thy precious eye-salve, those eyes shall be clear; 
and enabled to behold those glories, which shall 
ravish my soul. 

And now. Lord, what pure and resplendent light 
is this, wherein Thy blessed ones dwell ! How 
justly did Thine ecstatical apostle call it the inher- 
itance of the saints in light! Col. i. 12: light inex- 
pressible, light unconceivable, light inaccessible! 
Lo, Thou, tliat hast prepared such a light to this 
inferior world, for the use and comfort of us mortal 
creatures, as the glorious sun, which can both en- 
lighten and dazzle the eyes of all beholders, hast 



76 DEVOTIOx\AL THOUGHTS. 

proportionally ordained a light to that higher world, 
so much more excellent than the sun, as heaven is 
above earth, immortality above corruption. And, if 
wise Solomon could say, Truly the light is siceet; 
and a j)leasant thing it is for the eyes to see the sun; 
Eccl. xi. 7: how infinitely delectable is it, in Thy 
light to see such light, as may make the sun, in com- 
parison thereof, darkness! In Thy jpresence is the 
fulness of joy^ and at Thy rigid hand are pleasures 
for evermore. What can be wished more, wdiere 
there is fulness of joy? and, behold. Thy presence, 

Lord, yields it. 

The Saviour's Sufferings and Glories. 

WHEN I think on my Saviour, in His agony, 
and on His cross, my soul is so clouded with 
sorrow, as if it would never be clear again: those 
bloody drops, and those dreadful ejaculations, me- 
thinks, should be past all reach of comfort; but 
when I see His happy eluctation out of these pangs, 
and hear Him cheerfully rendering His spirit into 
the hands of His Father; when I find Him trampling 
upon His grave, attended with glorious angels, and 
ascending in the chariot of a cloud to His heaven; 

1 am so elevated Avith joy, as that I seem to have 
forgotten there was ever any cause of grief in those 
sufferings. I could })e passionate to think, O Sa- 
viour, of Thy bitter and ignominious death; and, 
most of all, of Thy vehement strugglings with Thy 
Father's wi'ath for my sake; but Th}^ conquest and 
glory, takes me off, and calls me to Hnllelujahs of 



JOSEPH 11^ LL. 77 

joy and triumpli; Blessing, honor, glory, and power 
be unto Him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto 
the Lamb, for ever and ever; Rev. v. 13. 

Paradise. 

O BLESSED Jesus, if from Avhat Thou hast suf- 
fered for me, I shall cast mine eyes upon what 
Thou hast done for my soul, how is my heart divided 
betwixt the wonders of both! and may as soon tell 
how great either of them is, as whether of them is 
the greatest. 

And oh, Avhat a heaven is this, that Thou hast laid 
out for me; how resplendent, how transcendentl}^ 
glorious! Even that lower paradise, which Thou 
providest for the harbor of innocence and holiness, 
was full of admirable beauty, pleasure, magnificence; 
but, if it be compared with this paradise above, 
which Thou hast prepared for the everlasting enter- 
tainment of restored souls, how mean and beggarly 
it was! O match too unequal, of the best piece of 
earth with the highest state of the heaven of heavens! 

In the earthly paradise, I find Thine angels the 
cherubim; but it was to keep man ofi* from that gar- 
den of delight, and from the Tree of Life in the 
midst of it: but, in this heavenly one, 1 find millions 
of thy cherubim and seraphim rejoicing at man's 
blessedness, and welcoming the glorified souls to 
their heaven. There, I find but the shadow of that, 
whereof the substance is here. There, we were so 
possessed of life, that yet we might forfeit it: here, 
is life, Avithout all possibility of death. Temptation 



78 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

eould find access thither: here, is iiothiiiiy but a free 
and complete fruition of blessedness. There, were 
delights fit for earthly bodies: here, is glory, more 
than can be enjoyed of blessed souls. That was 
watered with four streams, muddy and impetuous: 
in this, is the j[)iire river of the ivater of life] clear as 
crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and of 
the Lamb: Rev. xxii. 1. There, I find Thee only 
walkino; in the cool of the day: here, manifestins: 
Thy Majesty continually. There, I see onl}^ a most 
pleasant orchard*, set with all manner of varieties 
of flourishing and fruitful plants: here, I find also 
the city of God, infinitely rich and magnificent; the 
building of the wall of it of jasper; and the city 
itself pure gold, like unto clear glass; and the foun- 
dations of the wall garnished with all manner of 
precious stones. 

All that I can here attain to see, is the pavement 
of Thy celestial habitation. And, Lord, how glorious 
it is! how bespangled with the glittering stars; for 
number, for magnitude equally admirable! What 
is the least of them, but a world of light? and what 
are all of them, but a confluence of so many thousand 
worlds of beauty and brightness, met in one firma- 
ment? And, if this floor of Thy heavenly palace be 
thus richly set forth, oh, what infinite glory and 
magnificence must there needs be within! Thy 
chosen vessel, that had the privilege to be caught 
up thither, and to see that divine state, whether with 

• Gardens in general were formerly so called. — Cattermolf 



JOSEPH H^LL. 79 

bodily or mental eyes, can express it no otherwise, 
than that it cannot possibly be expressed. No, 
Lord,' it were not infinite, if it could be uttered. 
Thoughts go beyond words; yet even these come far 
short also. He, that saw it, says, Eye hath not seen, 
nor ear heard , neither have entered into the heart of 
man, the things which God hath prepared for them 
that love Him: 1 Cor. ii. 9.' 

Unchangeable Duration. 

IN the first minute wherein we live, w^e enter upon 
an eternity of being: and, though at the first, 
throngh the want of the exercise of reason, we can- 
not know it; and, afterwards, through our inconsid- 
eration and the bewitching businesses of time, we do 
not seriously lay it to heart, we are in a state of 
everlastin^ness. There must, upon the necessity of 
our mortality, be a change of our condition; but, 
Avith a perpetuity of our being: the body must un- 
dergo a temporary dissolution, and the soul a remove 
either to bliss or torment; but both of them, upon 
their meeting, shall continue in an unchangeable du- 
ration for ever and ever. And, if we are wont to 
slight transitory and vanishing commodities, by rea- 
son of their momentary continuance, and to make 
most account of things durable, what care and great 
thoughts ought I to bestow upon myself, who shall 
outlast the present world! and how ought I to frame 
my life so, as it may fall upon an eternity infinitely 
happy and glorious! .0 God, do Thou set off my 
heart from all these earthly vanities, and fix it above 



80 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

with Thee. As there shall be no end of my being, 
so let there be no change of my affections. Let them, 
beforehand, take possession of that heaven of Thine, 
whereto I am aspiring. Let nothing but this clay 
of mine be left remaining upon this earth, whereinto 
it is mouldering. Let my spiritual part be ever with 
Thee, whence it came, and enter upon that bliss, 
which knows neither change or end. 

Rest in God. 

SPEAK, Lord, for Thy servant hearetli: what is 
it, which Thou wouldest have me do, that I may 
lind rest to my soul? I am willing to exercise my- 
self in all the acts of piet}^, Avhich Thou requirest: 
I am ready to fast, to pray, to read, to hear, to 
meditate, to communicate, to give alms, to exhort, 
admonish, reprove, comfort where Thou bfddestme; 
and, if there be any other duty appertaining to de- 
votion or mercy, let me serve Thee in it: but, alas, 

my God, howsoever I know these works are, in 
themselves, well-pleasing unto Thee; yet, as they 
fall from my wretchedness, they are stained with so 
many imperfections, that I have more reason to crave 
pardon for them, than to put confidence in them; and 
if I could perform them never so exquisitely, yet one 
sin is more than enough to dash all my obedience. 

1 see, then, O Lord, I will see, there is no act, that 
I can be capable to do unto Thee, wherein I can find 
any repose: it must be Thine act to me, which only 
can effect it. It is Thy gracious word. Come unto 
me, all ye that hibor, and are heavy laden, and I icill 



JOSEPH HALL. 81 

give you rest: Mtittli. xi. 28. Lo, this rest must be 
Thy gift; not my earning: and what can be freer, 
than gift? Thou givest it then, but to those that 
come to Thee; not k) those that come not; to those 
that come to Thee hxden and hiborins: under the sense 
of their own wretchedness; not to the proud and 
careless. O Saviour, Thy sinner is sufficiently laden, 
with the burden of his iniquities: lade Thou me yet 
more with true penitent sorrow for my sins; and 
enable me then to come unto Thee by a lively faith. 
Take Thou the praise of Thine own work. Give me 
the grace to come; and give me rest, in coming. 

Life a Pilgrimage. 

OLOED my God, I am as very a pilgrim as ever 
walked upon Thy earth: why should I look to 
be in. any better condition than my neighbors, than 
my forefathers? Even the best of them, that were 
most fixed upon their inheritance, were no other than 
strangers at home: it was not in the power of the 
world to naturalize them; much less, to make them 
enrol themselves free denizens here below: they 
knew their country, Avhich they sought was above; 
so infinitely rich and pleasant, that these earthly re- 
gions, which they must pass through, are, in com- 
parison, Avorthy of nothing but contempt: Heb. xi. 
13, 14, 15. My condition is no other than theirs: 
I wander here, in a strange country; what wonder 
is it, if I meet with foreigners' fare, hard usage and 
neglect? Wh}'^ do I intermeddle with the affliirs of 
a nation, that is not mine? Why do I clog m^^self, 

4* 



82 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

in my way, with the base and heavy himber of the 
world? Why are not my affections homeward? Why 
do I not long to see and enjoy my Father's house? 

my God, Thou, that hast put «ie into the state of 
a pilgrim, give me a pilgrim's heart: set me off from 
this wretched world, wherein I am: let me hate to 
think of dwelling here: let it he my only care, how 
to pass through this miserable wilderness, to the 
promised land of a blessed eternity. 

On the Length of the Way. 

HOA\^ far off is yonder great mountain! My 
very eye is weary with the foresight of so 
great a distance; yet time and patience shall over- 
come it: this night we shall hope to lodge beyond 
it. Some things are more tedious in their expecta- 
tion, than in their performance. The comfort is, 
that every step I take sets me nearer to my end: 
when I once come there, I shall both forget how 
long it now seems, and please myself to look back 
upon the way that I have measured. 

It is thus in our passage to heaven. My weak 
nature is ready to faint, under the very conceit of 
the length and difficulty of this journey: my eye 
doth not more guide than discourage me. Many 
steps of grace and true obedience shall bring mc 
insensibly thither. Only, let me move, and hope; 
and God's good leisure shall perfect my salvation. 

O Lord, give me to possess my soul with patience; 
and not so much to regard speed, as certainty. When 

1 come to the top of Th}' liol}^ hill, all these weary 



JOSETH II-ALL. 83 

paces and deep sloughs, shall either be forgotten, 
or contribute to my happiness in their remembrance. 

The Divine Love. 

OGOD, hadst Thou sent down Thy Son to this 
lower region of earth upon such terms, as that 
He might have brought down heaven with Him; that 
He might have come in the port and majesty of a 
God, clothed with celestial glory, to have dazzled 
our eyes, and to have drawn all hearts unto Him; 
this might have seemed, in some measure, to have 
sorted with His divine magnificence; but Thou 
Avouldest have Him to appear in the wretched con- 
dition of our humanity. Yet, even thus, hadst Thou 
sent Him into the world in the highest estate and 
pomp of royalty that earth could afford; that all 
the kinoes and monarchs of the world should have 
been commanded to follow His train and to glitter in 
His court; and that the knees of all the potentates 
of the earth should have bowed to His Sovereign 
Majesty, and their lips have kissed His dust; this 
might have carried some kind of appearance of a 
state next to divine greatness: but Thou wouldest 
have Him come in the despised form of a servant. 

And Thou, O Blessed Jesus, wast accordingly will- 
ing, for our sakes, to submit Thyself to nakedness, 
hunger, thirst, weariness, temptation, contempt, be- 
traying, agonies, scorn, bufietings, scourgings, dis- 
tention, crucifixion, death: O love above measure, 
without example, beyond admiration! Greater' love, 
Thou sayest, hath no man than this, that a man lay 



84 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

doivn his life for his friends; but, Oh, Avliat is it 
then, that Thou, who wert God and Man, shouldest 
\i\j down Thy life, more precious than many worlds, 
for Thine enemies! 

Yet, had it been but the laying down of a life in 
a fair and gentle way, there might have been some 
mitigation of the sorrow of a dissolution. There is 
not more difference betwixt life and death, than there 
may be betwixt some one kind of death and another. 
Thine, O dear Saviour, was the painful, shameful, 
cursed death of the Cross; wherein yet all that man 
could do unto Thee was nothing to that inward tor- 
ment, which, in our stead, Thou endurest from Thy 
Father's wrath; when, in the bitterness of Thine 
anguished soul, Thou criedst out. My God^ my God^ 
why hast Thou forsaken me9 Even thus, thus wast 
Thou content to be forsaken, that we wretched sin- 
ners might be received to mercy: O love, stronger 
than death, which Thou vanquishedst! more high, 
than that hell is deep, from which Thou hast rescued 
us! 

I am swallowed up, O God, I am willingly swal- 
lowed up, in this bottomless abyss of Thine infinite 
love; and there let me dwell, in a perpetual -ravish- 
ment of spirit; till, being freed from this clog of 
earth, and filled with the fulness of Christ, I shall 
be admitted to enjoy that, which I cannot now reach 
to wonder at. Thine incomprehensible bliss and glory 
which Thou hast laid up in the highest heavens for 
them that love Thee, in the blessed communion of 
all Thy saints and angels, Thy cherubim and sera- 



JOSEPH HALL. 85 

pliim, thrones, dominions, and principalities, and 
powers; in the beatifical presence of Thee, the Ever- 
Living God, the Eternal Father of Spirits, Father, 
Son, Holy Ghost, One Infinite Deity in Three, co- 
essentially, co-eternally, co-equally glorious Persons: 
To whom be blessing, honor, glory, and power, for 
ever and ever. Amen. Hallelujah. 




RICHARD SIBBES, D. D. 
1577-1635. 

Gkace. 

PARKS by nature fly upwards; so the 
spirit of grace carrietli the soul heaven- 
ward, and setteth before us holy and heaven- 
ly aims : as it was kindled from heaven, so it 
carries us back to heaven. The part folio v/- 
eth the whole : fire mounteth upward, so every spark 
to its own element. Where the aim and bent of the 
soul is God-wards, there is grace though opposed. 
The least measure of it is holy desires springing from 
faith and love, for "we cannot desire anything wdiich 
we do not believe first to be, and the desire of it 
issues from love. Hence desires are counted a part 
of the thing desired in some measure, but then they 
must be, first, constant; for constancy shows that 
they are supernaturally natural, and not enforced: 
secondly, they must be carried to spiritual things, 
as to believe, to love God, &c., not out of a special 
exigent, because if now^ they had grace, they think 
they might escape some danger, but as a loving 
heart is carried to the thins^ loved for some ex- 
cellency in itself: and thirdly, with desire there is 



RICHAED SIBBES. 87 

grief when it is hindered, which stirs up to prayer: 
Oh that my loays ivere so directed^ that I might heep 
Thy statutes! Psalm cxix. 5; O miserable man that 
I am^ who shall deliver? <fec. Rom. vii. 24: fourthly, 
desires put us onward still, O that I might serve 
God with more liberty; O that I were more free 
from these offensive, unsavory, noisome lusts. 

The Holy Spirit our Guide. 

THE Holy Spirit of God is our guide: who will 
displease his guide ? A sweet comfortable 
guide that leads us through the wilderness of this 
world; as the cloud before the Israelites by daj^ 
and the pillar of fire by night: so He conducts us 
to the heavenly Canaan; if we grieve our guide, we 
cause Him to leave us to ourselves. The Israelites 
would not go a step further than God by His angel 
went before them. It is in vain for us to make 
toward heaven without our blessed Guide; we can- 
not do, nor speak, nor think anything that is holy 
and good w^ithout Him: whatsoever is holy, and 
pious, it grows not in our garden, in our nature, 
but it is planted by the Spirit. 

There is nothing in the world so great and sw^eet 
a friend that will do us so much good as the Spirit, 
if we give Him entertainment. Indeed He must rule, 
He will have the keys delivered to Him, we must 
"submit to His government. And when He is in the 
heart. He will subdue by little and little all high 
thoughts, rebellious risings, and despairing fears. 
This shall be our happiness in heaven, when we 



88 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

shall be wholly spiritiuil, that God shall be all in 
all; we shall be perfectly obedient to the Spirit in 
onr nnclerstandings, wills, and affections. The Spirit 
will then dwell largely in us, and will make the 
room where He dwelleth sweet, and lightsome, and 
free, subduing whatsoever is contrary; and bring 
fulness of peace, and joy, and comfort. And in the 
meantime in wliat condition soever we are, we shall 
have suitable help from the Spirit. We are partly 
flesh, and partly spirit; God is not all in all, the 
flesh hath a part in us, we are often in afflictions, 
and under clouds. Let us therefore prize our fel- 
lowship with the Spirit. For are we in darkness? 
He is a Spirit of light; are w^e in deadness of 
spirit? He is a Spirit of life; are we in a discon- 
solate estate? He is a Spirit of consolation; are we 
in perplexity, and know not what to do? He is a 
Spirit of wisdom; are we troubled with corrup- 
tions? He is a sanctifying, a subduing, a mortifying 
Spirit: in what condition soever we are, He will 
never leave us, till He hath raised us from the 
grave, and taken full possession of body and soul 
in heaven; He will prove a comforter, wdien neither 
friends, nor riches, nor anything in the world can 
comfort us. How careful should we be to give con- 
tentment to this sweet Spirit of God. 

No Christian is so happy as the w^atchful Chris- 
tian that is careful of his duty, and to preserve his 
communion with the Holy Sj^irit of God; for by enter- 
taining Him, he is sure to have communion with the 
Father and the Son. It is the happiest condition in 



RICHARD SIBBEF. 89 

the Avorkl, when the soul is the temple of the Holy 
Spirit, when the heart is as the Holy of Holies, 
where there be prayers and praises offered to God. 
The soul is as it were a holy ark, the memory like 
the pot of manna, preserving heavenly truths. It is 
a heavenly condition, a man prospers to heavenward, 
when the Spirit of God is Avith him. You know 
Obed-Edom, Avhen the ark was in his house, all 
thrived with him: so Avhile the Spirit and His mo- 
tions are entertained hy us, we shall be happy in 
life, happy in death, happy to eternity. 

Beholding of Christ, a Transforming Sight. 

THE very beholding of Christ is a transforming 
sight; the Spirit that makes us new creatures, 
and stirs us up to behold this SerA^ant, it is a trans- 
forming beholding, if Ave look upon Him with the 
eye of faith, it Avill make us like Christ; for the 
Gospel is a mirror, and such a mirror, that when we 
look into it, and see ourselves interested in it, ive 
are changed from glory to glory; a man cannot look 
upon the love of God and of Christ in the Gospel, 
but it Avill change him to be like God and Christ; 
for hoAV can Ave see Christ, and God in Christ, but 
Ave shall see hoAV God hates sin, and' this Avill trans- 
form us to hate it as God doth, Avho hated it so that 
it could not be expiated but with the blood of Christ, 
God-man; so seeing the holiness of God in it, it Avill 
transform us to be holy; Avhen Ave see the loA^e of 
God in the Gospel,, and the love of Christ giAdng 
Himself for us, this Avill transform us to love God; 



90 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

when we see the humility and obedience of Christ, 
when we look on Christ as God's chosen Servant in 
all this, and as our surety and Head, it ti'ansforms 
us to the like humility and obedience. Those that 
find not their dispositions in some comfortable mea- 
sure wrought to this blessed transformation, they 
have not yet those eyes that the Holy Ghost requi- 
reth here, Behold my Servant toJiom I have chosen, 
my Beloved in whom my soid delighteth. 

Comfort in Distress. 

SPIRITUAL comfort in distress, such as the world 
can neither give, nor take away, shows that God 
looks upon the souls of His with another eye than 
He beholdeth others. He sends a secret messeno^er 
that reports His peculiar love to their hearts. He 
knows their souls, and feeds them with His hidden 
manna; the inward peace they feel is not in freedom 
from trouble, but in freencss with God in the midst 
of trouble. 

Pardoning Mercy. 

CONCEIVE of God's mercy as no ordinary 
mercy, and Christ's obedience as no ordinary 
obedience. Tliere is something in the very great- 
ness of sin, that may encourage us to go to God, 
for the greater our sins are, the greater the glory 
of His powerful mercy, pardoning, and His powerful 
grace in healing will appear. The great God de- 
lights to show His greatness in the greatest things; 
even men glory, when they are put upon that, 



IJICIIARD bIBBKS. ' 91 

which may set forth their worth in any kind. Gocl 
delighteth in mercy, Mic. vii. 18, it pleaseth Him 
(nothing so well) as being His chief name, which 
then we take in vain, Avhen we are not moved by it 
to come unto Him. 

That which Satan would use as an aro'ument to 
drive us from God, we should use as a strong plea 
with Him. Lord, the greater my sins are, the 
greater will be the glory of Thy pardoning mercy. 
David, after his heinous sins, cries not for mercy, 
but for abundance of mercy, according to the multi- 
tude of Thy mercies, do cncay mine offences: Psalm 
li: His mercy is not only above His own w^orks, but 
above ours too. If w^e could sin more than He 
could pardon, then we might have some reason to 
despair. Despair is a high point of atheism, it 
takes away God and Christ both at once. Judas, in 
betraying our Saviour, was an occasion of His death 
as man, but in despairing he did what lay in him to 
take away His life as God. 

When, therefore, conscience joining with Satan, 
sets out the sin in its colors, lal^or thou by faith to 
set out God in His colors, infinite in mercy and 
loving kindness. 

Prayer and Praise. 

THOUGH in evil times we have cause to praise 
God, yet so we are, and such are our spirits, 
for the most part, that affliction straitens our hearts. 
Therefore the apostle thought it the fittest duty in 
affliction to pray. Is any afflicted? let him pray^ 



92 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

saith James; Is any joyfidf let him sing ])salms, 
James v. 13; showing that the clay of rejoicing is 
the fittest clay of praising God. Every work of a 
Christian is beautiful in its own time; the graces of 
Christianity have their several offices at several sea- 
sons; in trouble, prayer is in its season; in the evil 
clay call upon me, saith God; in better times praises 
should appear and show themselves. When Gocl 
manifests His goodness to His, He gives them grace 
with it, to manifest their thankfulness to Him. 
Praising of Gocl is then most comely, though never 
out of season, when God seems to call for it, by re- 
newing the sense of His mercies in some fresh favor 
towards us. If a bird will sing in winter, much 
more in the spring; if the heart be prepared in 
the winter time of adversity to praise God, how 
ready will it be when it is warmed with the glorious 
sunshine of His favor? 

Our life is nothing but as it were a web woven 
with interminglings of Avants and favors, crosses and 
blessings, standings and fallings, combat and victor}^, 
therefore there should be a perpetual intercourse of 
praying and praising in our hearts. There is alwaj-s 
a ground of communion with God in one of these 
kinds, till we come to that condition wherein all 
Avants shall be supplied, where indeed is only mat- 
ter of praise. Yet praising God in this life hath 
this prerogative, that here Ave praise Him in the 
midst of His enemies. In heaven all will be in con- 
cert Avith us. God esteems it an honor in the midst 
of devils, and wicked men, whose life is notliing but * 



EICIIARD SIBBES. 93 

a dishonor of Him, to have those that will make 
His name as it is in itself so, great in the Avorld. 

David comforts himself in this, that he should 
praise God; which shows he had inured himself 
well before to this holy exercise, in which he found 
such comfort, that he could not but joy in the fore- 
thoughts of that time, wherein he should have fresh 
occasion of his former acquaintance with God. 
Thoughts of this nature enter not into a heart that 
is strange to God. 

Praising God. 

SO soon as we set upon this work, we shall feel 
our spirits to rise higher and higher as the 
waters in the sanctuary, as the soul grows more and 
more heated; see how David riseth by degrees. Be 
glad in the Lord^ and then, rejoice^ ye righteous, and 
then, shout for joy, all ye that are ujpright in heart; 
the Spirit of God will delight to carry us along in 
this duty, until it leaves our spirits in heaven, 
praising God with the saints and glorious angels 
there; To him that hath and useth it shall be given; 
he that knoweth God aright, will honor Him by 
trusting of Him; he that honors Him by trusting 
Him, will honor Him by praying; and he that hon- 
ors Him l)y prayer, shall honor Him b}^ praises; he 
that honors Him by praises here, shall perfect His 
praises in heaven; and this will quit the lal)or of 
setting and keeping the soul in tune; this trading 
with God is the richest trade in the world; when 
we return praises to Him, lie returns new favors to 



94 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

US, and so an everlastinor ever-iiicreasiiio: intercourse 
betwi:S:t God and the soul is maintained; David here 
resolved to praise God, because he had assurance of 
such a deliverance as would yield him a ground of 
praising Him. 

Praising of God may well be called incense, be- 
cause as it is sweet in itself, and sweet to God, so it 
sweetens all that comes from us. Love and joy are 
sweet in themselves, though those whom we love 
and joy in, should not know of our affection, nor 
return the like; but we cannot love and joy in God 
but He will delight in us; when we neglect the 
praising of God, we lose both the comfort of God's 
love, and our own too; it is a spiritual judgment to 
want or lose the sight or sense of God's favors, for 
it is a sign of want of spiritual life, or at least live- 
liness; it shows we are not yet in the state of those 
whom God hath chosen, to set forth the riches of 
His glory upon. 

We ought not only to give thanks, but to be 
thankful, to meditate and study the praises of God. 
Our whole life should be nothing else but a con- 
tinual blessing of His holy name, endeavoring to 
bring in all we have, and to lay it out for God and 
His people, to see where He hath any receivers: our 
goodness is nothing to God; we need bring no 
water to the fountain, nor light to the sun. Thank- 
fulness is full of invention, it deviseth lil^eral things, 
though it be our duty to be good stewards of our 
talents, yet thankfulness adds a lustre, and a more 



niCHARD SIBBES. 95 

gracious acceptance, as having more of that which 
God calls for. 

Our praising God should not be as sparks out of 
a flint, but as water out of a spring, natui-al, ready, 
free, as God's love to us is; mercy pleases Him, so 
should praise please us; it is our happiness when 
the best part in us is exercised about the best and 
highest w^ork; it was a good speech of him that 
said. If God had made me a nightingale, I would 
have suno^ as a niochtinofale, but now God hath made 
me a man, I will sing forth the praises of God^ which 
is the work of a saint only: all Thy icorks bless 
Thee, and Thy saints praise Thee: all things are 
either blessings in their nature, or so blessed, as 
they are made blessings to us by the overruling 
coming of Him, who maketh all things serviceable 
to His; even the worst things in this sense are made 
spiritual to God's people against their own nature; 
how great is that goodness which makes even the 
worst thino^s o^ood? 

I beseech you therefore labor to be men of 
praises. If in any duty we may expect assistance, 
we may in this, that altogether concerns God's 
glory; the more we praise God, the more we shall 
please Him. When God by grace enlarges the 
will. He intends to give the deed. God's children 
Avherein their wills are conformable to God's will, are 
sure to have them fulfilled. In a fruitful ground, a 
man will sow his best seed. God intends His own 
glory in every mercy, and he that praises Him, glo- 
rifies Him. When our wills therefore carry us to 



96 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

that which God wills above all, we may well expect 
He will satisfy our desires. The living God is a 
living fountain never drawn dry; He hath never 
done so much for us, but He can and will do more. 
If there be no end of our praises, there shall be no 
end of His goodness, no way of thriving- like to 
this. By this means we are sure never to be very 
miserable; how can he be dejected, that by a sweet 
communion with God sets himself in heaven? nay, 
maketh his heart a kind of heaven, a temjyle^ a holy 
of holies^ wherein incense is offered unto God? It 
is the sweetest branch of our priestly office, to offer 
up these daily sacrifices; it is not only the begin- 
ning, but a further entrance of our heaven upon 
earth, and shall be one day our whole employment 
for ever. 

God our Refuge. 

THERE is none of us all but may some time or 
other fall into such a great extremity, that when 
we look about us, we shall find none to help us: at 
which time w^e shall thoroughly know what it is to 
have comfort from heaven, and a God to go unto. 
If there be anything in the world worth laboring 
for, it is the getting sound evidence to our souls 
that God is ours. What madness is it to spend all 
our labor, to possess ourselves of the cistern when 
the fountain is offered to us. O beloved, the whole 
w^orld cannot weigh against this one comfort, that 
God is ours. All tilings laid in the other balance, 
w^ould be too light. A moth may corrupt, a thief 



RICHARD SIBBES. 97 

may take away that we have here, but who can take 
our God away? though God doth convey some com- 
fort to us by these things, yet when they are gone, 
He reserves the comfort in Himself still, and can 
convey that, and more, in a purer and sweeter way, 
where He plants the grace of faith to fetch it from 
Him. Why then should we weaken our interest in 
God, for anything this earth affords? Avhat unwor- 
thy wretches are those, that to please a sinful man. 
or to feed a base lust, or to yield to a wicked cus- 
tom, will, as much as in them lieth, lose their inte- 
rest in God? such little consider what an excellent 
privilege it is to have a sure refuge to fly unto in 
time of trouble. Labor therefore to bring thy soul 
to this point with God: Lord^ if Thou seest it fit^ 
take aivay all from me, so Thou leavest me Thyself: 
ivhom have I in heaven hut Thee, and there is none 
on earth that I desire in comparison of Thee? 

Spiritual Desertion. 

IN time of desertion put Christ betwixt God and 
thy soul, and learn to appeal from God out of 
Christ, to God in Christ. Lord, look upon my Sav- 
iour, that is near unto Thee as Thy Son, near to me 
as my brother, and now intercedes at Thy right 
hand for me; though I have sinned, yet He hath 
suffered, and shed His precious blood to make my 
peace. When we are in any trouble, let us still wait 
on Him, and lie at His feet, and never let Him go 
till He casts a gracious look upon us. 



98 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

God our Portion. 

IN the division of things God bequeaths Himself 
to those that are His, for their portion, as the 
best portion He can give them. There are many 
goodly things in the world, but none of these are a 
Christian's portion; there is in Him to supply all 
good, and remove all ill, until the time come that 
we stand in need of no other good. It is our chief 
wisdom to know Him, our holiness to love Him, our 
happiness to enjoy Him. There is in Him to be had 
whatsoever can truly make us happ}^ We go to our 
treasure, and our portion in all our wants, we live 
by it, and value ourselves by it. God is such a por- 
tion, that the more we spend on Him, the more we 
may. Our strength may fail, and our heart mayfail^ 
but God is our po7^tion forever: Psalm Ixxiii. 26. 
Every thing else teaches us by the vanity and vexa- 
tion we find in them, that our happiness is not in 
them; they send us to God; they may make us 
worse, but better they cannot. Our nature is above 
them, and ordained for a greater good; they can go 
but along with us for a while, and their end swal- 
lows up all the comfort of their beginning, as 
Pharaoh's lean kine swallowed up the fat. If we 
have no better portion here than these things, we 
are like to have hell for our portion hereafter. 
What a shame will it be hereafter when we are 
stript of all, that it should be sa*id, Lo, this is the 
man that took not God for his portion. If God be 
once ours. He goes for ever along with us, and when 
earth will hold us no loiio-or, heaven shall. Who 



RICHARD SIBBE8. 99 

that hath his senses about him, would perish for 
want of water, when there is a fountain by him? or 
for hunofer, that is at a feast? God alone is a rich 
portion; O then let us labor for a large faith, as we 
have a large object; if we had a thousand times 
more faith, we should have a thousand times more 
increase of God's blessings. When the prophet 
came to the icidow^s house, as many vessels as she 
had ivere filled ivitJi oil: 1 Kings xvii. 14: we are 
straitened in our own faith, but not straitened in our 
God. It falls out oft in this world that God's peo- 
ple are like Israel at the Eed Sea, environed w^ith 
dantrers on all sides: what course have we then to 
take but only to look up and wait for the salvation 
of our God? This is a breast full of consolation; 
let us teach our hearts to suck, and draw comfort 
from hence. 

Is God our God; and will He suffer anything to 
befall us for our hurt? Will He lay any more upon 
us, than He gives us strength to bear? Will he suf- 
fer any wdnd to blow upon us but for good? Doth 
He not set us before His face? Will a father or 
mother suifer a child to be wronged in their pre- 
sence, if they can help it? Will a friend suffer his 
friend to be injured, if he may redress him? And 
will God, that hath put these affections into parents 
and friends, neglect tlie care of those He hath taken 
so near unto Himself? No surely, His eyes arc open 
to look upon their condition; His ears are open to 
their prayers; a hoolc of rememhrance, Mai. iii. IG, 
is written of all their good desires, speeches, and 



100 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

actions; He hath bottles for all their tears, their 
very sighs are not Jiid from Him; He hath written 
them upon the loalms of His hands, and cannot but 
continually look upon them. Oh let us prize the 
favor of so good a God, who though He dwells on 
high yet will regard things so low, and not neglect 
the mean estate of any; nay, especially delights to 
be called the Comforter of His elect, and the God 
of those that are in misery, and have none to fly 
unto but Himself. 

Comfort in the Hour of Death. 

IT is a comfort in the hour of death, that we yield 
up our souls to Christ, who has gone before to 
provide a place for us: this was one end of His 
being taken up to heaven, to provide a place for us. 
Therefore, when we die, we have not a place to seek, 
our house is provided beforehand; Christ was taken 
up to glory, to provide glory for us. Even as para- 
dise was provided for Adam before he was made, so 
we have a heavenly paradise provided for us; we 
had a place in heaven before we were born. What 
a comfort is this at the hour of death, and at the 
death of our friends, that they are gone to Christ 
and to glory! We were shut out of the first para- 
dise by the first Adam; our comfort is, that now the 
heavenly paradise in Christ is open. TJds day shalt 
thou he with me in jparadise, saith Christ to the pen- 
itent thief. There was an angel to keep paradise 
when Adam was shut out; but there is none to keep 
us out of heaven; nay, the angels are ready to con- 



RICHARD SIBBEg, JOl 

voy our souls to heaven, as they did Lazarus; and 
as they accomiDanied Christ in His ascension to hea- 
ven, so they do the souls of His children. 




JEREMY TAYLOR, D. D.. 
1613-1667. 

Pkayers. I. 

JL^LESSED and most Holy Jesus, foun- 
tain of grace and comfort, treasure of 
wisdom and spiritual emanations, be pleas- 
ed to abide with me for ever by the inhab- 
itation of Thy interior assistances and re- 
freshments; give me a corresponding love, accept- 
able and unstained purity, care and watchfulness 
over my ways, that I may never, by provoking 
Thee to anger, cause Thee to remove Thy dwell- 
ing, or draw a cloud before thy holy face. But if 
Thou art pleased, upon a design of charity, or 
trial, to cover my eyes, that I may not behold 
the bright rays of Thy favor, nor be refreshed 
with spiritual comforts, let Thy love support my 
spirit by ways insensible, and in all my needs 
give me such a portion as may be instrumental 
and incentive to performance of my duty; and in 
all accidents let me continue to seek Thee by 
prayers, and humiliation, and frequent desires, and 
the strictness of a holy life ; that I may follow Thy 
example, pursue Thy footsteps, be supported by 
Thy strength, guided by Thy hand, enlightened by 



JEREMY TAYLOR. 103 

Thy favor, and may at last, after a persevering holi- 
ness and an unwearied industry, dwell with Thee in 
the regions of light, and eternal glory, wdiere there 
shall be no fears of parting from the habitations of 
felicity, and the union and fruition of Thy presence, 
O blessed and most holy Jesus. Amen. 

II. 

O ETERNAL Jesus, Thou bright image of Thy 
Father's glories, whose light did shine to all 
the world, when Thy heart was inflamed w^ith zeal 
and love of God and of religion, let a coal from 
Thine altar, fanned with the wings of the holy dove, 
kindle in my soul such holy flames, that I may be 
zealous of Thy honor and glory, forward in religious 
duties, earnest in their pursuit, prudent in their 
managing, ingenuous in my purposes, making my re- 
ligion to serve no end but of Thy glories, and the 
obtaming of Thy promises: and so sanctify my soul 
and my bod}^, that I may be a holy temple, fit and 
prepared for the inhabitation of Thy ever-blessed 
Spirit; whom grant that I may never grieve by ad- 
mitting any impure thing to desecrate the place, and 
inihallow the courts of His abode; but give me a 
pure soul in a chaste and healthful body, a spirit full 
of holy simplicity, and designs of great ingenuity, 
and perfect religion, that I may intend what Thou 
commandest, and may with proper instruments prose- 
cute what I so intend, and hy Thy aids may obtain 
the end of my labors, the rewards of obedience and 
holy living, even the society and inheritance of Jesus 



104 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

in the participation of the joys of Thy temple, where 
Thou dwellest and reignest with the Father and the 
-Holy Ghost, O eternal Jesus. Amen. 

III. 

O ETERNAL God, Avho dwellest not in temples 
made by hands, the heaven of heavens is not 
able to contain Thee, and yet Thou art pleased to 
manifest Thy presence amongst the sons of men by 
special issues of Thy favor and benediction. Make 
my body and soul to be a temple pure and holy, apt 
for the entertainments of the Holy Jesus, and for the 
habitation of the Holy Spirit. Lord, be pleased, 
with Thy rod of paternal discipline, to cast out all 
impure lusts, all worldly affections, all covetous de- 
sires, from this Thy temple; that it may be a place 
of prayer and meditation, of holy appetites and chaste 
thoughts, of pure intentions and zealous desires of 
pleasing Thee; that I may become also a sacrifice as 
Avell as a temple, eaten up with the zeal of Thy 
glory, and consumed with the fire of love; that not 
one thought may be entertained by me but .such as 
may be like perfume breathing from the altar of in- 
cense, and not a word may pass from me but may 
have the accent of heaven upon it, and sound pleas- 
antly in Thy ears. O dearest God, fill every faculty 
of my soul with impresses, dispositions, capacities, 
and ajDtnesses of religion: and do Thou hallow my 
soul, that I may be possessed with zeal and religious 
affections, loving Thee above all things in the world, 
worshiping Thee with the humblest adorations and 



JEREMY TAYLOR. 105 

frequent addresses, continually feeding upon the 
apprehensions of the divine sweetness, and consider- 
ations of Thy infinite excellencies, and observations 
of Thy righteous commandments, and the feast of 
a holy conscience, as an antepast of eternity, and 
consignation to the joys of heaven, through Jesus 
'Christ our Lord. Amen. 

IV. 

OHOLY Jesus, fountain of eternal life. Thou 
spring of joy and spiritual satisfactions, let the 
holy stream of blood and water issuing from Thy 
sacred side cool the thirst, soften the hardness, and 
refresh the barrenness of my desert soul; that I, 
thirsting after Thee, as the wearied hart after the 
cool stream, may despise all the vainer complacencies 
of this world, refuse all societies but such as are safe, 
pious, and charitable, mortify all sottish appetites, 
and may desire nothing but Thee, seek none but 
Thee, and rest in Thee with entire dereliction of my 
own caitiff inclinations; that the desires of nature 
may pass into desires of grace, and my thirst and 
my hunger may be spiritual, and my hopes placed 
in Thee, and the expresses of my charity upon Thy 
relatives, and all the parts of my life may speak my 
love and obedience to Thy commandments: that 
Thou possessing my soul and all its faculties during 
my whole life, I may possess Thy glories in the 
fruition of a blessed eternity; by the light of Thy 
gospel here and the streams of Thy grace being 
guided to Thee, the fountain of life and glory, there 

5* 



106 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

to be inebriated with the waters of Paradise, with 
joy, and love, and contemphition, adoring and ad- 
miring the beauties of the Lord for ever and ever. 
Amen. 

V. 

O BLESSED Jesus, who art become to us the 
fountain of peace and sanctity, of righteousness 
and charity, of life and perpetual benediction, im- 
print in our spirits these glorious characterisms of 
Christianity, that we by such excellent dispositions 
may be consigned to the infinity of blessedness which 
Tliou camest to reveal, and minister, and exhibit to 
manldnd. Give us great humility of spirit; and 
deny us not, when w^e beg sorrow of Thee, the 
mourning and sadness of true penitents, that we may 
imitate Thy excellencies, and conform to Thy suffer- 
ings. Make us meek, patient, indifferent, and resign- 
ed in all accidents, changes, and issues of divine 
Providence. Mortify all inordinate anger in us; all 
^vi'ath, strife, contention, murmuriugs, malice, and 
envy; and interrupt, and then blot out all-peevish 
dispositions and morosities, all disturbances and un- 
evenness of spirit or of habit, tliat may hinder us in 
our duty. Oh! teach me so to hunger and thirst 
after the ways of rigliteousness, that it may be meat 
and drink to me to do Thy Father's will. Raise my 
affections to heaven and heavenly things, fix my 
heart there, and prepare a treasure for me, which I 
may receive in the great diffusions and communica- 
tions of Thy glory. And in this sad interval .of in- 



JEREMY TAYLOR. 107 

firmity and temptations strengthen my hopes, and 
fortify my faith, by such emissions of light and grace 
from Thy Spirit, that I may relish those blessings 
which Thou preparest for Thy saints with so great 
appetite, that I may despise the world and all its 
gilded vanities, and may desire nothing but the crown 
of righteousness and the paths that lead thither, the 
graces of TJiy kingdom, and the glories of it; that 
when I have served Thee in holiness and strict obe- 
dience, I may reign with Thee in the glories of eter- 
nity: for Thou, O holy Jesus, art our hope, and our 
life and glory, our exceeding great reward. Amen. 

VI. 

O ETERNAL Jesus, Who art made unto us wis- 
dom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemp- 
tion, give us of Thy abundant charity, that we may 
love the eternal benefit of our brother's soul with a 
true, diligent and affectionate care and tenderness. 
Give us a fellow-feeling of one another's calamities, 
a readiness to bear each other's burdens, aptness to 
forbear, wisdom to advise, counsel to direct, and a 
spirit of meekness and modesty trembling at our in- 
firmities, fearful in our brother's dangers, and joyful 
in his restitution and securities. Lord, let all our 
actions be pious and prudent, ourselves wise as ser- 
pents, and innocent as doves, and our whole life ex- 
emplary, and just, and charitable; that we may, like 
lamps shining in Thy temple, serve Thee and en- 
lighten others, and guide them to Thy sanctuary; 
and that, shining clearly, and burning zealously, 



108 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

when the Bridegroom shall come to biucl up His 
jewels, and beautify His spouse, and gather His 
saints together, we, and all Thy Christian people 
knit in holy fellowship, may enter into the joy of 
our Lord, and partake of the eternal refreshments 
of the kingdom of light and glory, where Thou, O 
holy and eternal Jesus, livest and reignest in the ex- 
cellencies of a kingdom, and the infinite durations 
of eternity. Amen. 

vn. 

BLESS me, gracious God, in my calling to such 
purposes as Thou shalt choose for me, or em- 
ploy me in: relieve me in all my sadnesses; make 
my bed in my sickness; give me patience in m}^ sor- 
rows, confidence in Thee, and grace to call upon 
Thee in all temptations. O be Thou my guide in all 
my actions; my protector in all dangers; give me a 
healthful body, and a clear understanding; a sancti- 
fied and just, a charitable and humble, a religious 
and contented spirit; let not my life be miserable 
and wretched; nor my name stained with -sin and 
shame; nor my condition lifted up to a tempting 
and dangerous fortune: but let my condition be 
blessed, my conversation useful to my neighbors, 
and pleasing to Thee; that when my body shall lie 
down in its bed of darkness, my soul may pass into 
the regions of light, and live with Thee for ever, 
throu2fh Jesus Christ. Amen. 



JEREMY TAYLOR., 109 

VIII. 

O ALMIGHTY God, Father and Lord of all the 
creatures, who hast disposed all things and 
all chances so as may best glorify Thy wisdom, and 
serve the ends of Thy justice, and magnify Thy 
mercy by secret and indiscernible ways, bringing 
good out of evil, I most humbly beseech Thee to 
give me wisdom from above, that I may adore Thee 
and admire Thy ways and footsteps, which are in 
the great deep and not to be searched out: teach 
me to submit to Thy providence in all tilings, to bo 
content in all changes of person and condition, to 
be temperate in prosperity, and to read my duty in 
the lines of Thy merc}^; and in adversity to be 
meek, patient, and resigned; and to look through 
the cloud, that I may wait for the consolation of 
the Lord and the day of redemption; in the mean- 
time doing my duty with an unwearied diligence, 
and an undisturbed resolution, having no fondness 
for the vanities or possessions of this world, but 
laying up my hopes in heaven and the rewards of 
holy living, and being strengthened with the spirit 
of the inner man, through Jesus Christ our Lord. 
Amen. 

Evening Prayers. I. 

OETEENAL God, great Father of men and 
angels, who hast established the heavens and 
the earth in a wonderful order, making day and 
night to succeed each other; I make my humble 
address to Thy Divine Majesty, begging of Thee 



110 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

mercy and protection this night and ever. O Lord, 
pardon all my sins, my light and rash words, the 
vanity and impiety of my thoughts, my unjust and 
uncharitable actions, and whatsoever I have trans- 
gressed against Thee this day, or at any time before. 
Behold, O God, my soul is troubled in the remem- 
brance of my sins, in the frailty and sinfulness of 
my flesh, exposed to every temptation, and of itself 
not able to resist any. Lord God of mercy, I earn- 
estly beg of Thee to give me a great portion of Thy 
grace, such •as maybe sufficient and efiectual for the 
mortification of all my sins and vanities and disor- 
ders, that as I have formerly served my lust and 
unworthy desires, so now I may give myself up 
wholly to Thy service and the studies of a holy life. 

11. 

INTO Thy hands, most blessed Jesus, I commend 
my soul and body, for Thou hast redeemed both 
with Thy precious blood. So bless and sanctify my 
sleep unto me that it may be temperate, holy, and 
safe; a refreshment to my wearied body, to 'enable 
it so to serve my soul, that both may serve Thee 
with a never-failing duty. Oh, let me never sleep 
in sin or death eternal, but give me a watchful and 
a prudent spirit, that I may omit no opportunity of 
serving Thee; that whether I sleep or awake, live 
or die, I may be Thy servant and Thy child; that 
when the work of my life is done, I may rest in the 
bosom of my Lord, till by the voice of the arch- 
angel, the trump of God, I shall be awakened, and 



JEREMY TAYLOR. HI 

called to sit down and feast in the eternal snpper 
of the Lamb. Grant this, O Lamb of God, for the 
lionor of Thy mercies, and the glory of Thy name, 
O most merciful Saviour and Redeemer Jesus. 
Amen. 

Prayer for Oxe in Trouble. 

O ETERNAL God, Father of mercies, and God 
of all comfort, with much mercy look upon 
the sadnesses and sorrows of Thy servant. My sins 
lie heavy upon me, and press me sore, and there is 
no health in my bones by reason of Thy displeasure 
and my sin. The waters are gone over me, and I 
stick fast in the deep mire, and my miseries are 
without comfort, because they are punishments of 
my sin: and I am so evil and unworthy a person, 
that though I have great desires, yet I have no dis- 
positions or worthiness toward receiving comfort. 
My sins have caused my sorrow, and my sorrow 
does not cure my sins; and unless for Thine own 
sake, and merely because Thou art good. Thou shalt 
pity me and relieve me, I am as much without rem- 
edy as now I am without comfort. Lord, pity me! 
Lord, let Thy grace refresh my spirit! Let Thy 
comforts support me. Thy mercy pardon me, and 
never let my portion be amongst hopeless and 
accursed spirits; for Thou art good and gracious, 
and I throw myself upon Thy mercy. Let me 
never let my hold go, and do Thou w^ith me what 
seems good in Thine own eyes. I cannot suffer 
more than I have deserved: and yet I can need no 



112 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

relief so great as Thy mercy is; for Thou art infin- 
itely more merciful than I can be miserable, and 
Thy mercy, which is above all Thy own works, 
must needs be far above all my sin and all my 
misery. Dearest Jesus, let me trust in Thee for 
ever, and let me never be confounded. Amen. 

Peayer for One in Sickness. 

OHOLY Jesus, Thou art a merciful High-Priest, 
and touched with the sense of our infirmities; 
Thou knowest the sharpness of my sickness and the 
weakness of my person. The clouds are gathered 
about me, and Thou hast covered me with Thy 
storm; my understanding hath not such apprehen- 
sion of things as formerly. Lord, let Thy mercy 
support me. Thy Spirit guide me, and lead me 
through the valley of this death safely; that I may 
pass it patiently, holily, with perfect resignation; 
and let me rejoice in the Lord, in the hopes of par- 
don, in the expectation of glory, in the sense of 
Thy mercies, in the refreshments of Thy Spirit, in 
a victory over all temptations. 

Thou hast promised to be with us in tribulation. 
Lord, my soul is troubled, and my body is weak, 
and my hope is in Thee, and my enemies are busy 
and mighty; now make good Thy holy promise. 
Now, O holy Jesus, now let Thy hand of grace be 
upon me; restrain my ghostly enemies, and give me 
all sorts of spiritual assistances. Lord, remember 
Thy servant in the day when Thou bindest up Thy 
jewels. 



JEREMY TAYLOR. 1X3 

O take from me all tediousness of spirit, all im- 
patience and .iinquietness: let me possess my soul 
in patience, and resign my soul and body into Thy 
hands, as into the hands of a faithful Creator and 
a blessed Redeemer. 

O holy Jesus, Thou didst die for us; by Thy sad, 
pungent, and intolerable pains, which Thou en- 
duredst for me, have pity on me, and ease my pain, 
or increase my patience. Lay on me no more than 
Thou shalt enable me to bear. I have deserved it 
all and more, and infinitely more. Lord, I am 
weak and ignorant, timorous and inconstant; and I 
fear lest something should happen that may discom- 
pose the state of my soul, that may displease Thee: 
do what Thou wilt with me, so that Thou dost but 
preserve me in Thy fear and favor. Thou knowest 
that it is my great fear, but let Thy Spirit secure 
that nothing may be able to separate me from the 
love of God in Jesus Christ: then smite me here 
that Thou mayest spare me for ever; and yet, O 
Lord, smite me friendly, for Thou knowest my 
infirmities. Lito Thy hands I commend my spirit; 
for Thou hast redeemed me, O Lord, Thou God of 
truth. Come, Holy Spirit, help me in this conflict. 
Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly. 

Prayer before a Journey. 

O ALMIGHTY God, who fillest all things with 
Thy presence, and art a God afar ofi* as well 
as near at hand; Thou didst send Thy angel to bless 
Jacob in his journey, and didst lead the children of 



114 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Israel tliroii£:li the Red Sea, makiiio: it a wall on the 
right hand and on the left; he pleased to let Thy 
angel go out before me and guide me in m}^ jour- 
ney, preserving me from dangers of robbers, from 
violence of enemies, and sudden and sad accidents, 
from falls and errors. And prosper, my journey to 
Thy glory, and to all my innocent purposes; and 
preserve me from all sin, that I may return in peace 
and holiness, with Thy favor and Thy blessing, and 
may serve Thee in thankfulness and obedience all 
the days of my pilgrimage; and at last bring me to 
Thy country, to the celestial Jerusalem, there to 
dwell in Thy house, and to sing praises to Thee for 
ever. Amen. 

Pkayers on Receiving the Sackament. I. 

OMOST gracious and Eternal God, the helper 
of the helpless, the comforter of the comfort- 
less, the hope of the afflicted, the bread of the hun- 
gry, the drink of the thirsty, and the Saviour of all 
them that wait upon Thee; I bless and glorify Thy 
name, and adore Thy goodness, and delight in Thy 
love, that Thou hast once more given me the oppor- 
tunity of receiving the greatest favor which I can 
receive in this world, even the body and blood of 
my dearest Saviour. O take from me all affection 
to sin or vanity; let not my affections dwell below, 
but soar upwards to the element of love, to the seat 
of God, to the regions of glory, and the inheritance 
of Jesus; that I may hunger and thirst for the bread 
of life and the wine of elect souls, and may know no 



JEREMY TAYLOR. 11 



D 



loves but the love of God, and the most merciful 
Jesus. Amen. 



o 



II. 

TASTE and see how gracious the Lord is: 
blessed is the man that trusteth in Him. The 
beasts do lack and sufier hunger; but they which 
seek the. Lord shall want no manner of thing that 
is good. Lord, what am I, that my Saviour should, 
become my food; that the Son of God should be 
the meat of worms, of dust and ashes, of a sinner, 
of him that was His enemy? But this Thou hast 
done to me, because Thou art infinitely good and 
wonderfully gracious, and lovest to bless everj^ one 
of us, in turning us from the evil of our ways. 
Enter into me, blessed Jesus: let no root of bitter- 
ness spring up in my heart; but be Thou Lord of 
all my faculties. O let me feed on Thee by faith, 
and grow up by the increase of God to a perfect 
man in Christ Jesus. Amen. Lord, I believe: help 
my unbelief. 

Prayers for Pardon of Sins. I. 

OJUST and dear God, my sins are innumerable; 
they are upon my soul in multitudes; they are 
a burden too heavy for me to bear; they already 
bring sorrow and sickness, shame and displeasure, 
guilt and a decaying spirit, a sense of Thy present 
displeasure, and fear of worse, of infinitely worse. 
But it is to Thee so essential, so delightful, so usual, 
so desired l)y Thee to show mercy, that although 



116 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

• 

my sin be very great, and my fear proportionable, 
yet Thy mercy is infinitely greater than all the 
world, and my hope and my comfort rise up in 
proportions towards it, that I trust the devils shall 
never be able to reprove it, nor my own weak- 
ness discompose it. Lord, Thou hast sent Thy Son 
to die for the pardon of my sins; Thou hast given 
me Thy Holy Spirit as a seal of adoption to consign 
the article of remission of sins; Thou hast, for all 
my sins, still continued to invite me to conditions 
of life by Thy ministers the prophets; and Thou 
hast, with variety of holy acts, softened my spirit 
and possessed my fancy, and instructed my under- 
standing, and bended and inclined my will, and 
directed or overruled my passions, in order to 
repentance and pardon: and why should not Thy 
servant beg passionately, and humbly hope for, the 
efiects of all these Thy strange and miraculous acts 
of loving-kindness? Lord, I deserve it not, but I 
hope Thou will pardon all my sins; and I beg it of 
Thee, for Jesus Christ's sake, whom Thou hast made 
the great endearment of Thy promises, and the 
foundation of our hopes, and the mighty instru- 
ment whereby we can obtain of Thee whatsoever 
we need and can receive. 

II. 

OMY God, how shall Thy servant be disposed 
to receive such a favor which is so great that 
the ever-blessed Jesus did die to purchase it for us; 
so great that the ftillen angels never could hope, and 



JEREMY TAYLOR. 117 

never shall obtain it? Lord, I do from my soul for- 
give all that have sinned against me; O forgive me 
my sins, as I forgive them that have sinned against 
me. Lord, I confess my sins unto Thee daily by the 
accusations and secret acts of conscience; and if we 
confess our sins, Thou hast called it a part of jus- 
tice to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all 
unrighteousness. Lord, I put my trust in Thee; and 
Thou art ever gracious to them that put their trust 
in Thee. I call upon my God for mercy; and Thou 
art always more ready to hear than we to pray. 
But all that I can do, and all that I am, and all 
that I know of myself, is nothing but sin, and 
infirmity, and misery: therefore I go forth of my- 
self, and throw myself wholly into the arms of Thy 
mcTcy through Jesus Christ, and beg of Thee, for 
His death and passion's sake, by His resurrection 
and ascension, by all the parts of our redemption, 
and Thy infinite mercy, in which Thou pleasest 
Thyself above all the works of the creation, to be 
pitiful and compassionate to Thy servant in the abo- 
lition of all my sins: so shall I praise Thy glories 
with a tongue not defiled with evil language, and a 
heart purged by Thy grace, quitted by Thy mercy, 
and absolved by Thy sentence, from generation to 
generation. Amen. 

Ox Prayer. 

PRAYER is an action of likeness to the Holy 
Ghost, the spirit of gentleness and dove-like 
simplicity; an imitation of the holy eTcsus, whose 



118 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

spirit is meek, up to the greatness of the biggest ex- 
ample; and a conformity to Gocl, whose anger is 
always just, and marches slowly, and is without 
transportation, and often hindered, and never hasty, 
and is full of mercy: prayer is the peace of our spirit, 
the stillness of our thoughts, the evenness af recol- 
lection, the seat of meditation, the rest of our cares, 
and the calm of our tempest; prayer is the issue 
of a quiet mind, of untroubled thoughts; it is the 
daughter of charity, and the sister of meekness; and 
he that prays to God with an angry, that is, with a 
troubled and discomposed spirit, is like him that re- 
tires into a battle to meditate, and sets up his closet 
in the out-quarters of an army, and chooses a frontier- 
garrison to be wise in. Anger is a perfect alienation 
of the mind from prayer, and therefore is contrary 
to that attention which presents our prayers in a 
rioht line to God. For so have I seen a lark risino- 
from his bed of grass, and soaring upwards, singing 
as he rises, and hopes to get to heaven, and climb 
above the clouds; but the poor bird was beaten back 
with the loud sighings of an eastern wind, and his 
motion was made irregular and inconstant, descend- 
ing more at every breath of the tempest than it could 
recover by the libration and frequent weighing of 
his wings, till the little creature Avas forced to sit 
down and pant, and stay till the storm was over; and 
then it made a prosperous flight, and did rise and 
sinof as if it had learned music and motion from an 
angel, as he passed sometimes through the air about 
his ministries here bolovr. 80 is the prayer of a 



JJ:REMY TAYLOR. 119 

good man, when his affairs have required business, 
and his business was matter of discipline, and his 
discipline was to pass npon a sinning person, or had 
a design of charity, his duties met with the infirmi- 
ties of a man, and anger was its instrument, and the 
instrument became stronger than the prime agent, 
and raised a tempest and overruled the man; and 
then his prayer was broken and his thoughts were 
troubled, and his words went up towards a cloud, 
and his thoughts pulled them back again and made 
them without intention; and the good man sighs for 
his infirmity, but must be content to lose the prayer, 
and he must recover it when his anger is removed 
and his spirit is becalmed, made even as the brow 
of Jesus, and smooth like the heart of God; and then 
it ascends to heaven upon the wings of the holy dove 
and dwells with God, till it returns, like the useful 
bee, laden with a blessing and the dew of lieaven. 

Advantages of Prayer. 

PRAYER can obtain everything; it can open the 
windows of heaven and shut the gates of hell; 
it can put a holy constraint upon God, and detain an 
angel till he leave a blessing; it can open the treas- 
ures of rain, and soften the iron ribs of rocks till they 
melt into tears and a flowing river; prayer can un- 
clasp the girdles of the north, saying to a mountain 
of ice. Be thou removed hence and cast into the bot- 
tom of the sea; it can arrest the sun in the midst of 
his course; and send the swift-winged winds upon 
our errand, and all tliose strani^e thino^s, and secret 



120 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

decrees and iinrevealed transactions, which are above 
the clouds and far beyond the regions of the stars, 
shall combine in ministry and advantages for the 
praying man. 

The Eighteous Safe. 

THE righteous is safe; but by intermedial diffi- 
culties: and he is safe in the midst of his per- 
secutions; they may disturb his rest and discompose 
his fancy, but they are like the fiery chariot to Elias; 
he is encircled with fire, and rare circumstances and 
strange usages, but is carried up to heaven in a robe 
of flames. And so was Noah safe when the flood came, 
and was the great type and instance too of the veri- 
fication of this proposition; he was put into a strange 
condition, perpetually wandering, shut up in a prison 
of wood, living upon faith, having never had the ex- 
perience*of being safe in floods. 

And so have I often seen young and unskilful per- 
sons sitting in a little boat, when every little wave 
sporting about the sides of the vessel, and every 
motion and dancing of the barge seemed a danger and 
made them cling fast upon their fellows; and yet all 
the while they were as safe as if they sat under a 
tree, while a gentle wind shaked the leaves into a 
refreshment and a cooling shade. And the unskilful, 
inexperienced Christian shrieks out whenever his 
vessel shakes, thinking it always a danger that the 
watery pavement is not stable and resident like a 
rock; and yet all his danger is in himself, none at all 
from without; for he is indeed moving upon the 



JEREMY TAYLOR. 121 

waters, but fastened to a rock. Faith is his founda- 
tion and hope is his anchor, and death is his harbor, 
and Clirist is his pilot, and heaven is his conntry; 
and all the evils of poverty, or affronts of tribunals 
and evil judges, of fears and sadder apprehensions, 
are but like the lond wind blowing from the right 
point: they make a noise and drive faster to the har- 
bor. And if we do not leave the ship and leap into 
the sea; quit the interests of religion and run to the 
securities of the world; cut our cables and dissolve 
our hopes; grow impatient and hug a wave, and die 
in its embraces, we are as safe at sea, safer in the 
storm which God sends us, than in a calm when we 
are befriended with the world. 

Consolation. 

GOD glories in the appellative that He is the 
Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort, 
and therefore to minister in the office is to become 
like God, and to imitate the charities of heaven; and 
God hath fitted mankind for it; he most needs it, and 
he feels his brother's wants by his own experience; 
and God hath given us speech and the endearments 
of society, and pleasantness of conversation and 
powers of seasonable discourse, arguments to allay 
the sorrow, by abating our apprehensions and taking 
out the sting, or telling the periods of comfort, or 
exciting hope, or urging a precept, and reconciling 
our affections and reciting promises, or telling-stories 
of the divine mercy, or changing it into duty, or 
n^aking the burden less by comparing it with greater, 

6 



122 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

or by proving it to be less than Ave deserve, and that 
it is so intended and may become the instrument of 
virtue. And certain it is, that as nothing can better 
do it, so there is nothing greater for which God 
made our tongues, next to reciting His praises, than 
to minister comfort to a weary soul. And what 
greater measure can we have than that we should 
bring joy to our brother, who with his dreary eyes 
looks to heaven and round about, and cannot find so 
much rest as to lay his eyelids close together, than 
that thy tongue should be tuned with heavenly ac- 
cents and make the weary soul to listen for light and 
ease; and when he perceives that there is such a thing 
in the world, and in the order of things, as comfort 
and joy, to begin to break out from the prison of his 
sorrows at the door of sighs and tears, and by little 
and little melt into showers and refreshment? This 
is glory to thy voice, and employment fit for the 
Ijrightest angel. 

But so have I seen the sun kiss the frozen earth, 
which was bound up with the images of death and 
the colder breath of the north; and then the waters 
break from their enclosures and melt with joy, and 
run in useful channels; and the flies do rise again 
from their little graves in walls, and dance awhile in 
the air, to tell that there is joy within, and that the 
great mother of creatures will open the stock of her 
new refreshment, become useful to mankind, and 
sing praises to her Redeemer. So is the heart of a 
sorrowful man under the discourses of a wise com- 
forter; he breaks from the despairs of the grave and 



JEKEMY TAYLOK. 123 

the fetters and chains of sorrow, he blesses God, and 
he blesses thee, and he feels his life returmng; for to 
be miserable is death, but nothing is life but to be 
comforted; and God is pleased with no music from 
below so much as in the thanksgiving songs of re- 
lieved widows, of supported orphans, of rejoicing 
and comforted and thankful persons. 

This part of communication does the work of God 
and of our neighbors, and bears us to heaven in 
streams of joy made by 'the overflowings of our 
brother's comfort. It is a fearful thing to see a man 
despairing. None knows the sorrow and the in- 
tolerable anguish but themselves, and they that are 
damned; and so are all the loads of a wounded spirit, 
when the staff of a man's broken fortune bows his 
head to the ground, and sinks like an osier under the 
violence of a mighty tempest. But therefore in pro- 
portion to this I may tell the excellency of the em- 
ployment and the duty of that charity, which bears 
the dying and languishing soul from the fringes of 
hell to the seat of the brightest stars, where 'God's 
face shines and reflects comforts forever and ever. 

God's Mercy. 

HIS mercy is His glory, and His glory is the 
light of heaven. His mercy is the life of the 
creation, and it fills all the earth; and His mercy is 
a sea too, and it fills all the abysses of the deep; it 
hath given us promises for supply of Avhatsoevcr we 
need, and relieves us in all our fears, and in all the 
evils that we suffer. His mercies are more than wc 



124 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

call tell, and they are more than we can feel. For 
all the world in the abyss of the divine mercies is 
like a man diving into the bottom of the sea, over 
whose head the waters run insensibly and unper- 
ceived, and yet the weight is vast and the sum of 
them is unmeasurable; and the man is not pressed 
with the burden nor confounded with numbers. And 
no observation is able to recount, no sense sufficient 
to perceive, no memory large enough to retain, no un- 
derstanding great enough to apprehend tliis infinity; 
but we must admire and love, and worship and mag- 
nify this mercy forever and ever; that we may dwell 
in what we feel, and be comprehended by that wliich 
is equal to God and the parent of all felicity. 

The Eepenting Sinner. 

EVERY sinner that repents causes joy to Christ, 
and the joy is so great that it runs over and 
wets the fair brows and beauteous locks of cherubim 
and seraphim, and all the angels have a part of that 
banquet; then it is that our blessed Lord feels the 
fruits of His holy death, the acceptation of His holy 
sacrifice, the graciousness of His person, the retuni 
of His prayers. 




ROBERT LEIGHTON, D. D. 
1613-1684. 

Saltation. 

ALYATION expresses not only that 
which is negative, but implies likewise 
positive and perfect happiness; thus for- 
giveness of sins is put for the whole nature 
of justification frequently in Scripture. It 
is more easy to say of this unspeakable happiness, 
what it is not, than what it is. There is in it a 
full and final freedom from all annoyance ; all tears 
are wiped away, and their fountain is dried up; 
all feeling and fear, or danger, of any the least 
evil, either of sin or punishment, is banished for 
ever; there are no invasions of enemies, no rob- 
bing or destroying in all this holy mountain, no 
voice of complaining in the streets of the new 
Jerusalem. Here, it is at the best but interchaug- 
es of mornings of joy, with sad evenings of weep- 
ings; but there, there shall be no night, no need 
of sun nor moon. For the glory of the Lord shall 
lighten it, and the Lamb shall he the light thereof, 
Rev. xxi. 23. 

Happy are they who have their eye fixed upon 



126 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

this salvation, and are longing and waiting for ifc; 
who see so mnch of that brightness and glory, as 
darkens all the lustre of earthly things to them, and 
makes them trample upon those things whieli for- 
merly they admired and (Joated on with the rest 
of the foolish world. Those things we account so 
much of, are hut as rotten wood, or glow-worms 
that shine only in the night of our ignorance and 
vanity: so soon as the light-beam of this salvation 
enters into the soul, it cannot much esteem or affect 
anything below it; and if those glances of it which 
shine in the word, and in the soul of a Christian, 
be so bright and powerful, what then shall the full 
sight and real possession of it be? 

Feee Grace. 

FREE grace being rightly apprehended, is that 
which stays the heart in all estates, and keeps 
it from fainting, even in its saddest times. What 
thou«-li there is nothing in m3^self but matter of 
sorrow and discomfort, it cannot be otherwise; it is 
not from myself that I look for comfort at any time, 
but from my God and His free grace. Here is com- 
fort enough for all times; when I am at the best, I 
ought not, I dare not, rely upon myself; when I am 
at the worst, I may, and should rely upon Christ, 
and His sufficient grace. Though I be the vilest 
sinner that ever came to Him, yet I know that He 
is more gracious than I am sinful; yea, the more my 
sin is, the more glory will it be to His grace to par- 
don it; it will appear the richer. Doth not David 



ROBERT LEIGIITON. 127 

argue thus, Psalm xxv. 11: For Thy name's sake, O 
XortZ, jpardon mine iniquity, for it is very great. 

Redemptiox the Admiration of Angels. 

THE Word made flesh, draws the eyes of those 
glorious spirits, and possesses them with won- 
der to see the Almighty Godhead joined with the 
weakness of a man, yea, of an infant. He that 
stretched forth the heavens bound up in swaddling 
clothes ! and to surpass all the wonders of His 
life, this is ])eyond all admiration, that the Lord 
of Life was subject to death, and that His love to 
rebellious mankind moved Him both to take on and 
lay down that life. 

It is no wonder the angels admire these things, 
and delight to look upon them; but it is strange 
that we do not so. They view them steadfastly, 
and we neo:lect them: either we consider them not 
at all, or give them but a transient look, half an 
eye. That which was the great business of the 
prophets and apostles, both for their own times, 
and to convey them to us, we regard not; and turn 
our eyes to foolish wandering thoughts, which an- 
gels are ashamed at. They are not so concerned in 
this great mystery as we are; they are but mere 
beholders, in comparison of us, yea, they seem 
rather to be losers some way, in that our nature, 
in itself inferior to theirs, is in Jesus Christ exalted 
above theirs, Heb. ii. 16. We bow down to the 
earth, and stud}", and grovel in it, rake into the 
very ])OAvels of it, and content ourselves Avith the 



128 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

outside of the unsearchable riches of Christy and look 
not within it; but they, having no will nor desire 
but for the glory of God, being pure flames of fire, 
burning only in love to Him, are no less delighted 
than amazed with the bottomless wonders of His 
wisdom and goodness shining in the work of oui 
redemption. 

It is our shame and folly, that we lose ourselves 
and our thoughts in poor childish things, and trifle 
away our days we know not how, and let these rich 
mysteries lie unregarded. They look up upon the 
Deitv in itself with continual admiration; but then 
they look down to this mystery as another wonder. 
We give them an ear in public, and in a cold formal 
way stop conscience's mouth with some religious 
performances in private, and no more; but to have 
deep and frequent thoughts and to be ravished in 
the meditation of our Lord Jesus, once on the cross, 
and now in glory, — how few of us are acquainted 
w4th this ! 

The Scriptures. 

LET this commend the Scriptures much to our 
diligence and afiection, that their great theme' 
is our Redeemer, and redemption wrought by 
Him; that they contain the doctrine of His excel- 
lences — are the lively picture of His matchless 
beauty. Were we more in them, we should daily 
see more of Him in them, and so of necessity love 
Him more. But we must look within them: the 
letter is but the case; the spiritual sense is w^hat 



EGBERT LEIGHTON. 129 

we should desire to see. We usually huddle them 
over, and see no further than their outside, and 
therefore find so little sweetness in them: we read 
them, but we search them not, as He requires. 
Would we dig into those golden mines, we should 
find treasures of comfort that cannot be spent, but 
which would furnish us in the hardest times. 

Prayer. 

ALL blessings attend this work. It is the 
richest traffic in the world, for it trades with 
heaven, and brings home what is most precious 
there. And as holiness disposes to prayer, so 
prayer befriends holiness, increases it much. No- 
thing so refines and purifies the soul as frequent 
prayer. If the often conversing with wise men 
doth so teach and advance the soul in wisdom, 
how much more then will converse with God ! 
This makes the soul despise the things of the 
world, and in a manner makes it divine; winds 
up the soul from the earth, acquainting it with 
delights that are infinitely sweeter. 

All the graces of the Spirit are, in prayer, stirred 
and exercised, and, by exercise, strengthened and 
increased; faith, in applying the Divine promises, 
which are the very ground that the soul goes upon 
to God; Hope looking out to their performance; and 
Love . particularly expressing itself in that sweet 
converse, and delighting in it, as love doth in the 
company of the person beloved, thinking all hours 
too shoi't in speaking with him. Oh, how the soul 



130 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

is refreshed with freedom of speech with its beloved 
Lord ! And as it delights in that, so it is continu- 
ally advanced and grows by each meeting and con- 
ference, beholding the excellency of God, and 
relishing the pure and sublime pleasures that are 
to be found in near communion with Him. Looking 
upon the Father in the face of Christ, and using Him 
as a mediator in prayer, as still it must, it is drawn 
to further admiration of that bottomless love which 
found out that way of agreement, that netv and liv- 
ing ivay of our access, wdien all was shut up, and 
we must otherwise have been shut out for ever. 
And then, the affectionate expressions of that reflex 
love, seeking to find that vent in prayer, do kindle 
higher, and being as it were fanned and blown up, 
rise to a greater, and higher, and purer flame, and 
so tend upward the more strongly. David, as he 
doth profess his love to God in prayer, in his 
Psalms, so no doubt it grew in the expressing: 
I ivill love Thee^ Lord my strength^ VavluiXYiii, 1. 
And in Psalm cxvi. 1, he doth raise an incentive of 
love out of this very consideration of the corres- 
pondence of prayer — / love the Lord because He 
hath heard; and he resolves thereafter upon per- 
sistence in that course — therefore ivill L call ujpon 
Him as long as I live. And as the graces of the 
Spirit are advanced in prayer by their actings, so 
for this further reason, because prayer sets the soul 
particularly near unto God in Jesus Christ. It is 
then in His presence, and being much with God in 
this way, it is powerfully assimihited to Him by con- 



ROBERT LEIGHTON. 131 

verse with Him; as we readily contract their habits 
with whom we have much intercourse, especially if 
they be such as we singularly love and respect. 
Thus the soul is moulded further to the likeness of 
God, is stamped wath clearer characters of Him, by 
being much with Him, becomes more like God, more 
holy and spiritual, and, like Moses, brings back a 
bn'o^ht shininof from the mount. 

True Rest. 

OMY brethren ! take heed of sleeping unto 
death in carnal ease. Resolve to take no 
rest till you be in the element and place of soul- 
rest, where solid rest indeed is. Rest not till you 
be with Christ. Though all the world should offer 
their best, turn them by with disdain; if they will 
not be turned by, throw them down, and go over 
them, and trample upon them. Say, you have no 
rest to give me, nor will I take any at your hands, 
nor from any creature. There is no rest for me 
till I be under His shadow, wdio endured so much 
trouble to purchase my rest, and whom having 
found, I may sit down quiet and satisfied; and 
when the men of the world make boast of the 
highest content, I will outvie them all ^yith this 
one word: Mt/ Beloved is mine^ and I am His. 

The Christian Warfare. 

THERE is still fighting, and sin will be molesting 
you; though wounded to death, yet will it 
struggle for life, and seek to wound its enemy; 



132 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

it will assault the graces that are in yon. Do not 
think, if it be once struck, and you have given it 
a stab near to the heart, by the sword of the 
Sjnrit, that therefore it will stir no more. No, 
so long as you live in the flesh, in these bowels 
there will be remainders of the life of this flesh, 
your natural corruption; therefore you must be 
armed against it. Sin will not give you rest, so 
long as there is a drop of blood in its veins, one 
spark of life in it: and that will be so long as you 
have life here. This old man is stout, and will fight 
himself to death; and at the weakest it will rouse 
up itself, and exert its dying spirits, as men will do 
sometimes more eagerly than when they were not 
so weak, nor so near death. 

This the children of God often find to their grief, 
that corruptions vfhicli they thought had been cold 
dead, stir and rise up again, and set upon them. A 
passion or lust, that after some great stroke lay a 
long while as dead, stirred not, and therefore they 
thouo^ht to have heard no more of it, thouo^h it shall 
never recover fully again, to be lively as before, yet 
will revive in such a measure as to molest, and pos- 
sibly to foil them yet again. Therefore it is con- 
tinually necessary that they live in arms, and put 
them not off* to their dying day; till th^ey put oflfthe 
body, and be altogether free of the flesh. You may 
take the Lord's promise for victory in the end; that 
shall not fail; but do not promise yourself ease in 
the way, for that will not hold. If at some times 
you be undermost, give not all for lost: he hath 



ROBERT LEIGHTON. 133 

often won the day, who hath been foiled and wound- 
ed in the fisfht. But likewise take not all for w^on, 
so as to have no more conflict, when sometimes you 
have the better, as in particular battles. Be not des- 
perate w^ien you lose, nor secure w^hen you gain 
them: when it is Avorse with you, do not throw away 
your arms, nor lay them away when you are at best. 

Communion with Christ in Suffering. 

IT is a sweet, a joyful thing to be a sharer with 
Christ in anything. All enjoyments wherein He 
is not, are bitter to a soul that loves Him, and all 
sufferino^s with Him are sweet. The w^orst thins^s of 
Christ are more truly delightful than the best thing 
of the world; His afflictions are sweeter than their 
pleasures, His rejproach more glorious than their hon- 
ors, and more rich than their treasures, as Moses ac- 
counted them: Heb. xi. 2G. Love delights in like- 
ness and communion, not only in things otherwise 
pleasant, but in the hardest and harshest things, 
which have not anything in them desirable, but only 
that likeness. So that this thought is very sweet 
to a heart possessed with this love: what does the 
world by its hatred, and persecutions, and revilings 
for the sake of Christ, but make me more like Him, 
give me a greater share with Him, in that which He 
did so willingly undergo for me? When He was 
sought for to be made a King^ as St. Bernard remarks. 
He escaped; hut tvheii He ivas sought to he brought to 
the cross^ He freely yielded Himself And shall I 
shrink and creep back from what He calls me to 



134 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

suffer for His sake! Yea, even all my other troubles 
and sufferings, I will desire to have stamped thus, 
with this conformity to the sufferings of Christ, in 
the humble, obedient, cheerful endurance of them, 
and the giving up my will to my Father's. 

The following of Christ makes any way pleasant. 
His faithful followers refuse no march after Him, be 
it through deserts, and mountains and storms, and 
hazards, that will affright self-pleasing, easy spirits. 
Hearts kindled and actuated wdth the Spirit of 
Christ, v^Wl folloio Him wheresoever^ He goeth. 

The Believer's Joy at the Eevelation of Christ. 

HE shall be revealed in His glory ^ and ye shall 
even overflow with joy in the partaking of that 
glory. Therefore, rejoice now in the midst of all 
your sufferings. Stand upon the advanced ground 
of the promises and the covenant of grace, and by 
faith look beyond this moment, and all that is in it, 
to that day wherein everlasting joy shall be upon 
your heads^ a crown of it, and sorrow and mourning 
shall flee away: Isa. li. 11. Believe in this day, and 
the victory is won. Oh! that blessed hope, well 
fixed and exercised, would give other manner of 
spirits. What zeal for God would it not inspire! 
What invincible courage against all encounters! 
How soon will this pageant of the world vanish, that 
men are gazing on, these pictures and fancies of 
pleasures and honors, falsely so called, and give place 
to the real glory of the sons of God, when this 
])lessed Son, who is God, shall be seen appearing in 



KOBERT LEIGIITOX. 135 

full majesty, and all His brethren ni glory witli Him, 
all clothed in their robes! And if you ask, who are 
they, why, these are they who came out of great tribu- 
lation^ and have ivashed their robes in the blood of 
the Lamb: Rev. vii. 14. 

Glory of Christ at the last Day. 

THE world sees nothing of His glory and beauty, 
and even His own see not much; they have but 
a little glimmering of Him, and of their own happi- 
ness in Him; know little of their own high condition;* 
and what they are born to. But in that bright day. 
He shall shine forth in His royal dignity, and every 
eye shall see Him, and be overcome with His splen- 
dor. Terrible shall it be to those that formerly de- 
spised Him and His saints, but to them it shall be 
the gladest day that ever arose upon them, a day 
that shall never set or be benighted; the day they 
so much longed and looked out for, the full accom- 
plishment of all their hopes and desires. Oh, how 
dark were all our days without the hope of this day! 

Steadfastness in the Faith. 

WHEN the soul is surrounded with enemies on 
all hands, so that there- is no way of escape, 
faith flies above them, and carries up the soul to take 
refuge in Christ, and is there safe. That is the 
power of faith; it sets a soul in Christ, and there it 
looks down upon all temptations as at the bottom 
of the rock, breaking themselves into foam. When 
the floods of temptation rise and gather, so great and 



136 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

SO many, that the soul is even ready to be s^yalloAYed 
up, then, by faith, it sa^^s, Lord Jesns, Thou art my 
strength, I look to Thee for deliverance; now appear 
for my help! And thus it overcomes. The guilt 
of sin is answered by His blood, the power of sin is 
conquered by His Spirit; and afflictions that arise 
are nothing to these: His love and gracious presence 
make them sweet and easy. 

Eternal Glory. 

OH, that blessed day when the soul shall be full 
of God, shall be satisfied and ravished with full 
vision! Should we not admire that such a condition 
is provided for man, wretched, sinful man? Lord^ 
lohat is man^ that Thou art mindful of him^ and the 
son of man, that Thou visitest him: Psalm viii. 3. 
And is it provided for me, as wretched as any who 
are left and fallen short of this glory, a base worm 
taken out of the mire, and Avashed in the blood of 
Christ, and Avithin a while set to shine in glory with- 
out sin? Oh, the wonder of this! How should it 
excite us to praise, when we think of such a One 
there, who will bring us up in the way to this crown! 
How will this hope sweeten the short sufferings of 
this life! And death itself, which is otherwise the 
bitterest in itself, is most of all sweetened by this, 
as being nearest it, and setting us into it. What 
though thou art poor, diseased, and despised here? 
Oh, consider what is there, how worthy the affection, 
worthy the earnest eye and fixed look of an heir of 
this glory! What can he either desire or fear, whose 



ROBERT LEIGIITON. 137 

heart is thus deeply fixed? Who would refuse this 
other clause, to suffer awhile^ a little Avhile, anything 
outward or inward Avhich lie thinks fit? How soon 
shall all this be overpast, and then overpaid in the 
very entry, at the beginning of this glory that shall 
never end. 

Meditatiois^ on the Eighth Psalm. 

OH, how strong and large that Hand, which with- 
out help expands the heavens as a curtain! 
Look up and see, consider their height and round- 
ness, such a glorious canopy set with such sparkling 
diamonds: then think how swift their motion, and 
yet imperceivable to us, no motion here below 
comparable, and yet they seem not to stir at all. 
And in all, their great Lord and ours so conspicu- 
ous! And yet wdio looks on them with such an ej^e 
as to behold Him, as David here, When I consider 
Thy heavens^ the loorh^ &c.! He is admirable in all: 
the very lowest and smallest creatures have their 
wonders of Divine wisdom in their frame, more than 
w^e are able to think, Magnus in minimis: He is 
great in the least of His works. The smallest flies, 
hoAv strange the fashioning of the organs of life and 
use in so little room! The man who is still in search 
of wisdom will find a school and a lesson in all 
places, and see everywhere the greatness and good- 
ness of his God! If he walk forth in the eveninor 
when this lower world is clothed with the dark 
mantle of the night, yet still he can look upward to 
the pavement of the throne of God, and think how 



138 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

glorious it is on the other side, when the moon and 
stars make this side, even in the night so beautiful. 
And this of David's, looks like a night meditation 
by the view of moon and stars. Thy Jieavens, these 
Thy works so glorious — Thou, therefore, infinitely 
more glorious; then can I not but increase in wond- 
er, that, dwelling above these heavens, Thou regard- 
est so poor a worm as man creeping on this earth. 

Spiritual Desire of Death. 
rj^HEEE is a spiritual desire of death, Avhich is 
J_ very becoming a Christian. For Jesus Christ 
hath not only opened very clearly the doctrine of 
eternal life, but He Himself hath passed through death, 
and lain down in the grave: He hath perfumed Ihat 
passage, and warmed that bed for us; so that it is 
sweet and amiable for a Christian to pass through 
and follow Him, and to be where He is. It is a 
strange thing, that the souls of Christians have not a 
continual desire to go to that company which is above 
(finding so much discord and disagreement among 
the best of men that are here); to go to the sinrits 
of just men 7nade jjerfect, where there is light, and 
love, and nothing else; to go to the comjpany of 
angels, a higher rank of blessed spirits; but, most 
of all to go to God, and to Jesus the Mediator 
of the New Testament. And to say nothing 
positively of that glory (for the truth is, we 
can say nothing of it), the very evils that death de- 
livers the true Christian from, may make him long 
for it; for such a one may say — I shall die, and go 



liOEEllT LEIGIITOX. 139 

to a more excellent country, where I shall be happy 
for ever: tliat is, I shall die no more, I shall sorrow 
no more, I shall be sick no more, and, which is yet 
more considerable, I shall doubt no more, and shall 
be tempted no more; and, which is the chiefest of 
all, I shall sin no more. 



Come to the Saviol e. 

THIS is the great comfort of sinners, this word: 
/ came to call not the righteous^ hut sinners. 
What can a diffident heart say, that it should 
not come to Jesus Christ? Art thou a sinner, an 
eminent sinner? Therefore come to Him, for He 
came to thee. It is such that He comes to seek — 
they are the very objects of His grace. He had 
nothing else to do in the world but to save such; He 
came on purpose for their sakes. His very name 
tells it: He shall be called Jesus, for He shall save 
His people from their sins. It is so far from being 
a just hinderance, that it is the only title to His favor- 
able intentions, that thou art a sinner. Were it not 
strange if one should say, I am sick, very sick, there- 
fore I will not make an address to the physician? 
And to say, I am a sinner, and a great one, therefore 
I dare not go to the Saviour of sinners, would be 
equally strange. Oh, no; therefore I will go: He 
came for me; I am sure He is able to heal me— ought 
to be the lano-uasfe of all such. 



140 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Cheist the Light of the CHKiSTiAi*r. 

ry^HE Christian that is truly acquainted with Him, 
JL enamored with the brightness of His beauty, 
can generously trample upon the smilings of the 
world with one foot, and upon her frownings with 
the other. If he be rich or honorable, or both, yet 
he glories not in that, but Christ, who is the glory 
of the Lord, is even then his chiefest glory; and the 
light of Christ obscures that worldly splendor in his 
estimation. And as the enjoyment of Christ over- 
tops all his other joys, so it overcomes his griefs. 
As that great light drowns the light of prosperity, 
so it shines bright in the darkness of affliction: no 
dungeon so close that it can keep out the rays of 
Christ's love from his beloved prisoners. The world 
can no more take away this light, than it can give it. 

Happiness of the Life to Come. 

WHAT are these things, the false glare and 
shadows whereof, in this earth, are pursued 
with such keen and furious impetuosity — riches, 
honors, pleasures? All these, in their justes.t, purest, 
and sublimest sense, are comprehended in this blessed 
life: it is a treasure, that can neither f^xil nor be car- 
ried away by force or fraud: it is an inheritance un- 
corrupted and undefiled, a crown that fadeth not 
away; a never-failing stream of joy and delight: it 
is a marriage feast, and of all others the most joyous 
and most sumptuous; one that always satisfies, and 
never cloys the appetite: it is an eternal spring, and 
an everlasting light, a day without an evening: it is 



EOBEET LEIGIITON. 141 

a paradise, where the lilies are always white and in 
full bloom, the saffron blooming, the trees sweat out 
their balsams, and the tree of life in the midst there- 
of: it is a city, where the houses are built of living 
pearls, the gates of precious stones, and the sti*eets 
paved with the purest gold. Yet, all these are no- 
thing but veils of the happiness to be revealed on 
that most blessed day: nay, the light itself, which 
we have mentioned anions^ the rest thouo^h it be the 
most beautiful ornament in this visible world, is at 
best but a shadow of that heavenly glory; and how 
small soever that portion of this inaccessible bright- 
ness may be, which, in the sacred Scriptures, shines 
upon us through these veils, it certainly very well 
deserves that we should often turn our eyes toward 
it, and view it with the closest attention. 

Now, the first that necessarily occurs in the con- 
stitution of happiness, is a,full and complete deliver- 
ance from every evil and every grievance; which we 
may as certainly expect to meet with in that heaven- 
ly life, as it is impossible to be attained while we 
sojourn here below. All tears shall be wiped away 
from our eyes, and every cause and occasion of tears 
for ever removed from our sight. There, there are 
no tumults, no wars, no poverty, no death, nor dis- 
ease; there, there is neither mourning, nor fear, nor 
sin, which is the source and fountain of all other 
evils: there is neither violence within doors nor with- 
out, nor any complaint, in the streets of that blessed 
city. There, no friend goes out, nor enemy comes in. 



142 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Fu]l vigor of body and mind, health, beauty, 
purity, and perfect tranquillity. 

The most delightful society of angels, prophets, 
apostles, martyrs, and all the saints; among whom 
there are no reproaches, contentions, controversies, 
nor party-spirit, because there are there noiie of the 
sources whence they can spring, nor anything to en- 
courage their growth; for there is there, particular- 
ly^, no ignorance, no blind self-love, no vain-glory lior 
envy, which is quite excluded from those divine re- 
o'ions; but, on the contrary, perfect charity, whereby 
every one, together with his own felicity, enjoys that 
of his neighbors, and is happy in the one as well as 
the other: hence there is among them a Idnd of in- 
finite reflection and multiplication of happiness, like 
that of a spacious hall adorned with gold and pre- 
cious stones, dignified with a full assembly of kings 
and potentates, and having its walls quite covered 
with the brightest looking-glasses. 

But what infinitely exceeds, and quite eclipses all 
the rest, is that boundless ocean of happiness, which 
results from the beatific vision of the evea'-blessed 
God, without which, neither the tranquillity they en- 
joy, nor the society of saints, nor the possession of 
any particular finite good, nor indeed of all such 
taken together, can satisfy the soul, or make it com- 
pletely happy. 



TvOBERT LEIGHTON. 143 

Prayees. I. 

PRAISE waits for Thee, O Lord, in Zion; and 
to be employed in paying Thee that tribute is 
a becoming and pleasant exercise. It is due to Thee 
from all the works of Thy hands, but particularly 
propel' from Thy saints and celestial spirits. Ele- 
vate, O Lbrd, our minds, that they may not grovel 
on the earth, and plunge themselves in the mire; 
but, being carried upward, may taste the pleasures 
of Thy house, that exalted house of Thine, the 
inhabitants whereof are continually singing Thy 
praises. Their praises add nothing to Thee; but 
they themselves are perfectly happy therein, while 
they behold Thy boundless goodness without any 
veil, admire Thy uncreated beauty, and celebrate 
the praises thereof throughout all ages. Grant us, 
that we may walk in the paths of holiness, and, 
according to our measure, exalt Thy name even on 
this earth, until we also be translated into the glo- 
rious asseml^ly of those who serve Thee in Th}^ 
hiofher house. 

'Remember Thy goodness and Thy covenant to 
Thy church militant upon this earth, and exposed 
to dangers amid so many enemies; yet we believe 
that, notwithstanding all these dangers, it will be 
safe .at last: it may be distressed, and plunged in 
the waters, but it cannot be quite overwhelmed, or 
finally perish. We depend upon Thee, O Father, 
without whose hand we should not have been, and 
without whose favor we can never be happ3\ In- 
spire our hearts with gladness, Thou who alone art 



144 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

the fountiim of solid, pure, and permanent jo}^; and 
lead us, by the paths of righteousness and grac-e, to 
the rest and light of glory, for the sake of Thy Son, 
our Redeemer, Jesus Christ. Amen. 

n. 

O INVISIBLE God, who seest all things! 
Eternal Light, before Avhom all darkness is 
light, and in comparison with whom every other 
light is but darkness ! The weak eyes of our 
understanding cannot bear the open and full rays 
of Thy inaccessible light; and yet, Avithout some 
glimpses of that light from heaven, we can never 
direct our steps, nor proceed toward that country 
which is the habitation of light. May it therefore 
please Thee, O Father of Lights, to send forth Thy 
light and Thy truth, that they may lead us directly 
to Thy holy mountain. Thou art good, and the 
Fountain of goodness; give us understanding, that 
we may keep Thy precepts. That part of our past 
lives, which we have lost in pursuing shadows, is 
enough, and, indeed, too much: bring back otir 
souls into the paths of life, and let the wonderful 
sweetness thereof, which far exceeds all the pleas- 
ures of this earth, powerfully, yet pleasantly, pre- 
serve us from being drawn aside therefrom by any 
temptation from sin or the world. Purify, we pray 
Thee, our souls from all impure imaginations, that 
Thy most beautiful and holy image may be again 
renewed within us, and, by contemplating Thy glo- 
rious perfections, we ma}^ feel daily improved within 



ROBERT LEIGHTON 145 

US that Divine similitude, the perfection whereof avc 
hope will at last make us for ever happy in that full 
and beatific vision we aspire after. Till this most 
blessed day break, and the shadows fly away, let 
Thy Spirit be continually with us, and may we 
feel the pow^erful effects of His Divine grace con- 
stantly directing and supporting our steps; that all 
our endeavors, not only in this society, but through- 
out the whole remaining part of our lives, may 
serve to promote the honor of Thy blessed name, 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 

III. 

MOST exalted God, who hast alone created, and 
dost govern this whole frame, and all the in- 
habitants thereof, visible and invisible, whose name 
is alone Wonderful, and to be celebrated with the 
highest praise, as it is indeed above all praise and 
admiration. Let the heavens, the earth, and all the 
elements praise Thee. Let darkness, light, all the 
returns of days and years, and all the varieties and 
vicissitudes of things, praise Thee. Let the angels 
praise Thee, the archangels, and all the blessed 
court of heaven, whose very happiness it is, that 
they are constantly employed in celebrating Thy 
praises. We confess, O Lord, that we are of all 
creatures the most unworthy to praise Thee, yet, of 
all others, we are under the greatest obligations to 
do it: nay, the more unworthy we are, our obliga- 
tion is so much the greater. From this dut}", how- 
ever unqualified we may be, we can by no means 



146 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS 

abstain, nor, indeed, ought we. Let our souls bless 
Thee, and all that is within us praise Thy holy name, 
who forgivest all our sins, and healest all our dis- 
eases: who deliverest our souls from destruction, 
and crownest them with bounty and tender mercies. 
Thou searchest the heart, O Lord, and perfectly 
knowest the most intimate recesses of it: reject not 
those prayers which Thou perceivest to be the voice 
and the wishes of the heart. Now, it is the great 
request of our hearts, unless they always deceive 
us, that they may be weaned from all earthly and 
perishing enjoyments; and if there is anything to 
which they cleave wdth more than ordinary force, 
may they be pulled away from it by Thy Almighty 
hand, that they may be joined to Thee for ever in 
an inseparable marriage-covenant. And in our own 
behalf, we have nothing more to ask. We only add, 
in behalf of Thy church, that it may be protected 
under the shadow of Thy wings, and everywhere, 
throughout the world, watered by Thy heavenly 
dew, that the spirit and heat of worldly hatred 
against it may be cooled, and its intestine divisions, 
whereby it is much more grievously scorched, exthi- 
o^uished. Amen. 



TV. 

ETERNAL God, who art constantly adored by 
thrones and powers, by seraphim and che- 
rubim, we confess that Thou art most worthy to be 
praised; but we, of all otheis, are the most unwor- 
thy to be employed in showing forth Thy praise. 



ROBERT LEIGIITON. 147 

How can polluted bodies, and impnre sonls, which, 
taken together, are nothing but mere sinks of sin, 
praise Thee, the pure and holy Majesty of heaven? 
Yet, how can these bodies which Thou hast wonder- 
fully formed, and these souls which Thou hast 
inspired, which owe entirely to Thine unmerited 
favor all that they are, all that they possess, and all 
they hope for, forbear praising Thee, their wise and 
bountiful Creator and Father? Let our souls, there- 
fore, and all that is within us, bless Thy holy name: 
yea, let all our bones say, O Lord, who is like unto 
Thee, w^ho is like unto Thee? Far be it, most gra- 
cious Father, from our hearts, to harbor anything 
that is displeasing to Thee; let them be, as it were, 
temples dedicated to Thy service, thoroughly purged 
from every idol and image, from every object of 
impure love and earthly affection. Let our most 
gracious King and Redeemer dwell and reign within 
us. May He take full possession of us by His Spirit, 
and govern all our actions. May He extend His 
peaceable and saving kingdom throughout the whole 
habitable world, from the rising of the sun to the 
j^ointr down thereof. Amen. 

V. 

INFINITE and Eternal God, who inhabitest thick 
darkness and light inaccessible, whom no mortal 
hath seen, or can see; yet all Thy Avorks evidently 
declare and proclaim Thy wisdom, Thy power, and 
Thy infinite goodness: and Avhen we contemplate 
these Thy perfections, what is it our souls can desire 



148 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

but that they may love Thee, worship Thee, serve 
Thee^ for ever proclaim Thy praise, and celebrate 
Thy exalted name, which is above all praises and all 
admiration? Thy throne is constantly surrounded 
by thousands and ten thousands of glorified spirits, 
who continually adore Thee and cry out without 
ceasing, Iloly^ lioly^ lioly^ Lord God Almighty^ who 
was^ who is, and who zs to come. Let others seek 
what they will, and find and embrace what they 
can; may we have always this one fixed and set- 
tled purpose, that it is good for us to draw near 
to God. Let the seas roar, the earth be shaken, and 
all things go to ruin and confusion; yet, the soul 
that adheres to God will remain safe and quiet, and 
shall not be moved for ever. O blessed soul that 
has Thee for its rest, and all its salvationi It shall 
be like a tree planted by the rivers of water; it 
shall not fear when heat cometh, nor shall it be 
uneasy in a year of drought. It is our earnest 
petition and prayer, O Father, that Thy hands may 
loosen all our chains, and effectually deliver our 
souls from all the snares and allurements of the 
world and the flesh; and that, by that same boun- 
tiful and most powerful hand of Thine, they may be 
for ever united to Thee through Thy only begotten 
Son, who is our union and our peace. Amen. 

VL 

HONOR and praise is due to Thee, O infinite 
God. This is the universal voice of all the 
blessed spirits on high, and all the saints on earth: 



ROBERT LEIGHTON. 149 

worthy art Thou, O Lord, to receive gloiy, aucl 
honor, and power, because Thou hast created all 
thhigs, and for Thy pleasure they are. We, here 
before Thee, with united hearts and affections offer 
Thee, as we can, the sacrifice of gratitude, love and 
praise. How much are we indebted to Thee, for 
ourselves, and for all that we possess! For in Thee 
we live, move, and have our being. Thou hast 
redeemed us from our sins, having given us the Sou 
of Thy love as a sacrifice and ransom for our souls: 
the chastisement of our peace fell upon Him, and by 
His stripes we are healed. On this consideration, 
we acknowledge we are no longer at our own dis- 
posal, since we are bought with a price, and so very 
great a price, that we may glorify Thee, O Father, 
and Thy Son, in our souls and our bodies, which 
are so justly Thine. May we devote ourselves to 
Thee through the whole remaining part of our life, 
and disdain the impure and ignoble slavery of sin, 
the world and the flesh, that in all things we may 
demean ourselves as becomes the sons of God, and 
the heirs of Thy celestial kingdom, and make daily 
greater progress in our journey toward the happy 
possession thereof. Amen. 

VII. 

ETERNAL Father of mercies and of lights, the 
only rest of the immortal souls which Thou 
hast created, and their never-failing consolation. 
Into what by-paths of error do our souls divert, and 
to what dangers are they exposed on every hand, 



150 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

when they stray away from Thee! But while they 
keep within Thy hiding-place, O Most High, they 
are safe under the shadow of Thy wiugs. O how 
happy are they, and how well do they live, who 
pass their whole lives in that secret abode, where 
they may continually refresh themselves mth the 
delicious fruits of Thy love, and show forth Thy 
praise! where they may taste and see that Thou art 
good, O Lord, and be thoroughly persuaded of the 
immense riches of Thy bounty, which all our mise- 
ries cannot exceed, nor our poverty exhaust; nay, 
which the constant effusion of them upon the whole 
universe, and all its parts, cannot in the least dimin- 
ish. As for us who are before Thee, the most un- 
Avorthy of all Thy creatures, yet, at the same time, 
the most excessively loaded with all the instances 
of Thy goodness, can we avoid crying out with the 
united voices of our hearts, Let praise be ascribed 
to the Lord, because He is good, and His mercy 
endureth for ever. Who shall declare the great and 
wonderful works of God? Who shall show forth 
His praise? Who ruleth by His power for ever, 
and His eyes observe the nations, that the rebellious 
may not exalt themselves. Who restores our souls 
to life, and suffers not our feet to be moved. But, 
on the other hand, alas! how justly may our songs 
be interrupted with bitter lamentations, that under 
such strong and constant rays of His bounty, our 
hearts are so cold toward Him! O how faint and 
lanfyuid is our love to Him! Hoav very little, or 
near to nothing, is the whole of that flame which 



IlOBEllT LEIGHTON. 152 

we feel within us! And, as that love fails within 
us, we misplace our affections upon the things 
around us; and, as we follow vanity, we become 
vain and miserable at the same time. But may Thy 
Spirit, O Lord, whom we humbly and earnestly beg 
of Thee, descending into our hearts, inspire us tho- 
roughly with life, vigor, and celestial purity! Amen. 

VIII. 

WHATEVER satisfiiction we look for without 
Thee, O heavenly Father, is mere delusion 
and vanity. Yet, though we have so often expe- 
rienced this, we have not, to this day, learned to 
renounce this vain and fruitless labor, that we may 
depend upon Thee, who alone canst give full and 
complete satisfaction to the souls of men. We 
pray, therefore, that, by Thy Almighty hand, Thou 
wouldst so effectually join and unite our hearts to 
Thee, that they may never be separated any more. 
How unhappy are they wdio forsake Thee, and whose 
hearts depart from Thy ways! They shall be like 
shrubs in the desert; they shall not see when good 
Cometh, but dwell in a parched and barren land. 
Blessed, on the contrary, is he who hath placed his 
confidence in Thee: he shall be like a tree planted 
by the rivers of water: he shall not be afraid when 
heat Cometh, nor be uneasy in the time of drought. 
Take from us, O Lord, whatever earthly enjoyments 
Thou shalt think proper: there is one thing will 
abundantly make up all our losses; let Christ dwell 
in our hearts by faith, and the rays of Thy favor 



152 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

continually refresh us in the face of Thine anointed: 
in this event, we have nothing to ask, but with 
grateful minds shall for ever celebrate Thy l^ounty, 
and all our bones shall say, ' Who is like unto Thee, 
O Lord, who is like unto Thee? ' Amen. 




RICHARD BAXTER. 
1G15-1691. 

Walking with God. 

f^ HAPPY man, that walks with God, 
though neglected and contemned bj all 
about him ! What blessed sights doth he 
daily see? What ravishing tidings, what 
pleasant melody, doth he daily hear, un- 
less it be in his swoons or sickness! What de- 
lectable food doth he daily taste! He seeth by 
faith the God, the glory, which the blessed spirits 
see at hand by nearest intuition! He seeth that 
in a glass, and darkly, which they behold with 
open face! He seeth the glorious majesty of his 
Creator, the eternal King, the cause of causes, 
the composer, upholder, preserver, and governor 
of all the worlds! He beholdeth the wonderful 
methods of His providence; and what he cannot 
reach to see, he admireth, and waiteth for the 
time when that also shall be open to his view! 
He seeth by faith the world of spirits, the hosts 
that attend the throne of God; their perfect right- 
eousness, their full devotedness to God; their ar- 
dent love, their flaming zeal, their ready and cheer- 
ful obedience, their dignity and shining glory, 

7" 



154 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

in Avhich the lowest of them exceedeth that which 
the disciples saw on Moses and Elias when they 
appeared on the holy mount, and talked with Christ! 
They hear by faith the heavenly concert, the high 
and harmonious songs of praise, the joyful triumphs 
of crowned saints, the sweet commemorations of the 
thinirs which were done and suffered on earth, with 
the praises of Him that redeemed them by His blood, 
and made them kings and priests to God: herein he 
hath sometimes a sweet foretaste of the cverlastino* 
pleasures, which though it be but little, as Jona- 
than's honev on the end of his rod, or as the clus- 
ters of grapes which were brought from Canaan 
into the wilderness, yet are they more excellent 
than all the delights of sinners. And in the behold- 
ing of this celestial glory, some beams do penetrate 
his breast, and so irradiate his longing soul, that he 
is changed thereby into the same image, from glory 
to glory; the Spirit of glory and of God doth rest 
upon him. And, oh! what an excellent holy frame 
doth this converse with God possess his soul of! 
How reverently doth he think of Him! What life 
is there in every name and attribute of God, which 
he heareth or thinketh on! The mention of His 
power, His wisdom. His goodness. His love, His 
holiness. His truth, how powerful and how pleasant 
are they to him! when to those that know Him but 
by the hearing of the ear, all these are but like com- 
mon names and notions; and even to the weaker 
sort of Christians, whose walking with God is more 
uneven, and low, interrupted l)y their sins, and 



RICHARD BAXTER. 155 

doubts, and fears, this life and glory of a Christian 
course is less perceived.* 

Prayer ix the Hour of Death. 

PRAYER in general, and this prayer in particu- 
lar, that Christ will receive our departing souls, 
is a most suitable conclusion of all the actions of a 
Christian's life. 

Prayer is the breath of a Christian's life: it is his 
work and highest converse, and therefore fittest to 
be the concluding action of his life, that it may reach 
the end at which he aimed. We have need of pray- 
er all our lives, because we have need of God, and 
need of His manifold and continued grace. But in 
our last extremity we have a special need. Though 
sloth is apt to seize upon us, while prosperity hind- 
creth the sense of our necessities, and health per- 
suadeth us that time is not near its journey's end, 
yet it is high time to pray with redoubled fervor and 
importunity when we see that we are near our last. 
When we find that we have no more time to pray, 
but must now speak our last for our immortal souls, 
and must at once say all that we have to say, and 
shall never have a hearing more. Oh, then, to be 
unable to pray, or to be faithless and heartless and 

* This beautiful passage on walking with God is conceived in 
the noblest spirit of hallowed eloquence, and is a fine illustration 
of the intense ardor of Baxter's mind, the vividness of his imagin- 
ation, and the deep spirituality of his feelings. It may be specified 
as one of the subliraest passages in his practical works; and it has 
been well remarked, that" " it would be difficult to find a nobler 
passage in the whole compass of devotional writing.' 



156 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

hopeless in our prayers, would be a calamity beyond 
expression. 

It is not a work tliat you were never used to, 
though you have had lamented backwardness and 
coldness, and omissions. It is not to a God that you 
were never with before; as you know whom you have 
believed, so you may know to whom you pray. It is 
indeed a most important suit to beg for the receiA^- 
ing of a departing soul; but it is put up to Him to 
whom it properly doth belong, and to Him that hath 
encouraged you by answering many a former prayer 
with that mercy which was the earnest of this, and 
it is to Him that loveth souls much better than any 
soul can love itself. O live in prayer, and die in 
prayer, and do not, as the graceless, witless world, 
despise prayer while they live, and then think, a 
Lord have mercy on me, shall prove enough to pass 
them into heaven. O pray, and wait but a little 
longer, and all your danger will be past, and you 
are safe forever! Keep up your hands a little longer, 
till you shall end your conflict with the last enemy, 
and shall pass from prayer to everlasting praise. 

Language and Power of Faith. 

IT is faith which overcometh the Avorld and the 
flesh, which must also overcome the fears of 
death, and can look with boldness into the loath- 
some grave, and can triumph over both as victorious 
through Christ. It is faith which can say. Go forth, 
O my soul; depart in peace; thy course is finished; 
thy warfare is accomplished; the day of triumph is 



RICHARD BAXTER. 157 

now at hand; thy patience hath no longer work; go 
forth with joy; the morning of thy endless joys is 
near; and the night of fears and darkness at an end. 
Thy terrible dreams are ending in eternal pleasures; 
the glorious light will banish all thy dreadful spec- 
tres, and resolve all those doubts which were bred 
and cherished in the dark. They whose employ- 
ment is their weariness and toil, do take the night 
of darkness and cessation for their rest; but this is 
their weariness: defect of action is thy toil; and thy 
most grievous labor is to do too little work; and 
thy incessant vision, love, and praise, will be thy 
incessant ease and pleasure; and thy endless work 
will be thy endless rest! Depart, O my soul, with 
peace and gladness! Thou leavest not a world 
where wisdom and piety, justice and sobriety, love 
and peace, and order do prevail; but a world of 
ignorance and folly, of brutish sensuality and rage, 
of impiety and malignant enmity to good; a world 
of injustice and oppression, and of confusion and 
distracting strifes! 

Thou oroest not from heaven to earth, from holi- 
ncss to sin, from the sight of God into an infernal 
dungeon; but from earth to heaven, from sin and 
imperfection unto perfect holiness, and from palpa- 
ble darkness into the vital splendor of the face of 
God ! Thou goest not among enemies, but to dear- 
est friends; not amongst mere strangers, but to 
many whom thou hast known by sight, and to more 
whom thou hast known by faith, and must know by 
the sweetest communion for ever. Thou goest not 



158 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

to unsiitislied justice, nor to a coudemniDg, unrecon- 
ciled God; but to love itself, to infinite goodness, 
the fountain of all created and communicated good; 
to the Maker, Eedeemer, and Sanctifier of souls; to 
Him who prepared heaven for thee, and now hath 
prepared thee for heaven. Go forth then in tri- 
umph, and not w^ith terror, O my soul! The prize 
is Avon: possess the things which thou hast so long 
prayed for, and sought! Make haste and enter into 
thy Masters joy! Go view the glory which thou 
hast so long heard of; and take thy place in the 
heavenly choir; and bear thy part in their celestial 
melody! Sit down w^ith Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, 
in the kingdom of God; and receive that which 
Christ in His covenant did promise to give thee at 
the last. Go boldly to that blessed God, w^ith 
wdiom thou hast so poAverful a Mediator, and to the 
throne of whose grace thou hast had so oft and 
sweet access. 

Second Comixg of Christ. 

O BLESSED day, Vvdien our blessed Hend shall 
be revealed from heaven with His mighty 
angels, and shall come to be glorified in His saints 
and admired in all them that now believe; v/hose 
weakness here occasioned His dishonor and their own 
contempt! When the seed of grace is grown up into 
glory, and all the world, whether they will or not, 
shall discern between the righteous and the wicked, 
between him that serveth God and him that serveth 
Him not; between the clean and the unclean, and 



RICHARD BAXTER. 159 

between him that sweareth and him that feareth an 
oath. And thonijh now ' onr life is hid with Christ 
in God,' and it yet ' appeareth not (to the sight of 
onrselvcs or others) what we shall be; yet then when 
Christ who is our life shall appear, w^e also shall 
appear with Ilim in glory.' Away then, my soul, 
from tills dark, deceitful and vexatious world! Love 
not thy diseases, thy fetters and calamities. Groan 
daily to thy Lord, and earnestly groan to be clothed 
upon with thy house that is from heaven: 2 Cor. v. 
2, 4: that mortality may be swallowed up of life! 
Join in the harmonious desires of the creatures, Avho 
groan to be delivered from the bondage of corrup- 
tion, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God: 
Eom. viii. 20-22. 'Abide in Him and walk in 
righteousness; that, wdien He shall appear, thou 
mayest have confidence and not be ashamed before 
Him at His comino;.' 

O watch and pray that thou enter not into tempta- 
tion! and be patient for the Judge is at the door! 
Lift up thy head with earnest expectation, O my 
soul, for thy redemption draweth near! Rejoice in 
hope before thy Lord, for He conieth; He cometh to 
judge the world in righteousness and truth. Behold, 
He cometh quickly, though faith be failing and 
iniquity abound, and love waxeth cold and scoficrs 
say, Where is the promise of His coming? Make 
haste, O Thou wdiom my soul desireth, and come in 
glory as Thou first camest in humility, and conform 
them to Thyself in glory whom Thou madcst con- 
formable to Thy sufferings and humility! Let the 



160 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

holy city, new Jerusalem, be prepared as a bride 
adorned for her husband; and let God's tabernacle 
be with men, that He may dwell with them and be 
their God, and wipe away their tears; and death and 
sorrow, and crying and pain may be no more, but 
former things may pass away! Keep np our faith, 
our hope, our love, and daily vouchsafe us some 
beams of Thy directing, consolatory light in this our 
darkness, and be not as a stranger to Thy scattered 
flock in this desolate wilderness. But let them hear 
Thy voice and find Thy ]3resence, and have such con- 
versation with Thee in heaven, in the exercise of 
faith, and hope, and love, which is agreeable to their 
low and distant state. Testify to their souls that 
Thou art their Saviour and Head, and that they abide 
in Thee, by the Spirit which Thou hiist given them, 
abiding and overcoming in them, and as Thy agent 
preparing them for eternal life. O let not our 
darkness nor Thy strangeness feed our odious un- 
belief! O show Thyself more clearly to Thy 
redeemed ones ! And come and dwell in our 
hearts by faith! And by holy love let us d\vell in 
God, and God in us, that ^ye grope not after Him, 
as those that worship an unknown God. O save us 
from temptation! And if the messenger of Satan be 
sent to buffet us, let Thy strength be manifest in our 
weakness, and Thy grace appear sufficient for us. 
And give us the patience which Thou tellest us we 
need, that having done Thy will we may inherit the 
promise. And bring us to the sight and fruition of 
our Creator, of whom, and through whom, and to 



lilCHAKD BAXTER. 161 

whom are all lliiiigs; to whom be glory forever. 
Amen. 

The Saints' Joy. 

JOY is itself a part of the holy qualification of the 
saints, and of the renewed state that grace hath 
brought them into. ' For the kingdom of God, as 
it consisteth in righteousness, so in peace and joy in 
the Holy Ghost,' Rom. xiv. 17. Believers 'receive 
not the spirit of bondage again to fear;' that is, they 
are not under the bondage of the law, nor have the 
spirit or state of mind which is suited to those legal 
impositions and terrible comminations: but they 
' have received the spirit of adoption by which they 
cry, Abba, Father;' that is, as they are brought under 
a more gracious dispensation, and a better covenant 
and promises, and God is revealed to them in the 
gospel as a reconciled Father through His Son, so 
doth He treat them more gently as reconciled child- 
ren, and the spirit which answer eth this gi'acious 
covenant, and is given us thereupon, doth qualify us 
with a child-like disposition, and cause us with bold- 
ness, love, and confidence to call God Father, and 
fly to Him for succor and supply in all our dangers 
and necessities. And how pleasant it must be to a 
believing soul, to have this ' spirit of adoption, this 
child-like love and confidence and freedom with the 
Lord, methinks you might conjecture, though it is 
sensibly known by them only that enjoy it: Gal. v. 
22, 'The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace,' &c. 
When the word is first received by believers, though 



162 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

it may be in much affliction, through the persecu- 
tions and cross that attend the gospel, yet is it ordi- 
narily 'in the joy of the Holy Ghost,' 1 Thess. i. G. 
The Holy Ghost is the comforter of true believers; 
and if He have taken it upon Him as His work He 
will surely do it, in the degree and season fittest for 
them. And if joy itself be part of the state of grace 
and holiness, you may see that is the most delight- 
ful, 23leasant course. 

O blessed life! where all that is as^ainst us is for- 
bidden, and all that is truly joyous and delightful 
and necessary to make us happy, is commanded us 
and made our duty; which is contrary to misery as 
life to death, and as light to darkness. Come hither, 
poor deluded sinners that fly from care, and fear and 
sorrow. If you will but give up yourselves to Christ 
you shall be exempted from all these, except such as 
is necessary to your joy. You may do anything, if 
you will be the servants of the Lord, except that 
which tendeth to your own and other men's calamity. 
Come hither, all you that call for pleasure, and love 
no life but a life of mirth. Let God be your Master 
and holiness your work, and pleasure then shall be 
your business and holy mirth shall be your employ- 
ment. While you serve the flesh your pleasure is 
small and your trouble great; vexation is your work 
and unspeakable vexation is 3^our wages. But if 
you will be the hearty servants of the Lord, re- 
joicing shall be your work and wages. If you un- 
derstand not this, peruse your lesson. Psalm xxxiii. 
1: 'Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous, for praise 



PJCITARl) BAXTER. 1G3 

is comely for the upriglit.' 'Liglit is sown for the 
righteous and gladness for the upright in heart. 
Kejoice in the Lord, jg righteous; and give thanks 
at the remembrance of His holiness,' Psalm xcvii. 11, 
12. 'Let all those that trust in Thee rejoice: let 
them ever shout for joy, because Thou defendest 
them: let them also that love Thy name be joyful in 
Thee,' Pliil. iii. 1; Psalm v. 11. 'Be glad in the 
Lord and rejoice ye righteous, and shout for joy all 
ye that are upright in heart,' Psalm xxxii. 11. ' Let 
Thy priests be clothed with righteousness, and let 
Thy saints shout for jo^^,' Psalm cxxxii. 9. ' I will 
also clothe her priests with salvation; and her saints 
shall shout aloud for joy/ ver. 16. Such precepts 
and promises abound in Scripture, which tell you, 
if you will be saints indeed, that joy and gladness 
must be your life and work. 

The "Word of God. 

HOW sweet is it to be exercised in the W^ord of 
God! in hearing or reading it with serious 
meditation! for the man that hath been revived by it, 
renewed, sanctified, saved by it, to hear that power- 
ful, heavenly truth, by which his soul was thus made 
new! for the soul that is in love with God, to hear 
or see His blessed name on every leaf! To read His 
will, and find the expressions of His love, His greats 
eternal, wondrous love; how sweet this is, experience 
tells the saints that feel it. If you that feel no 
sweetness in it, believe not them that say they feel 
it, at least believe the Avord of God and the profes- 



164: DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

sions of Ills ancient saints. ' Qli how I love Tliy 
law! it is my meditation all the clay. How sweet are 
Thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter than the 
honey and the honej^comb. I have rejoiced in the 
way of Thy testimonies as in all riches. I will de- 
light myself in Thy statutes: I will not forget Thy 
word. Thy testimonies arc my delight and my 
counsellors. I will delight myself in Thy command- 
ments which I have loved, and I will meditate in 
Thy statutes. The law of Thy mouth is better to 
me than thousands of gold and silver. Unless Thy 
law had been mj delight, I had perished in my 
affliction. I will never forget Thy precepts, for 
with them Thou hast quickened me. Thy testimo* 
nies have I taken as an heritage for ever: for they 
are the rejoicing of my heart. I love Thy com- 
mandments above gold, yea, above fine gold. I re- 
joice at Thy word as one that findeth great spoil. 
Great peace have they that love Thy law, and noth- 
ing shall ofiend them. 

Love of God. 

THE love of God is so sweet an exercise, that 
verily, my soul had rather be employed in it 
with sense and vigor, than to be lord of all the earth. 
Oh could I but be taken up with the love of God, 
how easily could I spare the pleasure of the flesh! 
Might I but see the loveliness of my dear Creator w^ith 
a clearer view, and see His glory in His noble works; 
might I but see and feel that saving love which He 
hath manifested in the Redeemer, till my soul were 



RICHARD BAXTER. 165 

ravished luid fillednvitli His love, how little should 
I care who had the pleasures of this deceitful world! 
Had I more of that blessed spirit of adoption, and 
more of those filial afiections to my heavenly Father, 
which His unutterable love bespeaks; and were I 
more sensible of His abundant mercy, and did my 
soul but breathe and long after Him more earnestly, 
I w^ould pity the miserable tyrants of the world, that 
are worse than beggars wdiile they domineer, and 
taste not of that kingdom of love and pleasure that 
dwelleth in my breast. All the pleasures of the 
world are the laughing of a madman, or the sports 
of a child, or the dreams of a sick man, in comparison 
of the pleasures of the love of God. 

Everlasting Joys of Heaven. 

"TT T^HEN our joys are at the sweetest, this thought 
V V must needs be part of that sweetness, that 
their sweetness shall never have an end. If our 
foretaste be joy unspeakable and full of glory, what 
sliall we call that joy which flows from the most 
perfect fruition and perpetuation? 1 Pet. i. 7, 8. We 
have joy here, but alas, how seldom! alas, how small 
in comparison of what we may there expect! Some 
joy we have, but how oft do melanchol}^, or crosses, 
or losses in the world, or temptations, or sins, or 
desertions interrupt it! Our sun is here most com- 
monly under a cloud, and too often in an eclipse; 
and we have the night as often as the day. Yea, 
our state is usually a winter; our days are cold and 
short, and our nis^hts are lono-. But when the flourish- 



1G6 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

ing state of glory comes, we shall have no intermis- 
sions nor eclipses. 'The path of the just is as the 
shining light, that shineth more and more unto the 
perfect clay,' Pro v. iv. 18. And the perfect day is a 
perpetual day, that knows no interruption by the 
darkness of the niffht. 'For there shall be no nio^ht 
there, nor need of candle or sun; for the Lord God 
giveth them light, and they shall reign for ever and 
ever,' Rev. xxii. 5. This is the life that fears no 
death, and this is the feast that fears no want or 
future famine; the pleasure that knows nor fears pain; 
the health that knows nor fears sickness: this is the 
treasure that fears no moth, or rust, or thief; the 
building that fears no storm nor decay, the king- 
dom that fears no changes by rebellion; the friend- 
ship that fears no falling out; the love that fears no 
hatred or frustration; the glory that fears no envious 
eye; the possessed inheritance that fears no ejection 
by fraud, or force, or any failings; the joy that feels 
or fears no sorrow. 

Eepose of the Soul. 

THE trust and repose of the soul on God, which 
is another part of the life of grace, is exceeding 
pleasant and quieting to the soul. To find that we 
stand upon a Rock, and that under us are the ever- 
lasting arms, and that we have so full security for 
oiu- salvation as the promise and oath of the immu- 
ttible God, what a stay, what a pleasure is tliis to the 
])eliever! The troubles of the godly are most from 
the remnants of their unbelief The more they be- 



T^TCIIArJ) BAXTER. 1G7 

licvc, the more they are comforted and established. 
The life of faith is a pleasant life. Faith could not 
conquer so many enemies, and carry us through so 
much suffering and distress, as you find in that cloud 
of testimonies, Heb. xi., if it were not a very com- 
fortable work. Even we that see not the salvation 
ready to be revealed, may yet greatly rejoice, for all 
the manifold temptations, that for a season make us 
subject to some heaviness, 1 Pet. i. 5, 6. And we 
' that see not Jesus Christ, yet believing can love 
Him, and rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of 
glor}^,' ver. 8. The God of hope doth sometimes 
' fill His servants with all joy and peace in believing, 
and makes them even aboimd in hope through the 
power of the Holy Ghost,' Eom. xv. 13. 

How TO Live a PLEAS^iNT Life. 

IF you would live a pleasant life draw near to God, 
and by faith behold Him, and by love adhere to 
Him, and take a view of His infinite goodness and 
all His perfections, and behold Him in His wondrous 
Avorks, and then break forth into His cheerful praises, 
and you shall taste such pleasures as the earth affbrd- 
eth not. Launch forth into the boundless ocean of 
eternity, and let your hearts and tongues expatiate 
in the praise of the Heavenly Majesty, and use this 
work, and ply it close, and be not too seldom or cus- 
tomary, or careless in it, and you shall find the difier- 
ence between the pleasures of faith and of the flesh, 
of a holy and of a sensual life. ' Ye that stand in 
the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of 



168 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

our God, praise the Lord; for the Lord is good; sing 
praises to His name, for it is pleasant,' Psalm cxxxy. 
2, 3. ' Let my mouth be filled with Thy praise and 
with Thy honor all the day,' Psalm Ixxi. 8. ' Sing 
unto the Lord: bless His name; show forth His sal- 
vation from day to day. Honor and majesty are be- 
fore Him: strength and beauty are in His sanctuary,' 
Psalm xcvi. 2, 6. 

Oh that the Lord will but shine upon my soul with 
the light of His countenance, and open my heart to 
the entertainment of His love, and hold a gracious 
communion with my soul by His Holy Spirit, and 
keep open these doors to me, and continue this 
liberty of His house and ordinances which we enjoy 
this day, that I may join with a faithful, humble 
people, in holy communion, and in His praise and 
worship, and that with a heart that is suitable to 
these works! I shall then say with David, 'The 
lines are fallen to me in pleasant places; I have a 
goodly heritage,' Psalm xvi. 6. I will ask for no 
greater pleasures or honors, or advancement in this 
world! Let who will surfeit on the pleasures of the 
flesh; here doth my soul delight to dwell! ' One 
thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek 
after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all 
the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the 
Lord, and to inquire in His holy temple. For in 
the time of trouble He will hide me in His pavilion; 
and in the secret of His tabernacle shall He hide me; 
He shall set me up upon a rock. And then shall my 
head bo lifted up above mine enemies round about 



rvlCTIAllD BAXTER. 1G9 

me: therefore will I offer in His tabenuiele sacrifices 
of joy, I will sing, yea, I will sing praises to the 
Lord,' Psalm xxvii. 4 — 6. Till I come to the prom- 
ised everlasting pleasures, I shall ask of God no 
greater pleasures. These would be as much as my 
soul in the prison of flesh could bear. Till I come 
to the land of promise, may I but have these clusters 
of its grapes in my present wilderness, I shall not 
repine: 'My heart here shall be glad, and my glory 
shall rejoice, and at death my flesh shall rest in 
hope.' For as the Lord now showeth me the ' path 
of life,' so in His ' presence is fullness of jo}^, and at 
His right hand are pleasures for evermore,' Psalm 
xvi. 9, 11. 

Th.vne:sgiving ^vnd Praise. 

ANOTHER duty that holiness consisteth in, is 
thanksgiving and praise to the God of our 
salvation. He that knows not that this w^ork is 
pleasant, is unacquainted with it. If there be any 
thing pleasant in this world, it is the praises of God 
that flow from a believing, loving soul, that is full 
of the sense of the mercies and goodness and excel- 
lences of the Lord; especially the unanimous con- 
junction of such souls, in the high praises of God in 
the holy assemblies. Is it not pleasant even to name 
the Lord? to mention His attributes? to remember His 
great and wondrous works? to magnify Him that 
rideth on the heavens, that dwellcth in the light that 
cannot be approached, that is clothed with majesty 
and glory, that infinitely surpasseth the sun in its 

8 



170 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

briglitness- that hath His throne in the heavens, and 
the heaven of heavens cannot contain Him; and yet 
He delighteth in the humble soul, and hath respect 
to the contrite; yea, dwells with them that tremble 
at His word? Is any thing so pleasant as the praises 
of the Lord? How sweet is it to see and praise Him as 
the Creator, in the various wonderful creatures which 
He hath made! How pleasant to observe His works 
of providence, to them that read them by the light of 
the sanctuary, and in faith and patience learn the 
interpretation from Him that only can interpret them! 
But oh how unspeakably pleasant is it to see the 
Father in the Son, and the Godhead in the manhood 
of our Lord, and the riches of grace in the glass of 
the holy gospel, and the manifold wisdom of God in 
the Church, where the angels themselves disdain not 
to behold it! Eph. iii. 10, 11. The praising of God 
for the incarnation of His Son, w^as a work that a 
choir of angels were employed in as the instructors 
of the church, Luke ii. 13, 14. There is not a 
promise in the Book of God, nor one passage of the 
life and miracles of Christ, and the rest of the history 
of the gospel, nor one of the holy works of the Spirit 
upon the soul, nor one of those thousand mercies to 
the Church, or to ourselves or friends, that infinite 
goodness doth bestow, but contain such matter of 
praise to God, as might fill believing hearts with 
pleasure, and find them most delightful work; much 
more when all these are at once before us, what a 
feast is there for a gracious soul! 



richard baxter. 171 

The Redeemed in Glory. 

THE true believer hath the small beginnings, and 
earnests and foretastes of the everlasting bless- 
edness in this life in his approaches to God, and liv- 
ing upon Him by faith and love, and in his believing 
apprehensions of the favor of God, the grace of 
Christ, and the happiness which in heaven he shall 
enjoy for ever. 

At death the souls of true believers do go to Christ, 
and enter upon a state of happiness. 

At the last day the body shall be raised and uni- 
ted to the soul, and the Lord Jesus Christ will come 
in glory to judge the world, where He wull openly 
absolve and justify the righteous, when He coii- 
demneth the ungodly, and will be glorified in His 
saints and admired in all them that do believe; and 
the saints shall also judge the w^orld, and be them- 
selves adjudged to everlasting glory. 

Their everlasting habitation shall be in the heavens, 
even near unto God, and in the presence of His glory. 

Their company will be only blessed spirits, even 
the holy angels and glorified saints, with whom we 
shall be one body and constitute the new Jerusalem, 
and be perfectly one in God for ever. 

Their bodies shall be perfected and made immor- 
tal, spiritual, incorruptible, and glorious bodies, 
shining as the stars in the celestial firmament; no 
more subject to hunger and thirst, or cold or weari- 
ness, or shame or pain, nor any of the frailties that 
now adliere unto them, lint be made like the glorified 
bodv of Christ. 



172 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

The souls of the saints united to these bodies shall 
also be perfected, having far larger capacity to know 
God and enjoy Him than now w^e have; being freed 
from all ignorance, error, unbelief, pride, hard- 
heartedness, and whatsoever sin doth now accompany 
us; and perfected in every part of the image of God 
upon us. 

The eyes of the glorified body shall in heaven have 
a glory to behold, that is suitable to their bodily 
capacity; — Heaven being not a place where the 
essence of God is eonfined, but where a prepared 
glory will be manifested to make happy the angels 
and saints with Christ. And whatever other senses 
the glorified bodies shall then have, (whether for- 
mally or eminently, we cannot now conceive what 
they will be,) they will all be satisfied with suitable 
deli2:hts from God. 

The blessed Person of our Redeemer in our nature 
glorified, will there be the everlasting object of our 
delightful intuition and fruition: an object suitable 
to the eye of the glorified body itself. We shall 
for ever live in the sight of His face, and in.the sense 
of His unspeakable love. 

The glorified soul (whether mediately or immedi- 
ately) shall behold the infinite, most blessed God, 
and by knowing Him be perfected in knowledge. 
As we shall see the Person of Jesus Chi'ist, and the 
glory of God with open fixce, and not as in a glass 
as now we do, so we shall know so much of the es- 
sence of the Deity as we are capable of, to our felicity. 

With the knowledge of God, and the beatifical 



RICHARD .BAXTER. 173 

vision, will be joined a perfect love unto Him, and 
closure with His blessed will. So that to love Him 
will be the everlasting employment of the soul. 

This love will be drawn forth into everlasting 
praise; and it will be our work before the throne of 
His glory to magnify the Lord forever. 

In all this love and praise and glory, and in the 
full fruition of the eternal God, we shall rejoice with 
full and perfect joy, and we shall have full content, 
delis^ht and rest. 

In all this blessedness and glory of the saints, the 
glory of God Himself w^ill shine, and angels shall ad- 
mire it, and the condemned spirits with anguish shall 
discern it, that God may be glorified in our glory. 

In all this happiness of believers and His own 
glory, the Lord will be well pleased, and that bless- 
ed will wliich is the beginning and end of all, will 
be accomplished and will have an eternal compla- 
cency, as the saints shall have an endless complacency 
in God. 

Heavenly Recognition. 

YOU cannot justly think that the knowledge of 
the glorified shall be more confused or imper- 
fect than the knowledge of natural men on earth. 
We shall know much more, but not so much less. 
Heaven exceedeth earth in knowledge, as much as 
it doth in joy. 

The angels in heaven have now a distinct, })articu- 
lar knowledge of the least believers, rejoicing par- 
ticularly in their conversion, and ])cing called by 



174 DEVOTIONAI. THOUGHTS. 

Christ Himself ' their angels.' Therefore, when ^ve 
shall be equal to the angels, we shall certainly know 
our nearest friends that there dwell with us, and 
are employed in the same attendance. 

Abraham knew the rich man in hell, and the rich 
man knew Abraham and Lazarus: therefore 'VN^e shall 
have as distinct a knowledge. 

The two disciples knew Moses and Elias in the 
mount, whom they had never seen before; though 
it is possible Christ told them who they were, yet 
there is no such thing expressed; and therefore it is 
as probable that they knew them by the communi- 
cation of their irradiating glory: much more shall 
we be then illuminated to a clearer knowledge. 

It is said expressly, 1 Cor. xiii. 10-12, that our 
present knowledge shall be done away only^ in 
regard of its imperfection; and not of itself, which 
shall be perfected: ' When that which is perfect is 
come, then that which is in part shall be done 
away;' as we put away childish thoughts and 
speeches, when we become men: the change will 
be from ' seeing in a glass ' to ' seeing face -to face,' 
and from ' knowing in part ' to ' knowing even as we 
are known.' 

And that w^e shall both know and love and 
rejoice in creatures, even in heaven, notwithstand- 
ing that God is all in all, appeareth further thus: 

Christ, in His glorified humanity, is a creature; 
and yet there is no doul)t but all His members will 
there know and love Him in His glorified humanity, 
without any derogation from the glory of His Deity. 



RICHARD BAXTER. 175 

The body of Christ will continue its union, and 
every member will be so nearly related, even in 
heaven, that they cannot choose b«t know and love 
each other. Shall we be iofnorant of the members 
of our body? and not be concerned in their felicity 
with whom we are so nearly one? 

The state and felicity of the Church hereafter, is 
frequently described in Scripture as consisting in 
society. It is a kingdom, the city of God, the 
heavenly Jerusalem; and it is mentioned as part 
of our happiness to be of that society, Heb. xii. 
22-24, &c. 

It is put into the description of the happiness of' 
the saints, that they shall come from the east, aiid 
from the west, and shall sit down with Abraham, 
Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of God. There- 
fore they shall know them, and take some comfort 
in their presence. 

Love to Saints m Heaven. 

LOVE, even to the saints, as well as unto God, 
is one of the graces which shall endure for 
ever, 1 Cor. xiii. It is exercised upon an immortal 
object, the image and children of the Most High, 
and therefore must be one of the immortal graces. 
For grace in the nature of it dieth not; and there- 
fore if the object cease not, how should the grace 
cease, unless you will call its perfecting a ceasing? 

I must profess, from the very experience of my 
soul, that it is the belief that I shall love my friends 
in heaven, that principally kiudleth my love to them 



176 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

on eartli; and if I tlionglit I shonlcl never know them 
after death, and consequently never love them more, 
when this life is- ended, I should in reason number 
them with temporal things, and love them compara- 
tively but a little; even as I love other transitory 
things, allowing for the excellency in the nature of 
grace. Bat now I converse with some delight with 
my godly friends, as believing I shall converse with 
them for ever, and take comfort in the very dead 
and absent, as believing we shall shortly meet in 
heaven: and I love them, I hope, with a love that 
is of a heavenly nature, while I love' them as the 
heirs of heaven, with a love which I expect shall 
there be perfected, and more fully and for ever 
exercised. 

Loss OF Pious Feiends. 

DO you not seem to forget where you are your- 
selves, and where you must shortly and for 
ever live ? Where would you have your friends, 
but where you must be yourselves? Do you mourn 
that they are taken hence? Why, if they had staid 
here a thousand years, how little of that time should 
you have had their company? When you are 
almost leaving the world yourselves, would you 
not send your treasure before you to the place 
where you must abide? Hovf quickly will you 
pass from hence to God, w^here you shall find your 
friends that you lamented as if they had been lost, 
and there shall dwell w^ith them for ever! O fool- 
ish mourners! would you not have your friends at 



RICHARD BAXTER. 177 

home? at their home and your home, with their 
Father and your Father, their God and your God? 
Shall you not there enjoy them long enough? Can 
you so much miss them for one day, that must live 
with them to all eternity? and is not eternity long- 
enough to enjoy ^-our friends in? 

Live by Faith. 

LIVE still by faith; let faith lay heaven and 
earth as it Avere together. Look not at God 
as if He were afar off; set Him always as before 
you, even as at your right hand, Psalm xvi. 8. Be 
still Avith Him Avhen you awake. Psalm cxxxix. 18. 
Li the morning thaiilv Him for your rest; and de- 
liver up yourself to His conduct and service for that 
day. Go forth as Avith Him, and to do His work; do 
every action with the command of God and the 
promise of heaven before your eyes, and upon your 
hearts: live as those that have incomparably more 
to do Avith God and heaven, than Avith all this 
Avorld; that you may say Avith David, 'Whom 
have I in heaven but Thee? and there is none on 
earth that I desire besides Thee:' Psalm Ixxiii. 
25, 26. And Avith Paul, 'To me to live is Christ, 
and to die is gain:' Phil. i. 21. You must shut up 
the eye of sense, save as subordinate to faith, and 
live by faith upon a God, a Christ, and a Avorld that 
is unseen, if you Avould know by experience Avhat it 
is to be above the brutish life of sensualists, and to 
converse Avith God. O Christian , if thou hadst rightly 

learned this blessed life, Avhat a high and noble soul- 
s' 



178 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

conversation wouldst thou have ! How easily Avouldst 
thou spare, and how little wouldst thou miss, the 
favor of the greatest, the presence of any worldly 
comfort! City or solitude would he much alike to 
thee, saving that the place and state would be best 
to thee, where thou hast the greatest help and free- 
dom to converse with God. 

Thus being taken up with God, thou mightest live 
in prison as at liberty, and in a wilderness as in a 
city, and in a place of banishment as in th}^ native 
land; * for the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness 
thereof;' and every where thou mayst find Him, and 
converse with Him, and lift up pure hands unto 
Him: in every place thou art within the sight of 
home; and heaven is in thine eye, and thou art con- 
versing with that God, in whose converse the high- 
est angels do place their highest felicity and delight. 

Contemplation of God. 

WHEREVER our friends are, God is still at 
hand to be the most profitable, honorable, 
and delightful ol)ject of our thoughts. There is 
enough in Him to take up all the faculties of my 
soul. He that is but in a well-furnished library, 
may find great and excellent employment for his 
thoughts many years together; and so may he that 
liveth in the open world, and hath all the visible 
works of God to meditate upon: but all this were 
nothinof if God were not the sense of books and 
creatures., and the matter of all these noble studies. 
He that is alone, and hath only God Himself to 



RICHARD BAXTER. 179 

study, hath the matter and sense of all the books 
and creatures in the world, to employ his thoughts 
upon. He never need to want matter for his medi- 
tation, that hath God to meditate on. He need not 
want matter of discourse, whether mental or vocal, 
that hath God to talk of, though he have not the 
name of any other friend to mention. All our affec- 
tions may have iuHiifi the highest and most pleasant 
work. The soul of man cannot have a more sweet 
and excellent work than to love Him: he wanteth 
neither work nor pleasure, that in his solitude is 
taken up in the believing contemplations of Eternal 
Love, and of all His blessed attributes and works. 
Oh, then, what happy and delightful converse may 
a believer have with God alone! He is always 
present, and always at leisure to be spoken with; 
and always willing of our access and audience. 

Oh, how oft have I been solaced in God, when I 
found nothing but deceit and darkness in the world ! 
How oft hath He comforted me, when it was past the 
power of man! How oft hath He relieved and 
delivered me, when all the help of man was vain! 
It hath been my stay and rest, to look to Him, when 
the creature hath been a broken staff, and deceitful 
friends have been but as a broken tooth, or a foot 
that is out of joint (as Solomon spcaketh of con- 
fidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble, 
Prov. XXV. 29). Verily, as the world were but a 
horrid dungeon without the sun, so it were a howl- 
ing wilderness, a place of no considerable employ- 
ment or delight, were it not that in it we may live 



180 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

to God and do Him service, and sometimes be 
refreshed with the light of His countenance, and 
the communications of His love. 

Solitude. 

rr^^HOUGH a wilderness is not heaven, it shall be 
jL sweet and welcome, for the sake of heaven, if 
thence I may but have a clearer prospect of it; and 
if by retiring from the crowd and noise of folly, I 
may but be more composed and better disposed to 
converse above, and to use my faith (alas! my too 
weak, languid faith) until the beatifical vision and 
fruition come. If there may be but more of God, 
or readier access to Him, or more heart-quickening 
flames of love, or more heart-comforting intimations 
of His favor, in a wilderness than in a cit}^, in a 
prison than in a palace, let that wilderness be my 
city, and let that prison be my palace, while I must 
abide on earth. If. in solitude I may have Enoch's 
walk with God, .1 shall in due season have such a 
translation as shall bring me to the same felicity 
which he enjoy eth; and in the mean time^ as well 
as after, it is no disadvantage, if by mortal eyes I 
be seen no more. If the chariot of contemplation 
Avill in solitude raise me to more believing, affec- 
tionate converse with heaven^ than I could expect in 
tumults and temptations, it shall reconcile me unto 
solitude, and make it my paradise on earth, till an- 
gels, instead of the chariot of Elias, shall convey 
me to the presence of my glorified Head, in the 
celestial paradise. 



iiiciiaiid baxter. 181 

Infinite Goodness of God. 
ry^HIS Infinite goodness should be the matter of 
_L our daily praises. He that cannot cheerfully 
magnify this attribute of God, so suitable to the 
nature of the will, is surely a stranger to the praises 
of the Lord. The goodness of God should be a 
daily feast to a gracious soul, and should continu- 
ally feed our cheerful praises, as the spring or cis- 
tern fills the pipes. I know no sweeter work on 
earth, nay, I am sure there is no sweeter, than for 
faithful, sanctified souls, rejoicingly to magnify the 
goodness of the Lord, and join together in His 
cheerful praises. O Christians, if you would taste 
the joys of saints, and live like the redeemed of the 
Lord indeed, be much in the exercise of this hea- 
venly work, and with holy David, make it your 
employment, and say, ' Oh how great is Thy good- 
ness which Thou hast laid up for them that fear 
Thee!' Psalm xxxi. 19. ' The earth is full of the 
goodness of the Lord!' Psalm xxxiii. 5. What then 
are the heavens? ' Thy congregation hath dwelt 
therein: Thou, O Lord, hast prepared Thy goodness 
for the poor.' ' Oh that men would praise the Lord 
for His goodness, and for His wonderful works to 
the children of men! for He satisfieth the lon<rin£r 
soul, and filleth the hungry soul with goodness:' 
Psalm cvii. 8, 9. ' The goodness of God endureth 
continually:' Psalm lii. 1. ' Truly God is good to 
Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart:' Psalm 
Ixxiii. 1. ' O taste and see that the Lord is good, 
blessed is the man that trusteth in Him:' Psalm 



182 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

xxxiy. 8. ' The Lord is good, His mercy is ever- 
lasting, His truth endureth from generation to gen- 
eration:' Psalm c. 5. 'The Lord is good to all, and 
His tender mercies are over all His works:'. Psalm 
cxlv. 9. Oh praise the Lord, for the Lord is good; 
sing praises to His name, for it is pleasant:' Psalm 
cxxxv. 3. Call Him, as David, ' My goodness, and 
my fortress, my high tower, and my deliverer, and 
my shield, and He in whom I trust:' Psalm cxliv. 2. 
' Let men therefore speak of the glorious honor of 
His majesty and of His wondrous works: let them 
a])undantly utter the memory of His great goodness, 
and sino^ of His rjo^hteousness:' Psalm cxlv. 5, 7. 
If there be a thought that is truly sweet to the 
soul^ it is the. thought of the infinite goodness of 
the Lord. If there be a pleasant w^ord for man to 
speak, it is the mention of the infinite goodness of 
the Lord. And if there be a pleasant hour for man 
on earth to spend, and a delightful work for man to 
do, it is to meditate on, and with the saints to praise, 
the infinite goodness of the Lord. What was the 
glory that God showed unto Moses, and the taste 
of heaven that He gave him upon earth, but this, 
' I will make all my goodness pass before thee, and 
I will proclaim the name of the Lord before thee; 
and I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, 
and will show mercy on whom I will show mercy i' 
Exod. xxxiii. 19. And His proclaimed name was, 
'The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, 
long-sufiering, and abundant in goodness and truth:' 
Exod. xxxiv. 6. These were the holy praises that 



mCHAKD BAXTER. 183 

Solomon did consecrate the temple with, 'Arise, O 
Lord God, into Thy resting-place. Thou and the ark 
of Thy strength: let Thy priests, O Lord God, he 
clothed with salvation, and let Thy saints rejoice 
in goodness:' 2 Chron. vi. 41; see Isaiah Ixiii. O 
Christians, if you would have joy indeed, let this be 
your employment! Draw near to God, and have no 
low undervaluino^ thouo'hts of His infinite o'oodness; 
for, ' How great is His goodness and how great is His 
beauty!' Zech. ix. 17. Why is it that divine con- 
solations are so strange to us, but because divine 
goodness is so lightly thought upon? As those that 
think little of God at all, have little of God upon 
their hearts; so they that think but little of His 
goodness in particular, have little love, or joy, or 
praise. 

The Saviour's Condescension and Love. 

OH wonderful, condescending love! Angels pro- 
claimed it; and angels admire it, and search 
into it, and in the Church's glass they still behold 
the manifold wisdom of God: how low, then, should 
redeemed sinners fall, in the humble admirations of 
this grace! how high should they rise in the thank- 
ful praise of their Redeemer! 

He came on earth and conversed with men, to 
make known to men the invisible God, and the un- 
seen things of the world above. He came as the 
Light and Saviour of the world, to bring to light 
immortality and life. He was holy, liarmless, and 
undefiled, separated from sinners, and fulfilling all 



184 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

righteousness, that He might be a meet High Priest 
and effectual Saviour of sinners. He taught us, by 
His perfect doctrine and example, to be humble and 
obedient, and to contemn this world; to deny our- 
selves, and bear the cross, that we may attain the 
everlasting crown of glory. He humbled Himself to 
the false accusations and reproach of sinners, and to 
the shameful and bitter death of the cross, to make 
Himself a sacrifice and propitiation for our sins, 
and a ransom for our guilty souls, that we might be 
healed by His stripes. Oh matchless love, which 
even for enemies, did thus lay down His precious 
life! He hath conquered and sanctified death and 
the grave to all believers. He, therefore, took part 
of flesh and blood, that He might by death destroy 
the devil that had the power of death, and deliver 
them who, through the fear of death, were all their 
lifetime subject unto bondage. He hath procured 
for mankind a covenant of grace, and sealed it as 
His testament with His l)lood. And now there is for- 
giveness with Thee, that Thou mightest be cheerfully 
feared and obeyed in hope. It was Thine own love 
to the w^orld, O Father, which gave Thine only be- 
gotten Son, that whosoever truly believeth in Him 
should not perish, but have everlasting life. Thou 
wast in Christ reconciling the world unto Thyself, 
and not imputing their sins unto them. Thou hast 
committed the word of reconciliation to Thy minis- 
ters, to beseech sinners, even in Thy name, and in 
the stead of Christ, to be reconciled to Thee. Thou 
commandest them to ofter Thy mercy unto all, and 



RICHARD BAXTER. 185 

by importunity to compel them to come in, that Thy 
house may be filled, and Thy blessed feast may be 
furnished with guests. 

Heavenly Aspirations. 

WE foresee, by faith, that happy day. We see, 
by faith, the new Jerusalem; the innumera- 
ble angels; the perfect spirits of the just; their glo- 
rious light, their flaming love, their, perfect harmony. 
Wg hear, by faith, their joyful songs of thanks and 
praise. Lately they Avere as low and sad as we; in 
sins and sorrows, in manifold weaknesses, sufierings, 
and fears; but by faith and patience they have over- 
come; and in faith and patience we desire to follow 
our Lord and them. The time is near; this flesh 
will quickly turn to dust, and our delivered souls 
shall come to Thee: our life is short, and our sins 
and sorrows will be short; then we shall have light: 
we shall no more groan, and cry out in darkness. Oh 
that Ave could know the Lord! then shall Ave love 
Thee AAdth pure, unmixed, perfect love; and need no 
more to groan and cry. Oh that our souls Avere in- 
flamed with Thy love! then shall Ave praise Thee 
Avith thankful alacrity and joy, which Avill exceed 
our present apprehensions and desires. 

O blessed streams of light and love, Avhich will 
floAV from Thy opened, glorious face, upon our souls 
forever! Hoav far Avill that cA^erlasting Sabbath, 
and those perfect praises, excel these poor and dull 
endeavors, as far as that triumphant city of God ex- 
celleth this imperfect, childish, discomposed Church. 



IQQ DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Quicken, Lord, our longing for that blessed state 
and day! O come, Lord Jesus, come quickl}^, and 
fulfill Thy word, that ayc may be with Thee where 
Thou art, and may behold Thy glory! 

Prayer for the Penitent. 

OGOD, be merciful to me a sinner! I confess 
not only my original sin, but the follies and 
fury of my youth, my manifold sins of ignorance 
and knowledge, of negligence and wilfulness, of 
omission and commission, against the law of nature, 
and against the grace and Gospel of Thy Son. 
Forgive and save me, O my God, for Thy abundant 
mercy, and for the sacrifice and merit of Thy Son, 
and for the promise of forgiveness which Thou hast 
made through Him; for in these alone is all my 
trust. Condemn me not, who condemn myself. O 
Thou that hast opened so precious a fountain for sin 
and uncleanness, wash me thoroughly from my wick- 
edness, and cleanse me from my sin. Though Thy 
justice might send me presently to hell, let Thy 
mercy triumph in my salvation. Thou hast no 
pleasure in the death of sinners, but rather that 
they repent and live. If my repentance be not 
such as Thou requirest, O soften this hardened, 
flinty heart, and give me repentance unto life. Turn 
me to Thyself, O God of my salvation, and cause Thy 
face to shine upon me. Create in me a clean heart, 
and renew a right spirit within me. Meet not this 
poor returning prodigal in Thy wrath, but with the 
cmbracements of Thy tender mercies. Cast me not 



raciiAiiD BAXTEr. 187 

away from Thy presence, and sentence me not to 
depart from Thee with the workers of iniqnity: 
Thou who didst patiently endure me Avhen I 
despised Thee, refuse me not, now I seek unto 
Thee, and here in the dust implore Thy mercy. 
Thou didst convert and pardon a wicked Manas- 
seh, and a persecuting Saul, and there are multi- 
tudes in heaven who were once Thine enemies. 
Glorify also Thy superabounding grace in the for- 
giveness of my abounding sins. Amen. 

Crucified to the World. 

WHEN once you are truly crucified to the 
world, you will have the honor and the 
comfort of a heavenly life. Your thoughts will be 
daily steeped in the celestial delights, when other 
men's are steeped in gall and vinegar. You will be 
above with God, when your carnal neighbors con- 
verse only with the world. Your thoughts will be 
higher than their thoughts, and your ways than 
their ways, as the heaven, where your converse is, 
is higher than the earth. When you take flight from 
earth in holy devotions, they may look at you, and 
wonder at you, but cannot follow you; for whither 
you go they cannot come, till they are such as 3'Ou. 

Now OR Never. 

HEAVEN is before you! Death is at hand! 
The eternal God hath sent to call 3'pu! 
Mercy doth yet stretch forth its arms! You have 
staid too long, and abused patience too much alrea- 



188 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

cly: stay no longer! O now please God, and com- 
fort us, and save yourselves by resolving that this 
shall be the day! and faithfully performing of this 
your resolution. Up and be doing: believe, repent, 
desire, obey, and do all this Avith all your might. 
Love Him that you must love for ever, and love 
Him with all your soul and might: seek that which 
is truly worth a seeking, and will pay for all your 
cost and pains: and seek it first with all your might; 
remembering still it must be noio or never. 




JOHN OWEN", D. D. 
1616-1683. 

Pkayer to Christ in Seasons of Distress. 

'IMES of great distresses in conscience 
through temptations and desertions, are 
seasons requiring an application unto 
Christ by especial invocation. Persons 
in such conditions, when their souls, as 
the psalmist speaks, are overwhelmed in them, 
are continually solicitous about compassion and 
deliverance. Some relief, some refreshment, they 
often find in pity and compassion from them who 
either have been in the same condition them- 
selves, or by Scripture light do know the terror 
of the Lord in these things. When their com- 
plaints are despised, and their troubles ascribed 
unto other causes than what they are really sensi- 
ble of, and feel within themselves — as is commonly 
done by physicians of no value — it is an aggrava- 
tion of their distress and sorrow. And they great- 
ly value every sincere endeavor for relief, either 
by counsel or prayer. In this state and condition 
the Lord Christ in the Gospel is projDosed as 
full of tender compassion — as He alone who is able 
to relieve them. In that Himself hath suffered, 



190 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

being tempted, He is touched with a feeling of our 
infirmities, and knows how to have compassion on 
them that are out of the w^ay, Heb. ii. 18, iv. 15, v. 
2. So is He also, as He alone who is able to succor, 
to relieve, and to deliver them. 'He is able to suc- 
cor them that are tempted,' chap. ii. 18. Hereon 
are they drawn, constrained, encouraged to make 
applications unto Him by prayer, that He would 
deal with them according to His compassion and 
powder. This is a season rendering the discharge 
of this duty necessary. And hereby have innumer- 
able souls found consolation, refreshment, and deli- 
verance. A time of trouble is a time of the especial 
exercise of faith m Christ. So Himself gives direc- 
tion, John xiv. 1, 'Let not your heart be troubled: 
ye believe in God, believe also in me.' Distinct 
actings of faith on Christ are the great means of 
supportment and relief in trouble. And it is by 
especial invQcation, whereby they put forth and 
exert themselves. 

CoaiinuNiON OF Believers in Heavenly W.oeship. 

BELIEVERS at present have, by faith, an admis- 
sion into communion with the Church above, 
in all its divine worship. For Ave ' are come unto 
mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, 
the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable 
company of angels, to the general assembly and 
Church of the first-born, which are written in hea- 
ven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits 
of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator 



JOHN OAVEN. 191 

of the new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, 
that speaketh better things than that of Abel,' Heb. 
xii. 22-24. 

In this holy assembly and worship have we 
communion by faith whilst we are here below, 
Heb. X. 19-22. O that my soul might abide and 
abound in this exercise of faith! that I might yet 
enjoy a clearer prospect of tTiis glor}^, and inspec- 
tion into the beauty and order of this blessed assem- 
bly! How inconceivable is the representation that 
God here makes of the glory of His wisdom, love, 
grace, goodness, and mercy, in Christ! How excel- 
lent is the manifestation of the glory and honor of 
Christ in His person and offices! the glory given 
Him by the Father! How little a portion do we 
know, or can have experience in, of the refreshing, 
satiating communications of divine love and good- 
ness, unto all the members of this assembly; or of 
that unchangeable delight in beholding the glory 
of Christ, and of God in Him, — of that ardency of 
affections wherewith they cleave unto Him, and con- 
tinual exultation of spirit, whereby they triumph in 
the praises of God, that are in all the members of it! 
To enter into this assembly by faith, — to join with 
it in the assignation of praises unto ' Him that sit- 
teth on the throne, and to the Lamb for evermore,' — 
to labor after a frame of heart in holy affections and 
spiritual delight in some correspondency with that 
which is in the saints above, — is the duty, and ought 
to be the design, of the Church of believers here 
below. So mucli as we are furthered and assisted 



\ 



192 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

herein by our present ordinances, so much benefit 
and advantage have we by them, and no more. A 
constant view of Jthis glory will cast contempt on 
all the desirable things of this world, and deliver 
our minds from any dreadful apprehensions of what 
is most terrible therein. 

Visions of 'Celestial Gloky. 

ALL is open unto the saints above. We are in 
the dust, the blood, the noise of the battle; 
they are victoriously at peace, and have a perfect 
vicAV of what they have passed through, and what 
they have attained unto. They are come to the 
springs of life and light, and are filled with admira- 
tion of the grace of God in themselves and one 
another. "What they see in God and in Jesus Christ, 
what they have experience of in themselves, what 
they know and learn from others, are all of them 
inconceivable and inexpressible. It is well for us, 
if we have so much experience of these things as 
to see a real glory in the fulness and perfection of 
them. The apprehensions by sight, without mixture 
of unsteadiness or darkness, without the alloy of 
fears or temptations, with an inefiable sense of the 
things themselves on their hearts or minds, are the 
springs or motives of the holy worship which is in 
heaven. 



JOHN OWEN. 193 

The Saints' Kest. 

THIS, in general, is the first thing that the dis- 
missed saints are at rest from: They sin no 
more, they wound the Lord Jesus no more, they 
trouble their own souls no more, they grieve the 
Spirit no more, they dishonor the gospel no more, — 
they are troubled no more with Satan's temptations 
without, no more with their own corruption within; 
but lie down in a constant enjoyment of one ever- 
lasting victory over sin, wdth all its attendants: saith 
the Spirit, 'They rest from their labors,' Rev. xiv., 
those labors which make them faint and weary, their 
contending with sin to the uttermost. They are no 
more cold in communion; they have not one thought 
that wanders off from God to eternity. They lose 
Him no more, but always lie down in His ])osom, 
without the least possibility of disturbance. Even 
the very remembrance of sin is sweet unto them, 
when they see God infinitely exalted and admired in 
the pardon thereof. They are free from trouble, and 
that both as to doino^ and sufferino*. Few of the 
saints but are called out, in one kind or another, to 
both these. Every one is either doing for God or 
suffering for God; some both do and suffer great 
things for Him. In either of them there is pain, 
weariness, travail, labor, trouble, sorrow, and anxiety 
of spirit; neither is there any eminent doing or 
working for God but is carried on with much suffer- 
ing to the outward man. 

The apostle tells us that ' there remaineth a rest 
for the people of God;' and yet w^ithal, that they 

9 



194 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

who believe are entered into that rest; those who in 
their labors, in their travails, do take in the sweet- 
ness of that promise of rest, do even in their labor 
make an entrance thereinto. 

They rest from all trouble and anxiety that attend 
them in their pilgrimage, either in doing or suffering 
for God: Heb.^ iv. 10. They enter into rest, and 
cease from their works. God wipes all tears 
from their eyes. There is no more watching, no 
more fasting, no more wrestling, no more fighting, 
no more blood, no more sorrow; the ransomed of 
the Lord do return with everlasting joy on their 
heads, and sorrow and sighing flee away. There, 
tyrants pretend no more title to their kingdom; 
rebels lie not in wait for their blood; they are no 
more awakened by the sound of the trumpet, nor the 
noise of the instruments of death: they fear not for 
their relations, they weep not for their friends; the 
Lamb is their temple, and God is all in all unto 
them. Yet, — - 

This will not complete their rest; something 
farther is required thereto, — even something to 
satisfy, everlastingly content, and fill them in the 
state and condition wherein they are. Free them in 
your thoughts from what you please, without this 
they are not at rest. This, then, you have in the 
second place, God is the rest of their souls: Psalm 
cxvi, ' Return to thy rest, O my soul.' Dismissed 
saints rest in the bosom of God, because in the fruition 
and enjoyment of Him they are everlastingly satisfied, 
as havinc: attained the utmost end whereto thev were 



JOHN OWEX. 195 

created, all the blessedness whereof they are capable. 
I could almost beg for liberty a little to expatiate in 
this meditation of the sweet, gracious, glorious, 
satisfied condition of a dismissed saint. 

The Word of God. 

THE entrance of it hath given light to my soul, 
which was before in darkness, not knowino: 
whither it went. How many glorious mysteries do 
I see in it! what purity, what spirituality, what holi- 
ness! etc. — all which speak the wisdom and power, 
and goodness and holiness, and truth of the Author 
of it. What sweetness have I tasted in it! It hath 
been as the ' honey and honeycomb' to me. Psalm 
xix. 10. What power, what life, what strange en- 
ergy have I experienced in it! What a change hath 
it wrought in me! What lusts hath it discovered 
and mortified! What duties hath it convinced me 
of, and engaged me in! What strength hath it furn- 
ished me with! How hath it quickened me w^hen I 
was dead in sin, revived my comforts when they 
were djdng, actuated my graces when they were 
languishing, roused me up when I was sluggish, 
awaked me when I was dreaming, refreshed me when 
I was sorrowful, supported me when I was sinldng, 
answered my doubts, conquered my temptations, 
scattered my fears, enlarged me with desires, and 
filled me 'with joy unspeakable and full of glory!' 
1 Pet. i. 8. And what word could ever have wrought 
such effects but that of the eternal, all-wise, all- 
powerful God? And therefore upon HLs alone an- 



196 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

thority I receive it; Him alone I adore in it, whose 
power I have so often found working by it. 

A Hiding Place from the Wind. 

CHRIST is a ' hiding-place.' He that was ready 
to be cast from the top of a rock with a strong 
wind, would desire nothing more than a hiding-place 
until the strong blast were over. When fierce winds 
have driven a vessel at sea from all its anchors, so 
that it hath nothing to keep it from splitting on the 
next rock whereunto it is driven, a safe harbor, a 
hiding-place, is the great desire and expectation of 
the poor creatures that are in it. Our Saviour tells 
us what this wind is: Matt. vii. 25. The wind that 
blows upon and casts down false professors to the 
ground, is the wind of strong and urging temptations. 
Is this the condition of the soul? [do] strong tempta- 
tions beat upon it, which are ready to hurry it down 
into sin and folly, — that it hath no rest from them, 
one blast immediately succeeding another, — that the 
soul begins to faint, to be weary, give over, and say, 
'I shall perish; I cannot hold out to the end?' Is 
this thy condition? See the Lord Christ suited unto 
it, and the relief that is in Him in this promise, — He 
is ' a hiding-place.' Saith He, ' These temptations 
seek thy life; but with me thou shalt be safe.' Fly 
to His bosom, retreat into His arms, expect relief by 
faith from Him, and thou shalt be safe. 



JOHN OWEN. 197 

A Covert fro^i the Tempest. 

rX^HERE is a tempest; in reference whereunto 
-J_ Christ is here said to be 'a covert.' A tempest, 
in the Scripture, represents the wrath of God for sin. 
' He breaketh me,' saith Job, ' with a tempest,' chap, 
ix. 17, when he hiy under a sense of the displeasure 
and indignation of God. ' He threatens to rain upon 
the wicked ' a horrible tempest,' Psalm xi. 6. 

Suppose a poor creature to be under this tempest, 
full of sad and dreadful thoughts and apprehensions 
of the wrath of God; behind, before, round about, 
he can see nothing but hailstones and coals of fire; 
heaven is dark and dismal over him; he hath not 
seen sun, moon or stars, in many days, — not one 
glimpse of light from above or hopes of an end. ' I 
shall perish; the earth shakes under me; the pit is 
opening for me. Is there no hope?' Why, see how 
Christ is suited in this distress also. He is ' a cov- 
ert' froni this tempest; get into Him, and thou shalt 
be safe. He hath borne all this storm, as far as thou 
art concerned; abide with Him, and not one hurtful 
drop shall fall upon thee, — not one hair of thy head 
shall be singed with this fire. Hast thou fears? hast 
thou a sense of the wrath of God for sin? Dost 
thou fear .it will one day fall upon thee and be thy 
portion? Behold a covert, a sure defence, is here 
provided. 



198 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Faith Teiumphant in* the Hour of Death. 

IT is the last victorious act of faith, wherein it hath 
its linal conquest over all its adversaries. Faith 
is the leading grace in all our spiritual warfare and 
conflict; but all along while we live, it hath faithful 
company that adheres to it, and helps it. Love 
works and hope works, and all other graces, — self- 
denial, readiness to the cross, — they all work and 
help faith. But when we come to die, faith is left 
alone. Now, try what faith will do. The exercise 
of other graces ceases; only faith comes to a close 
conflict Avith its last adversary, wdierein the whole is 
to be tried. And, by this one act of resigning all 
into the hand of God, faith triumphs over death, and 
cries, ' O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where 
is thy victory? Come, give me an inlet into immor- 
tality and glory; the everlasting hand of God is 
ready to receive me!' This is the victory whereby 
we overcome all our spiritual enemies. 

Fullness of Christ. 

FOR the fountain of grace, the Holy Ghost, He 
received not Him ' by measure,' John iii. 34; 
and for the communications of the Spirit, ' it pleased 
the Father that in Him should all fullness dwell,' 
Col. i. 19, — 'that in all things He might have the 
pre-eminence.' 

This is the Beloved of our souls, ' hol}^, harmless, 
undefiled;' 'full of grace and truth;' full, to a sufii- 
ciency for every end of grace; full, for practice, to 
be an example to men and angels as to obedience; 



JOHN OWEN. 199 

full, to a certainty of uninterrupted communion with 
God; full to a readiness of giving supply to others; 
full, to suit Him to all the occasions and necessities 
of the souls of men; full, to a glory not unbecoming 
a subsistence in the Person of the Son of God; full, 
to a perfect victory, in trials, over all temptations; 
full, to an exact correspondency to the whole law, 
every righteous and holy law of God; full, to the 
utmost capacity of a limited, created, finite nature; 
full, to the greatest beauty and glory of a living tem- 
ple of God; full, to the full pleasure and delight of 
the soul of His Father; full, to an everlasting monu- 
ment of the glory of God, in giving such inconceiv- 
able excellencies to the Son of man. 



Beholding the Glory of Cheist. 

THE heart of a believer affected wdth the glory 
of Christ, is like the needle touched wdth the 
loadstone. It can no longer be quiet, no longer be 
satisfied in a distance from Him. It is put into a 
continual motion towards Him. This motion, indeed, 
is weak and tremulous. Pantings, breathings, sigh- 
ings, groanings in prayer, in meditations, in the 
secret recesses of our minds, are the life of it. How- 
ever, it is continually pressing towards Him. But 
it obtains not its point, it comes not to its centre and 
rest in this world. 

But now above, all things are clear and serene, — 
all plain and evident in our beholding the glory of 
Christ; we shall be ever with Him, and sec Him as 



200 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

He is. This is heaven, this is blessedness, this is 
eternal rest. 

The person of Christ in all His glory shall be con- 
tinually before us; and the eyes of our understand- 
in<rs shall be so o-loriouslv illuminated, as that we 
shall be able steadily to behold and comprehend that 
glory. 

But, alas ! here at present our minds recoil, 
our meditations fail, our hearts are overcome, our 
thoughts confused, and our eyes turn aside from the 
lustre of this glory; nor can we abide in the contem- 
plation of it. But there, an immediate, constant 
view of it, will brino- in everlastino^ refreshment 

' ~ CD 

and joy unto our whole souls. 

Saving Grace. 

IT is in the nature of this grace to grow and in- 
crease unto the end. As rivers, the nearer they 
come unto the ocean whither they tend, the more 
they increase their waters and speed their streams; 
so will grace flow more freely and fully in its near 
approaches to the ocean of gloiy. 

Flourishing of the Eighteous. 

rnriHE flourishing of the righteous in grace and 
JL holiness is the glory of the oflGlce of Christ and 
of the gospel. Where tliis is not, there is no glory in 
the profession of our religion. The glory of kings 
is in the wealth and peace of their subjects; and the 
glory of Christ is in the grace and holiness of His 
subjects. 



JOHN OWEN. 201 

This flourishing is compared to the pahn-tree, and 
the growth of the cedar. The palm-tree is of the 
greatest verdure, beauty, and fruitfulness, and the 
cedar of the greatest and longest growth of any 
trees. So are the righteous compared to the palm- 
tree for the beauty of profession and fruitfulness in 
obedience; and unto the cedar for a continual, con- 
stant growth and increase in grace. Thus it is with 
all that are righteous, unless it be from their own 
sinful neglect, as it is with many in this day. They 
are herein rather like the shrubs and heaths in the 
wilderness, which see not when good cometh, than 
like the palm-tree or the cedars of Lebanon. 

Unless we are planted in the house of the Lord, 
we cannot flourish in His courts. See Psalm i. 3. 
Unless we are partakers of the grace administered in 
the ordinances, we cannot flourish in a fruitful pro- 
fession. The outward participation of them is com- 
mon unto hypocrites, that bear some leaves, but 
neither grow like the cedar nor bear fruit like the 
palm-tree. So the apostle prays for believers, that 
Christ may dwell in their hearts by faith, that they 
may be * rooted and grounded in love,' Eph. iii. 17, 
* rooted, built up and established,' Col. ii. 7. The 
want hereof is the cause that we have so many fruit- 
less professors; they have entered the courts of God 
by profession, but were never planted in His house 
by faith and love. Let us not deceive ourselves 
herein; we may be entered into the church, and made 
partakers of the outward privileges of it, and not be 

9-^ 



202 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

SO planted in it as to flourish in grace and fruitful- 
ness. 

Spiritual Decays in the CnRisTiiVN. 

HAVE you, in the way of your profession, had 
any experience of these spiritual decays? I 
doubt not but that there are some who have been 
preserved green and flourishing from their first con- 
version unto God, who never fell under the power 
of sloth, neglect, or temptation, at least not for any 
remarkable season; but they are but few. It was 
not so with scarce any of those believers under the 
Old Testament whose lives and walkings are record- 
ed for our instruction; and they must be such as 
lived in an exact and diligent course of mortification. 
And some there are who have obtained relief and 
deliverance from under their decays, — whose back- 
slidings have been healed, and their diseases cured. 
So it Avas with David, as he divinely expresseth it, 
Psalm ciii. 1, 3-5: 'Bless the Lord, O my soul; and 
all that is within me, bless His holy name. Who 
forgiveth all thine iniquities; who healeth all thy 
diseases; who redeemeth thy life from destruction; 
wdio crowneth thee with loving-kindness and tender 
mercies; who satisfieth thy mouth wdth good things, 
so that thy youth is renewed like the eagle's.' So 
doth he celebrate his deliverance from that state 
wdiereof he complains. Psalm xxxviii. And there is 
no grace or mercy that doth more aflect the hearts 
of believers, that gives them a greater transport of 
joy and thankfulness, than this of deliverance from 



JOHN OWEN. 203 

backslidino's. It is a brino-ino^ of the soul out of 
prison, which eulargetli it unto praise: Psalm cxlii. 7. 
Of this sort I doubt not but that there are many; 
for God hath given great warnings of the danger of 
a spiritually-decaying state; and He hath made great 
promises of recovery from it; and multitudes in the 
Church are daily exercised herein. 

Recovery feom Backsliding. 

THE work of recovering backsliders or believers 
from under their spiritual decays, is an act of 
sovereign grace, wrought in us by virtue of divine 
promises. Out of this eater cometh meat. Because 
believers are liable to such declensions, backslidings 
and decays, God hath provided and given unto us 
great and precious promises of a recovery, if we 
duly apply ourselves unto the means of it. One of 
the places only wherein they are recorded I shall 
here call over and explain, Hos. xiv. 1-8, 'O Israel, 
return unto the Lord thy God; for thou hast fallen 
by thine iniquity. Take with j^ou words, and turn 
unto the Lord: say imto Him, Take away all ini- 
quity, and receive us graciously: so will we render 
the calves of our lips,' &c. *I will heal their back- 
sliding, I will love them freely: for mine anger is 
turned aAvay from him. I will be as the dew unto 
Israel: he shall grow as the lily, and cast forth his 
roots as Lebanon. His branches shall spread, and 
his beauty shall be as the olive-tree, and his smell 
as Lebanon. They that dwell under his shadow 
shall return; they shall revive as the corn, and 



204 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

grow as the vine: the scent thereof shall be as the 
wine of Lebanon. Ephraim shall say, What have 
I to do any more with idols? I have heard him, 
and observed him. I am like a green fir-tree: from 
me is thy fruit found.' 

How TO Die Co^ifortably. 

HE, therefore, that would die comfortably, must 
be able to say within himself and to himself, 
* Die, then, thou frail and sinful flesh; ' dust thou 
art, and unto dust thou shalt return.' I yield thee 
up unto the righteous doom of the Holy One. Yet 
therein also I give thee into the hand of the great 
Kefiner, who will hide thee in thy grave, and by thy 
consumption purify thee from all thy corruption and 
disposition to evil. And otherwise this will not be. 
After a Ion 2: sincere endeavor for the mortification 
of all sin, I find it will never be absolutely perfect, 
but by this reduction into the dust. Thou shalt no 
more be a residence for the least remainder of sin 
unto eternity, nor any clog unto my soul in its act- 
ings on God. Rest therefore in hope; for JGrocl, in 
His appointed season, when He shall have a desire 
unto the work of His hands, will call unto thee, and 
thou shalt answer Him out of the dust. Then shall 
He, by an act of His almighty power, not only 
restore thee unto thy pristine glory, as at the first 
creation, when thou wast the pure workmanship of 
His hands, but enrich and adorn thee with incon- 
ceivable privileges and advantages. Be not then 
afraid; away with all reluctancy. Go into the dust; 



JOHN OWEN. 205 

rest in hope; ' for thou shalt stand in thy lot at the 
end of the days.' * 

The Departing Soul. 

THE soul is now parting with all things here 
below, and that for ever. None of all the 
things which it hath seen, heard, or enjoyed, by its 
outward senses, can be prevailed with to stay with it 
one hour, or to take one step with it in the voyage 
wherein it is engaged. It must alone by itself 
launch into eternity. It is entering an invisible 
world, which it knows no more of than it hath 
received by faith. None hath come from the dead 
to inform us of the state of the other world; yea, 
God seems on purpose so to conceal it from us, that 
we should have no evidence of it, at least as unto 
the manner of things in it, but what is given unto 
faith by divine revelation. 

Wherefore no man can comfortably venture on 
and into this condition, but in the exercise of that 
faith which enables him to resign and give up his 
departing soul into the hand of God, who alone is 
able to receive it, and to dispose it into a condition 
of rest and blessedness. So speaks the apostle: 'I 
am not ashamed; for I know whom I have believed, 
and am persuaded that He is able to keep that which 
I have committed unto him against that day.' 

Herein, as in all other graces, is our Lord Jesus 

* The Rev. "W. H. Gookl, the able editor of Owen's works, has 
justly uemarked, that this passage is wrought up and refined into a 
high degree of Christian eloquence. 



206 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Christ our great example. He resigned His depart- 
ing spirit into the hands of His Father, to be OAvned 
and preserved by Him, in its state of separation: 
' Father, into Thy hands I commend my spirit,' 
Luke xxiii. 46; as did the psalmist. His type, in an 
alike condition, Psalm xxxi. 5. But the faith of our 
Lord Jesus Christ herein — the object and exercise 
of it, ^'hat He believed and trusted unto in this 
resignation of His Spirit into the hand of God — is 
at large expressed in the 16th Psalm. 'I have,' 
said he, ' set the Lord always before me: because He 
is at my right hand, I ^hall not be moved. There- 
fore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoiceth; my 
flesh also shall rest in hope. For Thou wilt not 
leave my soul in hell; neither wilt Thou suffer 
Thine Holy One to see corruption. Thou wilt show 
me the path of life; in Thy presence is fullness of 
joy, and at Thy right hand there are pleasures for 
evermore.' He left his soul in the hand of God, in 
full assurance that it should sufler no evil in its 
state of separation, but should be brought again 
with his body into a blessed resurrection and eter- 
nal glory. So Stephen resigned his soul, departing 
under violence, into the hands of Christ Himself. 
When he died, he said, ' Lord Jesus, receive my 
spirit.' 

This is the last victorious act of faith, wherein its 
conquest over its last enemy death itself doth con- 
sist. Herein the soul sa^^s in and unto itself, ' Thou 
art now taking leave of time unto eternity; all 
things about thee are departing as shades, and will 



JOHN OWEX. 207 

immediately disappear. The things which thou art 
entering into are yet invisible; such as 'eye hath 
not seen, nor ear heard, nor will they enter into the 
heart of man fully to conceive.' Now, therefore, 
with quietness and confidence give up thyself unto 
the sovereign power, grace, truth, and faithfulness 
of God, and thou shalt find assured rest and peace.' 

True Pleasures. 

HERE aloiie — namely, in Christ, and a partici- 
pation of Him — are true pleasures and dura- 
ble riches to be obtained; ple-asures of the same 
nature with, and such as, like pleasant streams, 
flow down into the ocean of eternal pleasures 
above. A few moments in these joys are to be 
preferred above the longest continuance in the 
cursed pleasures of this world. See Prov. iii. 13-18. 




WILLIAM BATES, D.D. 
1625-1699. 

Heavenly Joy. 

'EAVEN is a state of pure, full, and 
unfading joy. Tlie joy of the blessed 
is not mixed with things that may cor- 
rupt its excellence. There is an abso- 
lute exemption from all evils. ' God shall 
wipe away all tears from their eyes : and there 
shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor cry- 
ing; neither shall there be any more pain.' The 
joy is full; it is called 'our Master's joy.' Great 
God, how ineffable is that joy! It is the richest 
reward infinite bounty can give to faithful servants. 
As 'being made like to Christ in glory,' 1 John 
iii. 2, implies a divine and full perfection: so the 
'entering into His joy' implies the most accom- 
plished and incomprehensible felicity. It is a per- 
manent joy that none shall take from the blessed, 
as our Saviour promises His disciples. Here be- 
low, suppose a person encompassed with all the 
good things of the world, yet this felicity is neither 
without defects, nor without dependance upon cas- 
ual things, that he is never completely happy, but 



WILLIAM BATES. 209 

only less miserable: and though he lives long in 
prosperity, and hath a tenor of health to enjoy it; 
yet, as the clearest evening is presently followed by 
night, so the most vigorous old age is certainly 
attended with death, that extinguishes all sensi;al 
pleasures. But in the ' presence of God is fullness 
of joy; at His right hand are pleasures for ever.' 

Heavenly Conversation. 

LET our conversation be in heaven, whilst Ave 
are upon the earth. Every thing in nature 
hath a tendency to its original and perfection. 
Rivers that come from the sea, are in a livinof 
motion returning thither; if you stop their course, 
and confine them, though in receptacles of marble, 
they corrupt and die. The divine nature in the 
saints hath a strong tendency to heaven, from 
wdicnce it came, and raiseth the soul by solemn 
thoughts, and ardent desires, to that blessed place. 
A philosopher that w^as asked of w^hat country he 
was, replied, he was a citizen of the w^orld. The 
Scripture corrects the language, and teaches us that 
w^e are citizens of heaven; w^e are passing to the 
Jerusalem above, the Mand of promise, the true 
land of the living:' and all our aims and endeavors 
should have a final respect thither. ' Our hearts 
should be where our treasure is.' How jo3'ful, how 
advantageous is a heavenly conversation! The se- 
rious and believing contemplation of heaven, is a 
temperate ecstacy, and brings the soul into the 
divine presence: anticipates the joy of it by a 



210 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

sweet foretaste, by a supernatural elevation of 
mind: by frequent lively thoughts of our glorious 
inheritance, we gradually enter into it: the prospect 
of that causes in the saints a holy contempt of the 
world, as not worthy our ambition and diligence: it 
causes such a self-denial from the inviting tempta- 
tions of sense, that men, whose portion is in this 
life, are forced to admire their restraint from those 
objects that ravish carnal hearts. 

The Music of Heaven. 

WE may judge by the saints here, when they 
are in a fit disposition to praise God, what 
fervors they feel in their united praises of Him in 
heaven. The psalmist in an ecstacy calls to all the 
parts of the world to join with him: 'The Lord 
reigns, let the heavens rejoice, and the earth be 
glad; let the sea roar, let the fields be joyful, and 
all that dwell therein.' He desires that nature 
should be elevated above itself, that the dead parts 
be inspired with life, the insensible feel motions of 
joy, and those that want a voice, break forth in 
praises, to adorn the divine triumph. With what 
life and alacrity will the saints in their blessed 
communion celebrate the object of their love and 
praises! The seraphim about the throne ' cried to 
one another,' to express their zeal and joy, in cele- 
brating His eternal pui-ity and power, and the glory 
of His goodness. Oh the unspeakable pleasure of 
this concert! when every soul is harmonious, and 
contributes his part to the full music of heaven! O 



WILLIAM BATES. 211 

could we hear but some eclio of tnose songs where- 
with the heaven of heavens resounds, some remains 
of those voices wherewith the saints above ' triumph 
in the praises/ in the solemn adoration of the Kino- 
of spirits, how would it inflame our desires to be 
joined with them? 'Blessed are those that are in 
Thy house, they always praise Thee.' 

Death and Heaven. 

ART thou in the vale of tears, languishing in 
sorrow, and dying every day? By faith 
ascend to 'the mountains of spices,' the blessed 
place above, and thou wilt find the comforts of 
God to revive and delight thy soul. 

Let this reconcile death to us. The pale horse is 
sent to bring us to our Father's house. The apostle 
expresses the true Christian temper: 'In this we 
groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed with our 
house that is from heaven: and we are willino- 
rather to be absent from the body, and present with 
the Lord:' 2 Cor. v. 2, 8. Every saint in the pres- 
ent world is both a prisoner and a captive; and his 
soul is detained from the glorious liberty of the 
sons of God, by confinement to his body. There- 
fore, methinks he should not merely be content to 
die out of the necessity of nature, when he can live 
no longer, but desire the happy removal, and say 
with the Psalmist, 'I rejoiced when they said unto 
me, let us go into the house of the Lord.' It is 
true, nature will recoil, and the extinguishing the 
present life, with all its sensible, pleasant opera- 



212 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

tioiis, is uneasy to us: but as when the candles are 
put out, the sun rises in its brightness, so when the 
natural life ceases, the spiritual life springs forth in 
its oriency and glory: 'When the earthly tabernacle 
is dissolved, the naked, separate soul shall be re- 
ceived into a building not made with hands, eternal 
in the heavens.' Our joyful affections, in leaving 
the world, and ascending to heaven, should be in 
some manner suitable to our reception there. What 
a jo3^ful welcome will entertain us from God Him- 
self !. Our Saviour comforted His disciples with a 
heavenly valediction: 'I go to my Father, and your 
Father; to my God, and your God.' The gracious 
relation sweetens the glorious. He that joyfully 
receives the rebellious but penitent son to grace, 
will joyfully receive His obedient sons to glory. 
He that now receives their prayers with the affec- 
tion of a father, will receive their persons with the 
dearest expressions of love. His fatherly provi- 
dence watched over them in the way, and will tri- 
umphantly bring them home. Here, many blessed 
testimonies of God's love are given to the. saints, 
that produce such a spiritual sweetness in their 
hearts, that they esteem His loving-kindness as bet- 
ter than life, more worth than all the w^orld; but 
the full revealing of His love is only in heaven. 

Death of Pious Friends. 

WHAT father is so deserted of reason, as to 
bear impatiently the parting with his son, 
that gees over a narrow part of the sea to a rich 



WILLIAM BATES. 213 

and pleasant country, and receives the investiture 
and peaceable possession of a kingdom? Nay, by 
how much the stronger his love is, so much the 
more transportmg is his joy; especially if he ex- 
pects shortly to be with him, to see him on the 
throne, in the state of a king, and to partake of his 
happiness. If then it be impossible to nature to 
be grieved at the felicity of one that is loved; ac- 
cording to what principle of nature or faith do 
believers so uncomfortably lament the death of 
friends, of whom they have assurance that after 
their leaving our earth, they enter into an everlast- 
ing kingdom, to receive a crown of glory from 
Christ Himself? Our Saviour tells the disciples, 
' If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I 
go to my Father,' to sit dow^n at His right hand in 
majesty. A pure affection directly terminates in the 
happiness and exaltation of the person that is loved. 
I am not speaking against the exercise of tender 
affections on the loss of our dear friends, and the 
pensive feeling of God's hand in it, which is a na- 
tural and necessary duty. There is a great differ- 
ence between stupidity and patience: but violent 
passion, or unremitting sorrow^, is most unbecoming 
the blessed hope assured to us in the Gospel. 

Perpetuity of Bliss. 

THE blessedness of the saints is without end. 
This makes heaven to be itself. There is no 
satiety of the present, no solicitude for the future. 
Were there a possibility, or the least suspicion of 



214 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

losing that happy state, it would cast an aspersion 
of bitterness upon all their delights: they could not 
enjoy one moment's repose; but the more excellent 
their happiness is, the more stinging would their 
fear be of parting with it. 'But the inheritance 
reserved in heaven is immortal, undefiled, and 
fades not away.' And the tenure of their possession 
is infinitely firm by the divine power, the true sup- 
port of their everlasting duration. 'With God is 
the fountain of life.' They enjoy a better immor- 
tality than the tree of life could have preserved in 
Adam. The revolutions of the heavens, and ages, 
are under their feet, and cannot in the least alter or 
determine their happiness. After the passing of 
millions of years, still an entire eternity remains 
of their enjoying God. O most desirable state! 
where blessedness and eternity are inseparably 
united. O joyful harmony! when the full chorus of 
heaven shall sins:, ' This God is our God for ever and 
ever.' This adds an infinite weight to their glory. 
This redoubles their unspeakable joys with infinite 
sweetness and security. They repose themselves 
in the complete fruition of their happiness. God 
reigns in the saints, and they live in Him for ever. 

Ever with the Loed. 

THE lively hope of this blessedness is powerful 
to support us under the greatest troubles that 
can befal us in this our mortal condition. Here we 
are tossed upon the alternate waves of time, but 
hereafter we shall arrive at the port, the blessed 



AVTLLIAM BATES. 21 



O 



bosom of our Saviour, and enjoj a peaceful calm; 
'and so we shall ever be with the Lord.' Words 
of infinite sweetness! This is the song of our pros- 
perity, and charm of our adversity: 'We shall ever 
be with the Lord.' Well might the apostle add 
immediately after, ' Therefore comfort one another 
with these words.' 




SYMON PATRICK, D.D. 
1626-1707. 

Peayeks. I. 

t^C GOD, who art tlie full and the fill- 
ing Good; who satisfieth the desire of 
every living thing, and therefore will not 
refuse to answer the desires of immortal 
spirits, whom Thou hast made to know 
how good Thou art, and to be satisfied with no 
less good than Thyself: Thou art ever pouring 
Thy benefits upon us; and sendest us every day 
some new token of Thy love, to make our pilgrimage 
here upon earth the more comfortable to us. But 
•above all. Thou art to be acknowledged in Thy sur- 
passing love and kindness towards us in Christ 
Jesus, by whom Thou hast made the darkest night 
of trouble and sorrow not to be without the light 
of joy and gladness. I thank Thee, O God, for the 
great satisfaction which Thou hast given to all that 
is within us, which ought to bless Thy holy name. 
For Thou hast filled our minds and understand- 
ings with the highest knowledge, and our wills with 
the divinest love, and all our affections with the 
comforts of hope and joy in Thee our God, sufficient 
to swallow up all our sadness and grief, and fear 



SYMON PATRICK. 217 

and care, and all the troublesome passions that are 
in our hearts. O my God, hovv^ rich art Thou in 
mercy towards us, who providest that contentment 
for us, which we seek and labor after in these lower 
enjoyments, by leading us to Thyself, the fountain 
of all that good which is in any creature! How 
excellent is Thy loving-kindness; Who when we de- 
sire much in this world, givest us an immortal in- 
iieritance in the other; and when our hearts are set 
iq3on perishing riches, invitest us to treasures in the 
heavens, and settest before us eternal honor and glory 
with our Saviour! Besides all wliich, Thou dost not 
deny me the comfort of my friends, lovers and ac- 
quaintance; in whom I see likewise how full of love 
Thou art, and how ready to do us good. Thou wilt 
never cease Thyself, I believe, to follow me with 
Thy loving-kindness all my days, to take care of me, 
help and comfort me; Who hast put such great good 
Yvdll into tlie hearts of men. 

My soul doth magnify Thee, O Lord; and my 
spirit rejoiceth in Thee, O God my Saviour; par- 
ticularly for that Thou hast promised me Thy hol}^ 
Spirit to strengthen and empower me to do my duty 
faithfully to Thee, and to increase in wisdom, charity, 
and piety, that I may rejoice in Thee evermore. O 
that I may feel the effect of these holy thoughts and 
devout acknowledgments, in the constant stillness 
and quietness of my soul, whatsoever the condition 
be into which Thou art pleased to bring me. Dis- 
pose my heart to such an humble confidence in Thee, 
that I may be careful for nothing, but in everything 

10 



218 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

by prayer and supplication make known my request 
to Tliee with thanksgiving. Help me to have my 
conversation without covetousness, and to be con- 
tent with such things as I have. Let no solicitude 
for the future discompose my dut}'-, or disturb my 
present enjoyment. Eoot out of my heart all dis- 
trust for Thee, all envy, nncharitableness, ambition, 
murmuring or repining at any of Thy providences, 
w^ith every thing else that dishonors the gospel of 
our Lord Jesns, and misbecomes the Christian spirit. 
Li all events, give me grace to acqniesce in Thy wis- 
dom and love; and to study rather how to mend 
myself, than how to mend my outward estate: that 
having my soul still more and more furnished with 
those heavenly goods wherewith Thou hast enriched 
us l)y Christ Jesus, I may lead every day a more 
happy life in this world, and be prepared for that 
perfect satisfaction of contentment, whicli we wait 
for iu the world to come. Amen. 

II. 

OLORD, the fountain of all good, whose bless- 
iugs are derived in several channels to us, 
especially to our souls; unto which all things minis- 
ter, and help to promote their eternal welfare: I see 
the large and abundant provision which Thou hast 
made for them in Christ Jesus. Thou hast opened 
the heavens and let down eternal life unto us. Thou 
hast set before us the glory of another world, and 
called us to Thy kingdom, and promised to make us 
lieirs with Thy only-begotten Sou, and to give us au 



SYMON PATRICK. 219 

cverltistiiig inheritance. I thank Thee that Thou 
hast hrought the word of Thy gospel so nigh me, and 
put it even into my mouth, and into my heart; and 
that I have felt Thy Holy Spirit in my soul, so often 
disposing my mind and affections to seek that blessed 
immortality. Every good thing in this world bids 
me love Thee and rejoice in Thee, who art the giver 
of it: and all the crosses likewise and afflictions of 
this life tend to make me happy, by teaching me 
moderation and sobriety, humility and heavenly- 
mindedness, faith in Thee, and absolute resignation 
to Thee, with fervent devotion, and passionate de- 
sires after a better life. 

O God, how excellent is Thy loving-kindness! 
therefore the children of men put their trust under 
the shadow of Thy wings. How inexcusable shall I 
be, if I should starve in the midst of such abundance 
and perish, when Thou hast sent me such great sal- 
vation! How shall I escape, if, after Thou hast done 
so much without my thonglit or labor, I should take 
no pains to attain the end of Thy extraordinary grace 
towards me? Excite in me, I beseech Thee, a great- 
er sense of Thy love, and endue me with a greater 
care to improve every thing to the enriching of my 
soul with spiritual wisdom and all divine virtues; 
that so I may be the better able to bear all the 
troubles of this life; and neither the infirmities and 
pains of this body, nor the poverty and meanness of 
my outward estate, nor the loss and unkindness of 
friends, nor any other sad accident, may throw me 
into discontent and impatience of spirit: but I may 



220 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

still remember, that, as I suffer notliing but what I 
deserve, so my soul may be a gainer by all my suifer- 
iugs. Help me, therefore, instead of murmuring and 
repining at my present condition, to apply myself 
to make the best use of it, whatsoever it be, to my 
everlasting advantage. Purify and refine my spirit 
more perfectly from all unreasonable opinions, and 
purge out of my heart all inordinate affections. Settle 
my will in an immovable submission to Thine. And, 
considering both that I am Thy creature and that I 
am an offender, enable me always to rest satisfied 
with Thy proceedings, and acknow^ledge that I am 
less than the least of Thy mercies. 

Pardon, good Lord, all my ingratitude, and inde- 
cent complaints; pity my infirmities; accept my holy 
desires; confirm all my good purposes; strengthen 
and empower my endeavors, that I may mortify 
every bad disposition in me, faithfully discharge my 
duty, rightly use Thy various blessings, patiently 
bear the heaviest afiiictions, and make for my soul 
most certain provision; by all the means of grace, 
by the good counsels of others, the inspirations of 
the Holy Ghost, Thy many remarkable providences 
about me, and whatsoever courses Thou takest with 
me, to bring me safe through this life to a happy 
eternity. Amen. 

III. 

OGOD, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and 
at w^hose right hand there arc pleasures for 
evermore: we see daily how uncertain and empty all 



SYMON PATRICK. 221 

our enjoyments nve in this world; and are directed 
by our constant experience to look up higher, and 
fix our hearts on Thee, for our true contentment and 
satisfaction of spirit. Our eye is not satisfied with 
seeing, nor our ear filled with hearing; but after all 
that we possess, our spirits are still thirsty and 
craving more. The very love of ourselves and our 
own ease, carries us unto Thee; for we are extreme- 
ly miserable, even in the midst of abundance, if we 
want Thee. Blessed be Thy goodness that I know 
Thee, and Thy exceeding great love to mankind in 
Christ Jesus. Blessed be Thy infinite grace that I 
understand where my happiness lies, and am not left 
to wander after the foolish desires of my own heart. 
O turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, and 
quicken me in Thy way. Fasten my mind on that 
immovable bliss which our Lord hath discovered 
unto us, and fill me with constant delight and joy in 
contemplation of it; that so I may not lay out my 
strength for that which is not bread, and my labor for 
that which satisfieth not; but earnestly pursue that 
everlasting life, the very hope of which is so sweet 
and comfortable in this world. 

Thou hast not made me, I know, to be miserable 
here; for Thou art the Father of mercies, andtakest 
pleasure in enriching others with Thy benefits. It 
is Thy glory to do good: Thou openest Thy hand 
and satisfiest the desire of every thing living. The 
whole creation acknowledges Thy bounty; and there- 
fore I should be the most ungrateful wretch if I 
shoukl not rejoice in it, which hath made me to want 



222 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

nothing but what I may easily enjoy, and hitherto 

hath supplied all my needs with a continued care and 

kindness. Preserve me, O Lord, in a sober and 

serious sense of the state of my own nature, and of 

the condition of all things round about me; that I 

may not stretch my desires greedily after that which 

I do not need, and which cannot satisfy and fill up 

the vast emptiness of my soul, if I did enjoy it. 

Make me so wise as to reflect continually upon the 

trouble as well as pleasure that I am like to meet 

withal in every change; that so I may be modest in 

my desires, and pursue what I desire with an in- 

difierent mind, and enjoy what Thou bestowest on 

me with a thankful and charitable heart, and with a 

quiet and undisturbed spirit resign it back into Thy 

hands, when Thou callest for it. O blessed Jesus, 

as Thou hast made Th^'self my example, so be Thou 

pleased to be my guide. Inspire me with the same 

thoughts, inclinations, desires, and resolutions which 

were in Thy blessed nature. Help me to place my 

satisfaction there, where Thou livest in perpetual 

peace, amidst all the troubles and vexation-s of this 

life. Raise my spirit to that great and sublime 

good, which none can touch, much less remove; 

that, remaining in an unshaken possession of Thy 

love, and being lifted up in noble hopes of the 

glory to which Thy love will promote Thy faithful 

servants, I may not feel myself altered by any of 

the chano^es which are in the thinc^s that are under 

my feet. Dispose my mind, O God, to the sweetest 

and most gentle compliance with Thy providence. 



SYMON PATEICK. 223 

And make me so perfectly in love with Thy will, 
that all that is great, or glorious, or delightful in 
this world, I may enjoy in a pure and clear con- 
science, void of offence towards Thee and towards 
all men. O the deliciousness of those pleasures! 
O the divineness of those joys! Bless me daily with 
a stronger taste of them, and satisfaction in them, 
till I come to enjoy that reward of well-doing, 
which exceeds all thoughts and desires, through our 
Lord and Saviour Christ Jesus. Amen. 

IV. 
ADORE and praise, O Lord, Thy greatness. Thy 
power, wisdom, and goodness, which shine in all 
Thy woi'lvs of creation and providence. They all 
shoAV forth the majesty of Thy glory; and are 
placed and move in such comely order, that Thou 
Thyself rejoicest in all Thy Avorks, and art perfectly 
pleased even in that which gives us grief and trou- 
ble. It is our duty, O blessed God, to be pleased 
too, and to rejoice in this knowledge which Thou 
hast given us of Thee, who art from everlasting to 
everlasting, and changest not, but art ever the same 
immutable love, exercising the most wise and tender 
providence in every part of this great world; and 
more especially over mankind, to whom Thou hast 
shown the highest kindness, and given unquestiona- 
ble testimonies of Thy singular care of them, and 
good-will towards them. 

O God, what tilings arc those Avhich Thou hast 
laid up for those that fear Thee; for those that trust 



224 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

in Thee, and depend entirely on Thy goodness, and 
submit to Thy will and pleasure! In what a kind 
relation Thou art pleased to stand unto ns, that we 
may be confident Thou dearly lovest us, and wilt 
take care of us! All ages have experienced this 
love, that Thou, Lord, hast not forsaken them that 
seek Thee: therefore Thy face evermore will I seek. 
I will never doubt of Thy merciful kindness; but 
always believe that Thou art gracious and full of 
compassion, just and true in all Thy wa3^8, O Thou 
King of saints. Confirm and strengthen these holy 
purposes in me by the assistance of Thy good Spirit, 
making these thoughts more strong, more lively, and 
mightily affecting my heart; so that I may be able 
to say, The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what 
man can do unto me. He hath not spared His only 
Son, but delivered Him up for us all: how shall He 
not with Him give us all things? I will bless the 
Lord at all times, His praise shall be continually in 
my mouth; my soul shall make her boast in the 
Lord, and I will rejoice in His salvation. 

O blessed day, when we shall see Jesus again, 
and feel Him changing this vile bod}^, and making 
it like His glorious body, by the power whereby He 
can subdue all things to Himself ! O happy day, 
when all tears shall be wiped away from our eyes, 
and there shall be no sighing nor sorrow, but pres- 
ent satisfaction and joy for evermore! Amen. 




JOHN FLAVEL, B. A. 
1G27-1G91. 

Efficacy of the Blood of the Cross. 

HERE is sufficient efficacy in the blood 
of the Cross to expiate and wash away 
the greatest sins. This is manifest, for it is 
precious blood, as it is called, 1 Peter i. 18. 
'Ye were not redeemed with corruptible 
things, as silver and gold; but with the precious 
blood of the Son of God.' This preciousness of 
the blood of Christ riseth from the union it hath 
with that Person, who is over all, God blessed for 
ever. 

Before the efficacy of this blood, guilt vanishes, 
and shrinks away as the shadow before the glorious 
sun. Every drop of it hath a voice, and speaks to 
the soul that sits trembling under its guilt better 
things than the blood of Abel, Heb. x. 24. It 
sprinkles us from all evil, i. e. an unquiet and ac- 
cusing conscience, Heb. x. 22. For having enough 
in it to satisfy God, it must needs have enough in it 
to satisfy conscience. 

Can God exact satisfaction from the blood and 
death of His own Son, the surety of believers, and 

yet still demand it from believers? It cannot be. 

10* 



226 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

'Who (saitli th^ apostle) shall lay any thing to the 
charge of God's elect? It is God that justiiieth. 
Who shall condemn? It is Christ that died,' Rom. 
viii. 33, 34. And why are faith and repentance 
prescribed as the means of pardon? Why doth 
God every where in His Word, call upon sinners to 
repent, and believe in this blood? encouraging them 
so to do, by so many precious promises of remission; 
and declarino' the inevitable and eternal ruin of all 
impenitent and unbelieving ones, who despise and 
reject this blood? What, I sa}^, doth all this speak, 
but the possibility of a pardon for the greatest of 
sinners; and the certainty of a free, full, and final 
pardon for all believing sinners? O what a joyful 
sound is this! What ravishing voices of peace, par- 
don, grace, and acceptance, come to our ears from 
the blood of the Cross? 

The greatest guilt that ever was contracted upon 
a trembling, shaking conscience, can stand before 
the efficacy of the blood of Christ no more than the 
sinner himself can stand before the justice of the 
Lord, with all that guilt upon him. 

Reader, the word assures thee, whatever thou 
hast been, or art, that sins of as deep a dye as 
thine, have been washed away in this blood. 'I 
was a blasphemer, a persecutor, injurious; but I 
obtained mercy,' saith Paul. 1 Tim. i. 13. But it 
may be thou wilt object; this was a rare and singu- 
lar instance, and it is a great question whether any 
other sinner shall find tlie like grace that he did. 
No question of it at all, if you believe in Christ as 



JOlIxN FLAVEL. 227 

he did; for he tells us, ver. 16, '^ov this cause I 
obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might 
show forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them 
which should hereafter believe on Him to life ever- 
lasting.' So that upon the same grounds he ol)- 
tained mercy, you may obtain it also. 

Those very men who had a hand in the shedding 
of Christ's blood, had the benefit of that blood after- 
wards pardoning them. Acts ii. 36. There is no- 
thing l)ut unbelief and impenitency of heart can bar 
thy soul from the blessings of this blood. 

Fountain of Life. 

^ T3LESSED are they which hunger and thirst 
1 } after righteousness, for they shall be filled.' 
They shall then depend no more upon the stream, 
but drink from the overflowing fountain itself. 
Psalm xxxvi. 8: 'They shall be abundantly satisfied 
with the fatness of Thy house, and Thou shalt make 
them drink of the river of Thy pleasures: for with 
Thee is the fountain of life, and in Thy light shall 
we see light.' There they shall drink and praise, 
and praise and drink for evermore; all their thirsty 
desires shall be filled with complete satisfiiction. O 
how desiral^le a state is heaven upon this account! 
and how should we be restless till we come thither; 
as the thirsty traveler is until he meet that cool, 
refreshing spring he wants and seeks for. This 
present state is a state of thirsting, that to come 
of refreshment and satisfaction. Some drops indeed 
come from the fountain by faith, but they quench 



228 DEVOTIONxlL THOUGHTS. 

not the believer's thirst; rather like water sprinkled 
on the fire, they make it burn the more: but there 
the thirsty soul hath enough. 

The Study of Christ. 

THE study of Jesus Christ is the most noble sub- 
ject that ever a soul spent itself upon; those 
that rack and torture their brains upon other studies, 
like children, weary themselves at a low game; the 
eagle plays at the sun itself. The angels study this 
doctrine, and stoop down to look into this deep 
abyss. What are the truths discovered in Christ, 
but the very secrets that from eternity lay liid in 
the bosom of God? Eph. iii. 8, 9. God's heart is 
opened to men in Christ, John i. 18; this makes the 
Gospel such a glorious dispensation, because Christ 
is so gloriously revealed therein, 1 Cor. iii. 9, and 
the studying of Christ in the Gospel stamps such a 
heavenly glory upon the contemplating soul, ver. 18. 
It is the most sweet and comfortable knowledge; 
to be studying Jesus Christ, what is it but to be 
digging among all the veins and springs of comfort? 
and the deeper you dig, the more do these springs 
flow upon you. How are hearts ravished with the 
discoveries of Christ in the Gospel. What ecstacies, 
meltings, transports, do gracious souls meet there. 

Vision of God in Glory. 

^ TT THEN I awake I shall be satisfied with Thy 

V V likeness.' This sight of God, in glory, 

called the beatifical vision, must needs yield inefia- 



JOHN FLAVEL. 229 

ble satisftictioii to the beholding soul, inasmuch as 
it will be an intuitive vision. The intellectual or 
mental eye shall see God, 1 John iii. 2. The cor- 
poreal, glorified eye shall see Christ, Job xix. 26, 
27. What a ravishing vision will this be! and how 
much will it exceed all reports and apprehensions 
we had here of it! Surely one half was not told 
us. It will be a transformative vision^ it will change 
the beholder into its own image and likeness. ' We 
shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is,' 
1 John iii. 2. It will be an ajppropriative vision: 
'Whom I shall see for myself,' Job xix. 26, 27. In 
heaven, interest is clear and undoubted; fear is cast 
out: no need of marks and signs there; for what a 
man sees and enjoys, how can he doubt of? It will 
be a ravishing vision; these we have by faith are so, 
how much more those in glory? How was Paul 
transported, when he was in a visional way rapt 
up into the third heaven, and heard the unutterable 
things, though he was not admitted into the blessed 
society, but was with them, as the angels are in our 
assemblies, a stander-by, a looker-on. It will be a 
fully satisfying vision; God will then be all in 
all. The blessed soul will feel itself blessed, filled, 
satisfied in every part. Ah, what a happiness is 
here! to look and love, to drink and sing, and 
drink as-ain at the fountain head of the hiofhcst 
glory! 



230 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Divine Caee. 
• A LL things shall work together for good.' From 
-XTjl. what quarter soever the wmd bloweth, God 
will take care that it shall be useful to drive you to 
your port; the very providences that cast you down, 
b}^ virtue of this promise, prove as serviceable and 
beneficial as those that lift you up. 

The care of God stands engaged in the promise, 
for the help and aid of His people in all the ex- 
tremities and exigencies of their lives, Psalm xlvi. 1. 
'God is our refuge and strength, a very present help 
in trouble.' Never is the care of God more visible 
and conspicuous than in such times of need. 

The care of God is engaged to carry His people 
safe through all the dangers of the way, and bring 
them all home to glory at last, John x. 28. ' I give 
unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, 
neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand.' 
This care of God, thus engaged for you, is your con- 
voy to accompany and secure 3^ou, till it set you safe 
into your harbor of eternal rest. 

You have heard how the care of God is engaged 
for you by promise; now see how jt actuates and 
exerts itself for the people of God in the various 
methods of providence; and here, O here is the 
sweetest pleasure of the Christian life, a delight far 
transcending all the delights of this life. Sit down 
Christian in this chambei* also, and make but such 
observations upon the care of thy God as follow; and 
then tell me whether the world, with all its pleasures 



JOHN FLAVEL. 231 

and delights, can give thee such another entertain- 
ment. 

Keflect upon the constant, sweet and suitable pro- 
visions, that frora time to time have been prepared 
for thee and thine, by this care of thy God; for 
whensoever thy wants did come, I am sure from 
hence came thy supplies, it hath enabled thee to re- 
turn the same answer the disciples did to that ques- 
tion, Luke xxii. 35: 'Lacked ye any thing?' And 
they said, Nothing. 

Reflect with admiration upon the various difficul- 
ties of your lives, wherein your thoughts have been 
entangled, and out of which you have been extricated 
and delivered by the care of God over you; how 
oft have your thoughts been like a raveled skein 
of silk, so entangled and perplexed with the difficul- 
ties and fears before you, that you could find no end, 
but the longer you thought, the more you were 
puzzled, till you have left thinking and fell to pray- 
ing; and there you have found the right end to wind 
up all your thoughts upon the bottom of peace and 
sweet contentment, according to that direction, 
Psalm xxxvii. 5: ' Commit thy way unto the Lord, 
trust also in Him, and He shall bring it to pass.' 

Observe with a melting heart, how the care of thy 
God hath disposed and directed thy way to unfore- 
seen advantages: had He not ordered thy steps when, 
and as He did, thou hadst not been in possession 
of those temporal and spiritual mercies that sweeten 
thy life at this day. Surely the steps of good men 
are ordered by the Lord: and as for thee. Christian. 



232 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

what reason hast thou, with an heart overflowing 
with love and thankfulness, to look up and say, my 
Father^ thou art the guide of my youth? 

It is sweet to live by faith upon Divine care. O 
what a serene life might we live, careful for nothing, 
but making known our requests unto God in every 
thing, Phil. iv. 6, casting all our care on Him that 
careth for us, 1 Pet. v. 7, perplexing our thoughts 
about nothing, l)ut rolling every burden upon God 
by faith! 

Faith in God's llNCHi^^GEABLENESS. 

LIVE by faith upon God's unchangeableness under 
the greatest changes of your own condition in 
this world. Providence may make great altera- 
tions upon all your outward comforts: it may cast 
you down, how dear soever you be to God, from 
riches into poverty, from health into sickness, from 
honor into reproach, from liberty into bondage. Yet 
still it is your duty, and will be your great privilege 
in the midst of all these changes, to act your faith 
upon the never-changing God, as that holy man did, 
Hab. iii. 17, ' Although the fig tree shall not blossom, 
neither fruit be in the vine; the labor of the olive 
shall fail; and the fields shall yield no meat; the 
flocks shall be cut oft' from the fold, and there shall 
be no herd in the stall; yet will I rejoice in the Lord, 
I will joy in the God of my salvation.' 

Live upon the unchangeableness of God under the 
greatest and saddest changes of your spiritual con- 
dition; God may cloud the light of His countenance 



JOHN FLAVEL. 233 

over thy soul, He may fill thee with fears and 
troubles, and the Comforter that should relieve thee 
may seem to be far off; yet still maintain thy faith 
in the unchangeableness of His love; trust in the 
name of the Lord, stay thyself upon thy God, when 
thou walkest in darkness and hast no light, Isa. 1. 10. 

WxiLKiNG WITH God; 

O SWEET and pleasant walk! all pleasures, all 
joys are in that walk with God. ' Blessed are 
the people that hear the joyful sound; they shall 
walk, O Lord, in the light of Thy countenance,' 
Psalm Ixxxix. 15. The joyful sound there spoken 
of was the sound of the trumpet, which called the 
people to the solemn assemblies, where they walked 
in the light of God's countenance, the sweet mani- 
festations of His favor; and because the world is so 
apt to suspect the reality and certainty of this doc- 
trine, the apostle again asserts it, Phil. iii. 20, 'Truly 
our conversation is in heaven.' We breathe below, 
but we live above; w^e walk on earth, but our con- 
versation is in heaven. 

Rest in God. 

WHEN we attain perfect communion with God 
in heaven, we attain to perfect rest, and all 
the rest the spirit of man finds on earth, is found in 
communion with God. Take a sanctified person, 
Avho hath intermitted for some time his communion 
with the Lord, and ask him. Is your soul at rest and 
ease? He will tell you, no! The motions of his soul 



234 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

are like those of a member out of joint, neither come- 
ly nor easy. Let that man recover his spiritual frame 
again, and, with it, he recovers his rest and comfort. 
Christians, you meet with variety of troubles in this 
world; many a sweet comfort is cut off, many a hope- 
fnl project dashed by the hand of providence; and 
what think you is the meaning of those blasting, dis- 
appointing providences? Surely this is their design 
and errand, to disturb your false rest in the bosom 
of the creature; to pluck away those pillows you 
were laying your heads upon, that thereby you might 
be reduced unto God, and recover your lost com- 
munion with Him; and say, Avith David, 'Return 
imto thy rest, O my souL' Sometimes we are set- 
tling ourselves to rest in an estate, in a child, or the 
like; at this time it is usual for God to say, go, losses, 
smite and blast such a man's estate; go, death, and 
take away the desire of his eyes witli a stroke, that 
my child may find rest no where but in me. God is 
the ark; the soul, like the dove Noah sent forth, let 
it fly where it will, it shall find no rest till it come 
back to God. 

Communion with God. 

IT is the desire of all gracious souls throughout the 
world. Wherever there is a gracious soul, the 
desires of that soul are working after communion 
with God. As Christ was called, The desire of all 
nations^ so communion with Him is the desire of all 
nations: and this speaks the excellency of it. Psalm 
xxvii. 4: ' One thing have I desired of the Lord, that 



JOHN FLAVEL. 235 

will I seek after; that I might dwell in the house of 
the Lord all the days of my life, to see the beauty 
of the Lord, and to enquire in His temple;' i. e. to 
enjoy communion with Him in the public duties of 
His w^orship. One thing have I desired^ that is, one 
thing above all other things; such a one, as, if God 
shall give me, I can comfortal^ly bear the want of all 
other things. Let Him deny me what He will, if so 
be He will not deny me this one thing; this one 
thing shall richly recompense the want of all other 
things. Hence the desires of the saints are so in- 
tense and fervent after this one thins:; Psalm xlii. 1: 
'My soul panteth after Thee, O God; '.and Psalm 
cxix. 81: ' My soul fainteth for Thy salvation.' Psalm 
ci. 2: 'When wilt Thou come unto me?' No duties 
can satisfy without it; the soul cannot bear the de- 
laj^s, much less the denials of it. They reckon their 
lives worth nothing without it. Ministers may come, 
ordinances and Sabbaths may come; but there is no 
satisfaction to the desires of a gracious heart, till 
God comes too; O when wilt Thou come unto mef 

Christ's Love Manifested from the Cross. 
rj^HE transcendent love of Christ shines out in its 
JL full strength upon the souls of sinners from the 
Cross; and there is nothing like love to draw love. 
When Christ was lifted up upon the Cross, He gave 
such a glorious demonstration of the strength of His 
love to sinners, as one would think should draw love 
from the hardest heart that ever lodo^ed in a sinner's 
breast. 'Herein is love,' saith the apostle, 'not that 



'2dQ DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

we loved Gocl, but that He loved ns, aud sent His 
Son to be a propitiation for our sins/ 1 John iv. 10 
q. d. Here is the triumph, the riches and glory of 
Divine love; never was such love manifested in the 
world. There is much of God's love in temporal 
providences, but all is nothing to this; this is love 
in its highest elevation; love in its meridian glory; 
before it was none like it, and after it shall none 
appear like unto it. 

Fkee Grace. 

THE willingness of Christ to receive the willing 
soul, how many and great soever its sins and 
unworthiness be,. appears from the actual grants of 
pardon and mercy, even to the vilest sinners tha,t 
ever were upon the earth, when they thus came unto 
Him. Here you see how the waters of free-grace 
rise higher and higher. An invitation is much; a 
promise of welcome is more: but the actual grant 
of mercy is most satisfying of all. Come on, poor 
trembling soul, do not be discouraged, stretch out 
the small, weak arms of thy faith to that great and 
gracious Redeemer; open thy heart wide to receive 
Him; He will not refuse to come in. He hath sealed 
thousands of pardons to as vile wretches as thyself; 
He never yet shut the door of mercy upon a willing, 
hunorerino^ soul. 



1 



john flavel. 237 

Grace of God. 
T is siiperabounding grace. Waters do not so 
abound in the ocean, nor light in the sun, as 
grace and compassion do in the bowels of God 
towards broken-hearted and hungry sinners, Isa. Iv. 
6: 'Let him return unto the Lord, and He will have 
mercy upon him; and to our God, for He will abund- 
antly pardon.' The compassions of our God insert- 
ed that word on purpose to relieve poor souls faint- 
ing under the sense of their abounding iniquities. 
Here is abundant pardon for abounding guilt; and 
yet, lest a desponding sinner should not find enough 
here to quiet his fears, the Lord goes yet farther in 
the expression of His grace, Rom. v. 20: ' Where sin 
abounded, grace did much more abound.' It over- 
flowed all the bounds, it rose quite above the high- 
water mark of sin and guilt: but these overflowings 
of grace run only through that channel of all grace, 
Jesus Christ, to broken-hearted and obedient sinners. 

Pardon for the most Heinous Sins. 

THERE is a sacrifice laid out and appointed for 
these sins. O bless God for that! they are no 
where excepted from the possibility of forgiveness. 
Nothing but the impenitency of thy heart, and ob- 
stinacy of thy will, can bar thee from a full and 
final pardon. Jesus Christ can save thee to the 
uttermost. Say not within thyself, can the virtue 
of His blood extend itself to the remission of this or 
that sin? He can save to the uttermost. Look round 
about thee to the uttermost horizon of all thy guilt, 



238 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

and Christ can save thee to the uttermost that the 
eye of thy conscience can discern, yea, and beyond 
it too; but then thou must come unto Him. You 
speak of the greatness of sin, and you have cause to 
have sad thoughts about it; but, in the mean time, 
you consider not, that your unbelief, by which you 
stand off from Christ, your only remedy, is certainly 
the greatest of all the sins that ever you stood guilty 
of against the Lord. This is the sin that binds the 
guilt of all your other sins upon you. 

Peace to the SctuL. 

FAITH is not only the messenger that brings you 
a pardon from heaven; but it is, as I may say. 
that heavenly herald that publishes peace in the soul 
of a sinner. O peace, how sweet a word art thou! 
how welcome to a poor condemned sinner! ' Beau- 
tifnl upon the mountains are the feet of them that 
publish peace.' Now it is faith that brings this 
blessed news and publishes it in the soul, Avithout 
which all the publishers of peace without us, can 
administer but little support, Rom. v... 1. Faith 
l)rings the soul out of the storms and tempests with 
which it was tossed, into a sweet rest and calm, Heb. 
iv. 3: 'We which have believed do enter into rest.' 
Is the quiet harbor welcome to poor weather-beaten 
seamen, after they have past furious storms and many 
fears upon the raging sea? O how welcome then 
must peace be to that soul that hath been tossed upon 
the tempestuous ocean of its own fears and terrors, 
bU)wn up and incensed by the terrible blasts of the 



JOHN FIAVEL. 239 

law and conscience? It was a comfortable sight to 
Noah and his famil}' , to see an olive-leaf in the mouth 
of the dove, by which they knew the waters were 
abated. But, oh ! what is it to hear such a voice as 
this from the mouth of faith, Fury is not in me, saith 
the Lord; His anger is turned away, and He com- 
forteth thee? Fear not thou poor tempest-tossed 
soul, the God of peace is thy God. 

Joy in the Holy Ghost. 

THIS is somewdiat beyond peace; it is the very 
quintessence and spirit of all consolation. The 
kingdom of God is said to consist in it, Rom. xiv. 
17; it is somewhat near to the joy of the glorified, 1 
Pet. i. 8; it is heaven upon earth. All believers do 
not immediately attain it, but one time or other God 
usually gives them a taste of it; and Avhen He doth, 
it is as it were a short salvation. O, who can tell 
what that is which the apostle calls, ' The shedding 
al)road of the love of God in the heart, by the Holy 
Ghost, which is given to us!' Rom. v. 5. It is a 
joy that wants an epithet to express the sweetness 
of it, 1 Pet. i. 8. 'Joy unspeakable and fall of 
glory.' It hath the very scent and taste of heaven 
in it, and there is but a gradual difference betwixt 
it and the joy of heaven. This joy of the Holy 
Ghost is a spiritual cheerfulness streaming through 
the soul of a believer upon the Spirit's testimony, 
which clears his interest in Christ and glory. No 
sooner doth the Spirit shed forth the love of God 
into the believer's heart, ])ut it streams and overflows 



240 DEVOTION'AL THOUGHTS. 

with joy. Joy is no more under that soul's com- 
mand. And this will evidently appear, if you con- 
sider the matter of it; it arises from the light of 
God's countenance, Psalm iv. 6, 7, the heavenly glory, 
1 Pet. i. 8. ' Whom having not seen we love,' &c. 
The soul is transported with joy, ravished with the 
glory and excellency of Christ. Didst thou ever see 
this Christ whom thy soul is so ravished with? No, 
r have not seen Him; yt;t my soul is transported with 
so much love to Him, whom having not seen ive love. 
But if thou never sawest Him, how comes thy soul 
to be so delighted and ravished with Him? why, 
though I never saw Him by the qjq of sense, yet I 
do see Him by the eye of faith; and by that sight 
my soul is flooded with spiritual joy. Believing ice 
rejoice. But what manner of joy is that which you 
taste? why, no tongue can express that, j^or it is joy 
unsjpeahahle. But how are Christ and heaven turned 
into such ravishing joys to the soul? why, the Spirit 
of the Lord gives the believing soul not only a sight 
to discern the transcendent excellency of these spirit- 
ual objects, but a sight of his interest in .them also. 
Tliis is my Christ, and this the glory prepared for 
me. Without interest, heaven itself cannot be turned 
unto joy, ' My soul rejoices in God my Saviour,' 
Luke i. 47. 

This joy of the Lord shall be your strength, Neh. 
viii. 10. Let God but give a person a little of this 
joy into his heart, and he shall presently feel him- 
self strengthened by it, either to do or to suffer the 
will of God. Now he can pray with enlargement. 



JOHN FLAVEL. 241 

hear with comfort, meditate with delight: and if God 
call him to suffer, this joy shall strengthen him to 
bear it. This was it that made the martyrs go sing- 
in 2^ to the stake. This therefore transcends all the 
joys of this lower world. 

Foretastes of Heaven. 

BELIEVERS have a double pledge, or earnest 
for heaven, one in the person of Christ, who is 
entered into that glory for them, John xiv. 2, 3, the 
other in the joys and comforts of the Spirit, which 
they feel, and taste in themselves. These are two 
great securities, and the designs of God in giving us 
these earnests and foretastes of heaven, are not onlv 
to settle our minds but to whet our industry, that 
we may long the more earnestly, and labor the more 
diligently for the full possession. The Lord sees 
how apt we are to flag in the pursuit of heavenly 
glory, and therefore gives His people a taste, an 
earnest of it, to excite their diligence in the pursuits 
of it. 

As the visions of God are begun on earth, so the 
heavenly delights are begun here also. Some drops 
of that delight, are let fall here, Psalm xciv. 19. 'Li 
the multitude of the thoughts I had within me, Th}^ 
comforts delight my soul.' David's heart, it is likely, 
had been full of sorrow and trouble; a sea of gall 
and wormwood had overflowed his soul: God lets 
fall but a drop or two of heavenly delight, and all 
is turned into sweetness and comfort. Is there not 

something here of that transformation of the soul 

11 



242 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

into the image of God, which is complete in heaven', 
and a special part of the glory thereof? It is said in 
1 John iii. 2: 'We shall be like Him, for we shall 
see Him as he is.' This is heaven, this is glory, to 
have the soul moulded into full conformity with 
God: something thereof is experienced in this world: 
O that we had more! 2 Cor. iii. 18: 'But we all 
with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of 
the Lord, are changed into the same image, from 
glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord.' Is 
there- not somethino; felt here of the ravishino- sweet- 
ness of God's presence in ordinances and duties, 
which is a faint shadow, at least, of the joys of His 
glorious presence in heaven? There is certainly a 
felt presence of God, a sensible nearness unto God 
at sometimes and in some duties of religion, wherein 
His name is as ointment poured forth. Cant. i. 3, 
something that is felt beyond and above all the com- 
forts of this world. In a word, the jo3's of heaven 
are unspeakable joj^s, no words can make known to 
others what they are. When Paul was caught up 
into paradise he heard unspeakable worxis, 2 Cor. 
xii. 4, and are there not times, even in this life, 
wherein the saints do feel that which no w^ords can 
express? 1 Pet. i. 8, Rev. ii. 17. 

If a relish, a taste of heaven, in the earnest there- 
of, be so transporting and ravishing, what then is 
the full fruition of God ! If these be unutterable, 
what must that be! Give me leave to say, whatever 
the comforts and joys of any believer in this world 



JOHN FLAVEL. 243 

may be, yet heaven will be a surprise to him when 
he comes thither. 

The Longing Soul's Keflection. 

I HAVE waited for Thy salvation, O God! Hav- 
ing received Thy first fruits, my soul longs to fill 
its bosom with the full ripe sheaves of glory: 'As 
the hart panteth for the water brooks, so panteth my 
soul for Thee, O God! O when shall I come and 
appear before God!' I desire to be dissolved and to 
be with Christ! When shall I see that most lovely 
face? When shall I hear His soul-transporting voice! 
Some need patience to die: I need it as much to 
live. Thy sights, O God, by faith, have made this 
world a burden, this body a burden, and this soul 
to cry, like thirsty David, ' O that one would give 
me of the waters of Bethlehem to drink!' The hus- 
bandman longs for his harvest, because it is the re- 
ward of all his toil and labor. But what is his har- 
vest to mine? What is a little corn to the enjoy- 
ment of God? What is the joy of harvest to the 
joy of heaven? What are the shoutings of men in 
the fields to the acclamations of glorified spirits in 
the kingdom of God? Lord, I have gone forth bear- 
ing more precious seed than they; when shall I re- 
turn rejoicing, bringing my sheaves with me? Their 
harvest comes when they receive their corn; mine 
comes when I leave it. O much desired! O day of 
gladness of my heart! How long. Lord! how long! 
Here I wait as the poor man at Bethesda's pool, look- 
ing when my turn will come, but every one steps 



244 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

into heaven before me; 3^et Lord, I am content to 
wait till my time is fully come: I would be content 
to stay for my glorification till I have finished the 
work of my generation; and when I have done the 
will of God, then to receive the promise. If Thou 
have any work on earth to use me in, I am content 
to abide: behold, the husbandman waiteth, and so 
will I; for Thou art a God of judgment; and blessed 
are all they that wait for Thee. 

Eeflection of a Gkowing Christi^vn. 

CHEER thyself, O my soul! with the heart- 
strengthening bread of this Divine meditation. 
Let faith turn every drop of this truth into a soul- 
reviving cordial. God hath sown the precious seed 
of grace upon my soul; and though my heart hath 
been an unkindly soil, which hath kept it back, and 
much hindered its growth, yet, blessed be the Lord, 
it still grows on, though by slow degrees; and from 
the springing of the seed, and shooting forth of those 
gracious habits, I may conclude an approaching har- 
vest: Now^ is my salvation nearer than w:hen I be- 
lieved; every day I come nearer to my salvation, 
Rom. xiii. 11. O that every day I were more active 
for the God of my salvation! Grow on, my soul, 
and add to thy faith virtue, to thy virtue knowledge, 
<fec. Grow on from faith to faith; keep thyself 
under the ripening influences of heavenly ordinances: 
The faster thou growest in grace, the sooner thou 
shalt be reaped down in mercy, and bound up in the 
bundle of life, 1 Sam. xv. 29. I have not yet attain- 



JOHN FLAVEL. 245 

ed the measure and proportion of grace assigned to 
me, neither am I already perfect, but am reaching 
forth to the things before me, and pressing towards 
the mark for the prize of my heavenly calling, Phil, 
iii. 12, 13. 

Lost and Found. 

OMY soul! for ever bless and admire the love 
of Jesus Christ, who came from heaven to seek 
and save such a lost soul as I was. Lord, how mar- 
velous! how matchless is Thy love! I was lost, and 
am found: I am found, and did not seek; nay, I am 
found by Him from whom I fled. Thy love, O my 
Saviour, was a preventing love, a wonderful love; 
Thou lovedst me much more than I loved myself; I 
was cruel to my own soul, but Thou wast kind; Thou 
soughtest for me a lost sinner, and not for lost angels; 
Thy hand of grace caught hold of me, and hath let 
go thousands and ten thousands as good as myself 
by nature; like another David, Thou didst rescue 
my poor lost soul out of the mouth of the destroyer; 
yea, more than so, Thou didst lose Thine own life to 
find mine: and now, dear Jesus, since I am thus 
marvelously recovered, shall I ever straggle again 
from Thee? O let it forever be a warning to me, 
how I turn aside into the by-paths of sin any more. 

The Ocean of Divine Mercy. 

IN the vastness of the ocean, Ave have also a lively 
emblem of eternitj^ Who can comprehend or 
measure the ocean, but God? And who can compre- 



246 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

hencl eternity but He that is said to inhabit it? Isa. 
Ivii. 5. Though shallow rivers may be drained and 
dried up, yet the ocean cannot. And though these 
transitory days, months, and years will at last expire; 
yet eternity shall not. O! it is a long word! and 
amazing matter! what is eternity but a constant per- 
manency of persons and things, in one and the same 
state and condition forever; putting them beyond 
all possibility of change? 

And is the mercy of God like the great deep, an 
ocean that none can fathom? What unspeakable 
comfort is this to me? may the pardoned soul say. 
Did Israel sing a song when the Lord had overwhelm- 
ed their corporeal enemies in the seas? And shall 
not I break forth into His praises, who hath drowned 
all my sins in the depth of mercy? O my soul, bless 
thou the Lord, and let His high praises ever be in 
thy mouth. Mayest thou not say, that He hath gone 
to as high an extent and degree of mercy in pardon- 
ing thee as ever He did in any? O my God, who is 
like unto Thee! that pardoneth iniquity, transgression 
and sin. "What mercy, but the mercy of a God, 
could cover such abomination as mine? 

Joy of the Redeemed. 

OWHAT a transcendent joy, yea, ravishing, will 
over-run the hearts of saints, when, after so 
many conflicts, temptations, and afflictions, they ar- 
rive in glory and are harbored in heaven, where they 
shall rest for ever! 2 Thess. i. 7. The Scripture 
saith, ' They shall sing the song of Moses and of the 



JOHN FLAVEL. 247 

Lamb/ Rev. xv. 3. The song of Moses was a 
triumphant song composed for the celebration of 
that glorious deliverance at the Red sea. The saints 
are now fluctuating upon a troublesome and tempest- 
uous sea; their hearts sometimes ready to sink, and 
die within them at the apprehension of so many and 
great dangers and difficulties. Many a hard storm 
they ride out, and many straits and troubles they 
here encounter with, but at last they arrive at their 
desired and long-expected haven, and then heaven 
rings and resounds with their joyful acclamations. 
And how can it be otherwise, when as soon as ever 
they set foot upon that glorious shore, Christ Him- 
self meets and receives them with a ' Come, ye bless- 
ed of my Father,' Matth. xxv. 34. 

Assurance. 

IT is the very riches of fiiith, the most pleasant 
fruit which grows upon the top branches of faith. 
The Scripture tells us of an assurance of understand- 
ing, hope and faith. All these graces are precious 
in themselves; but the assurance of each of them 
is the most sweet and pleasant part. Knowledge 
above knowledge, is the full assurance of knowledge: 
hope above hope, is the full assurance of hope: and 
faith above faith, is the full assurance of faith. The 
least and lowest act of saving faith is precious, and 
above all value; what then must the highest and 
most excellent acts of faith be? Certainly there is a 
sweetness in the assurance of faith, that few men 
have the privilege to taste: and they that do, can 



248 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

find no words able to express it to another's under- 
standino^. The weakest Christian is exalted above 
all other men; but .the assured Christian hath a 
preference before all other Christians. 

It is heart's ease; the very sabbath and sweet re- 
pose of the soul. Thousands of poor Christians 
would part with all they possess in this world to 
enjoy it; but it flies from them. The life that most 
of them live, is a life betwixt hopes and fears; their 
interest in Christ is very doubtful to them. Some- 
times they are encouraged, from sensible workings 
of grace; then all is dashed again b}^ the contrary 
stirrings and workings of their own corruptions. 
Now the sun shines out clear, by and by the heavens 
are overcast and clouded ao-ain: but the assured 
Christian is at rest. He can take Christ into the 
arms of faith, and say, ' My Beloved is mine, and I 
am His. Return to thy rest, O my soul, for the 
Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee!' 

It is the pleasure of life; yea, the most rational, 
pure, and transporting pleasure. What is life with- 
out pleasure? And what pleasure is th^re in the 
world, comparable to this pleasure? 

Constancy of Christ's Love. 

THE constancy of Christ's love to His people 
passeth knowledge: No length of time, no dis- 
tance of place, no change of condition, either with 
Him or us, can possibl}^ make any alteration of His 
afiections towards us: 'He is the same yesterday, 
to-day, and for ever,' Heb. xiii. 8. It is noted also 



JOHN FLAVEL. 249 

by the evangelist, John xiii. 1 : ' That havhig loved 
His own which were in the world. He loved them to 
the end.' It is true His condition is altered; He is 
no more in this world conversing with His people, 
as He did once in the days of His flesh: He is now 
at the right-hand of God, in the highest glory; but 
yet His heart is the same that ever it was, for love 
and tenderness to His people. Our conditions also 
are often altered in this world; but His love suiFers 
no alteration. Yea, which is much more admirable, 
we do many things daily that grieve Him and offend 
Him; yet He takes not away His loving-kindness 
from us, nor suffers His faithfulness to fail. We 
pour out so much cold Avater of unkindness and pro- 
vocation, as is enough to cool and quench any love 
in the world, except His love; but notwithstanding 
all, He continues unchano-eable in love to us. 



Maturity of Grace. 

WHEN the corn is near ripe, it bows the head 
and stoops lower than when it was green. 
When the people of God are near ripe for heaven, 
they grow more humble and self-denying than in the 
days of their first profession. The longer a saint 
grows in this world, the better he is still acquainted 
with his own heart and his obligations to God; both 
which are very humbling things. Paul had one foot 
in heaven when he called himself the chief est of sin- 
ners, and least of saints, 1 Tim. i. 15; Eph. iii. 8. 

A Christian, in the progress of his knowledge and 

j1* 



250 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

grace, is like a vessel cast into the sea; the more it 
fills the deeper it sinks. 



End of the Christian's Trials. 

THE time is coming, when thy heart shall he as 
thon wouldst have it; when thou shalt be dis- 
charged of all these cares, fears, and sorrows, and 
never cry out, O my hard, my proud, my vain, my 
earthly heart, any more! When all darkness shall be 
vanished from thine understanding; and thou shalt 
clearly discover all truths in God, that crystal ocean 
of truth: When all vanity shall be purged perfectly 
out of thy thoughts, and they be everlastingly, ravish- 
ingly and delightfully entertained and exercised upon 
that supreme goodness, and infinite excellency of 
God, from whom they shall never start any more 
like a broken bow. And as for thy pride, passion, 
earthliness, and all other matters of thy complaint 
and trouble, it shall be said of them, as of the 
Egyptians to Israel, ' Stand still, and see the salva- 
tion of God.' These corruptions thou seest to day, 
henceforth thou shalt see them no more for ever! 
when thou shalt lay down thy weapons of prayers, 
tears and groans, and put on the armor of light, 
not to fight but triumph in. 

Lord! when shall this blessed day come? How 
long! how long! Holy and True? My soul waiteth 
for Thee! Come, my Beloved! and be Thou like a 
roe or a young hart upon the mountains of Bether. 
Amen. 




STEPHEN CHARNOOK, B. D. 

1628-1680. 

Meditation on the Glory of Christ. 

EDITATE upon the glory of Christ: 
without a due and frequent reflection 
upon it, we can never have a spirit of 
thankfulness for our great redemption ; 
because we cannot else have sound 
impressions of the magnificent grace of God in 
Christ. It is the least we can do, to give Him a 
room in our thoughts, who hath been a forerun- 
ner in glory, to make room for us in a hapj^y 
world. As the ancient Israelites linked their devo- 
tion to the temple and ark at Jerusalem, the visi- 
ble sign God had given them of His presence, 
ought we not also to fix our eyes and hearts on the 
holy place which contains our ark, the body of the 
Lord Jesus? The meditation on this glory will 
keep us in acts of faith on Him, obedience to Him, 
a lively hope of enjoying blessedness by Him, 
1 Peter i. 21. If we did believe Him dignified with 
power at the right hand of His Father, it would be 
the strongest motive to encourage and quicken our 
obedience and fill us with hopes of being with Him, 



252 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

since He is gone up in triumph as our Head: it 
would make us liiglily bless God for the glory of 
Christ, since it is the day of our triumph, and the 
assurance of our liberty. 

It would alienate our affections from the world, 
and fix them upon heaven. The thoughtis of His 
glory would put our low and sordid souls to the 
blush, and shame our base and unworthy affections, 
so unsuitable to the glory of our Head. If we 
looked upon Christ in heaven, ' our conversation 
would be more there,' Phil. iii. 20, 21: our hearts 
would seek more ' the things which are above,' Col. 
iii. 1; we should loathe every thing, where Ave do 
not find Him; and think on that heaven, where only 
we can fully enjoy Him. It would make us have 
heavenly pantings after the glory of another world, 
and disjoin our affections from the mud and dirt of 
this. This would elevate our hearts from the cross 
to the throne, from the grave to His glory, from His 
windino^-shect to His robes. If we think on Him 
mounted to heaven, why should we have affections 
groveling upon the earth? It is not fit our hearts 
should be where Christ would not vouchsafe to 
reside Himself after His work was done. If He 
would have had our souls tied to the earth, He 
would have made earth His habitation; but going 
up to the higher world, He taught us that we should 
follow Him in heart, till He fetched our souls and 
bodies thither, to be with Him in person. 

It would quicken our desires to be with Christ. 
How did the apostle long to be a stranger to the 



STEniEX CIIAKXOCK. 253 

body, that he might be in the tirms of his triumph- 
ant Lord! Phil. i. 23. How did Jacob ardently 
desire to see Joseph, when he heard he was not 
only living, but in honor in Egypt! And should 
not we npon the meditation of this glory be in- 
flamed with a lono^ins: to behold it, since we have 
the prayer of Christ Himself to encourage our 
belief that it shall be so? What spouse would not 
desire to be with her husband in that glory she 
hears he is in? What loving member hath not an 
appetite to be joined to the head? 

It would encourage those at a distance from Him 
to come to Him, and believe in Him. What need 
we fear, since He is entered into glory, and set 
down upon a throne of grace? If our sins are 
great, shall we despair, if we do believe in Him, 
and endeavor to obey Him? This is not only to set 
light by His blood, but to think Him unworthy of the 
glory He is possessed of, in imagining any guilt so 
great that it cannot be expiated, or any stain so deep 
that it cannot be purified by Him. A nation should 
run to Him because He is glorified, Isaiah Iv. 5. 
The most condescending affections that ever He dis- 
covered, the most gracious invitations that ever He 
made, were at those times when He had a sense of 
this glory in a particular manner, to show His inten- 
tion in His possessing it. When He spake of all 
things delivered to Him by His Father, an invitation 
of men to come unto Him is the use He makes of it, 
Matt. xi. 27, 28. If this be the use He makes of 
His glory to invite us, it should be the use Ave 



254 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

should make of the thoughts of it, to accept His 
proffer. Well then, let us be frequent in the believ- 
ing reviews of it. When Elisha fixed his eyes upon 
his master Elijah ascending into heaven, he had a 
double portion of his spirit. If we Avould exercise 
our understandings by faith on the ascension and 
glory of the Kedeemer, and our hearts accompany 
Him in His sitting down upon the throne of His 
Father, we might receive from Him fuller showers, 
be revived with more fresh and vigorous communi- 
cations of the Spirit; for thus He bestows grace and 
gifts upon men. 

Christ our Advocate. 
^ "TF any man sin, we have an Advocate with the 
J_ Father, Jesus Christ the righteous!' 1 John ii. 1. 
Believers, while in the world, are liable to acts of 
sin. 'If any man;' he supposeth that grace may be 
so weak, temptation so strong, that a believer may 
fall into a grievous sin. While men are in the flesh, 
there are indwelling sins, and invading temptations; 
there is a body of death within them, and snares 
about them. The apostle excludes not himself, for, 
putting himself by the term ' we ' into the number 
of those that want the remed}^, he supposes himself 
liable to the disease : ' We have an Advocate with 
the Father.' 

Though believers do, through the strength of the 
flesh, subtlety of the tempter, power of a tempta- 
tion, and weakness of grace, fall into sin, yet they 
should not despair of succor and pardon. ' If any 



STEPHEN CHAENOCK. 255 

man sin, we have an Advocate.' Such a total 
despondency would utterly ruin them; despair 
would bind their sins upon them. Be not only 
cast down under the consideration of the curses and 
threatenings of the law, but be erected by the pro- 
mises of the GosDel, and the standino^ office of Christ 
in heaven. 

Faith in Christ must be exercised as often as we 
sin. ' If any man sin, we have an Advocate.' What 
is it to us that there is an Advocate, unless we will 
put our cause into His hand; though we have a 
foithful attorney in our worldly affairs, yet upon 
any emergency we must entertain him, let him 
know our cause, if we expect relief. Though Christ, 
being omniscient, knows and compassionates our 
case, yet He will be solicited; as, though God 
knows our wants, He will be supplicated to for the 
supplies of our necessities; though He understands 
our case, He would have us understand it too, that 
we may value His office. Faith ought therefore to 
be exercised, because, by reason of our daily sins, 
we stand in need of a daily intercession. ' If any 
man sin;' it implies that every man ought to make 
reflections on his conscience, lament his condition, 
turn- his eye to his great Advocate, acquaint Him 
with his state, and entertain Him afresh in his cause. 
Though He lives for ever to make intercession, it is 
only for those who come to God by Him, as their 
Agent and Solicitor; for those who come to the 
Judge, but first come to Him as their Attorney. 

The proper intention of this office of Christ, is 



256 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS, 

for sins after a state of faith. He was a Priest in 
His propitiation, to bring God and man together; 
He is a Priest in His intercession, to keep God and 
man together; His propitiation is the foundation of 
His intercession, but His intercession is an act dis- 
tinct from the other; that was done by His death, 
this is managed in His life; His death was for our 
reconciliation, but His life is for the perpetuating 
that reconciliation: Rom. v. 10. 'If any man sin, 
we have an Advocate.' If any man sin that hath 
entered into a state of communion with God, let him 
know that this office was erected in heaven to keep 
him rio:ht in the favor of the Judo-e of all the world. 
"We should quickly mar all, and be as miserable the 
next minute after regeneration and justification as 
before, if provision were not in this way made for 
us. In the first acts, faith eyes the propitiation of 
Christ, and pitches upon His death: Christ, as dying, 
is the great support of a soul nevfly come out of the 
gulf of misery, and terrors of conscience: in after 
acts, it eyes the life of Christ as well as the death, 
taking in both His propitiation and intercession 
together. 

How divine is the Gospel! 'Sin not,'-=— 'if any 
man sin.' It gives us comfort against the demerit 
of sin, without encouraging the acts of sin; it teaches 
us an exact conformity to God in holiness, and pro- 
vides, for our full security, in Christ a powerful 
Advocate. No religion is so pure for the honor of 
God, nor any so cordial for the refreshment of the 
creature. 



STErHEN CHARNOCK. 257 

Christ presenting the Memorials of His Death. 

IT is by the displaying the whole merit of His 
passion, that He doth solicit for us. Intercession 
is not properly a sarcedotal act without respect to 
the sacrifice. It was with the blood of the sacri- 
fice that the high priest was to enter into the holy 
of holies, and sprinkle it there. The same blood 
that had been shed without on the day of expiation, 
was to be carried within the veil. What was done 
typically, Christ doth really; first give Himself a 
sacrifice, and then present Himself as the sacrifice 
for us. The apostle shows us the manner of it, 
Heb. xii. 24; the blood of Christ is a speaking 
blood, as well as the blood of Abel. It speaks in 
the same manner as Abel's blood did, though not 
for the same end. As the blood of Abel, presenting 
itself before the eyes of God, was as powerful to 
draw down the vengeance of God, as if it had 
uttered a cry so loud as to reach to heaven; so the 
blood of Christ, being presented before the throne 
of God, powerfully excites the favor of God by the 
loudness of its cry. He speaks by His blood, and 
His blood speaks by its merit. The petitions of 
His lips had done us no good without the voice of 
His blood. He stands as a Lamb slain, when He 
presents the prayers of the saints. Rev. v. 6, 8; with 
His bleeding wounds open as so many mouths full 
of pleas for us, and every one of them is the memo- 
rial and mark of the things which He sufiercd, and 
for what end He suflered them; as the wounds of a 
soldier, received in the defence and for the honor 



258 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

of his country, displayed to persons sensible of 
them, are the loudest and best pleas for the grant 
of his request. If the party-colored rainbow being 
looked upon by God, reminds Him of His covenant 
not to destroy the world again by a deluge, Gen. ix. 
14-16, much more are the wounds which Christ 
bears both in His hands, feet, and side, remem- 
brancers to Him of the covenant of grace made 
with repenting and believing sinners. The look of 
God upon these wounds whereby so great an obla- 
tion is remembered, doth as efficaciously move Him 
to look kindly upon us, as the look upon the rain- 
bow disposeth Him to the continuance of the world. 
If our Saviour had not a mouth to speak. He hath 
blood to plead, and His blood cries louder in heaven 
for us, than His voice did in any of the prayers He 
uttered upon earth; for by this His performance of 
the articles on His part is manifested, and the per- 
formance of the promises on God's part solicited; 
when He sees what the Eedeemer hath done, He 
reflects upon what He Himself is to do; the blood 
of Christ speaks the tenor of the covena^nt of re- 
demption made with Christ on the behalf of sinners. 
It is a presenting our persons to God together 
with His blood in an affectionate manner. As the 
high priest, when he went into the holy of holies, 
was to bear the names of the children of Israel in 
the breast-plate of judgment upon his heart, Exod. 
xxviii. 29, to which the Church alludes in her desire 
that she might be ' set as a seal upon the heart of 
her Beloved,' Cant. viii. 6; and perhaps there may 



STE1»HEN CIIARNOCK. 259 

be also an allusion in Rev. iii. 5, confessing the 
names of the victorious sufferers before His Father, 
bearing their names visibly before Him. The per- 
sons of believers are His jewels locked up in the 
cabinet of His own breast, and showed to His Fa- 
ther in the exercise of His priestly office. 



rp] 



Perpetuity of Christ's Intercession. 
^HE first evidence is in the text: 'We have an 
JL Advocate.' We have, at this present moment; 
we have an Advocate actually remembering us in 
His thoughts, and presenting us to His Father; we 
in this age, we in all ages, till the dissolution of the 
world; without any faintness in the degrees of His 
intercession, without any interruption in time; He 
never ceases the exercise of this office, so far as it is 
agreeable to that high and elevated state wherein He 
is. As there are continual sins of believers in all 
ages of the world, so there are constant pleas of the 
Advocate. 

Christ is an Intercessor for us in the w^hole course 
of our pilgrimage, all the time that we have any 
need of Him; His voice is the same still: 'I will 
that they behold my glory which Thou hast given 
me,' till they are w^afted from hence to a full vision 
of it. This is the true end of His heavenly life, and 
His living for ever there: ' Seeing He ever liveth to 
make intercession for them,' Heb. vi. 25; He lives 
solely to this purpose, to discharge this part of His 
driesthood for us. His advocacy is like His life, 
without end: as He died once, to merit our rcdemp- 



260 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

tion, so He lives always, to make application of re- 
demption. He would not answer the end of His 
life, if He did not exercise the office of His priest- 
hood. It would not be a love like that of a God, 
if He did not bear His people continually upon His 
heart. He was the Author of our faith, by endur- 
ing the cross; and the Finisher of our faith, by 
' sitting down at the right hand of God,' Heb. xii. 2. 
He will be exercised in it as long as there is any 
faith to be finished and completed in the world. 
His oblation was a transient act, but His appear- 
ance in heaven for us is a permanent act and con- 
tinues for ever. His mediatorial glory is not con- 
summate, though His personal be. He hath yet a 
mystical self to be perfected, a fullness to be 
enriched with: He cannot be intent upon this with- 
out minding the concerns of, and putting up pleas 
for His people; for they are one with Him, 'the 
fullness of Him that filleth all in all,' Eph. i. 23. 
There can be no cessation of His work, till His ene- 
mies be conquered, and His whole mystical body 
wrapt up in glory. -. - 

He is always in the presence of His Father in the 
dignity of His Person, and fullness of His merit, 
continually spreading every part of His meritorious 
sacrifice in the view of God. The high priest en- 
tered into the holy of holies but once a year, but 
this High Priest sits forever in the court in a per- 
petual exercise of His function, both as a priest and 
a sacrifice. And since His own sacrifice for sins 
ofiered on earth was sufficient. He hath nothing to 



STEPHEN CHARNOCK. 261 

do perpetually in heaven, but to sprinkle the blood 
of that sacrifice upon the mercy-seat. He is never 
out of the presence of God, and the infiniteness of 
His compassions may hinder us from imagining a 
silence in Him, when any accusations are brought in 
against us. The accusations might succeed well, 
were He out of the way; but being always present. 
He is always active in His solicitations; no clamor 
can come against us, but He hears it, as being on 
the right hand of His Father, and appears as our 
Attorney there in the presence of God, to answer it, 
as the high-priest appeared in the holy of holies for 
all the people. 

Efficacy of Cheist's Inteecession. 

HE is an Advocate to the Father; not only to 
Him at a distance, but with Him: the con- 
stant presence of a favorite with a king, of a 
princely son with a royal father, is a means to make 
his intercessions of force with him: He is an Advo- 
cate, and He is constantly with the Father in that 
capacity. A letter from a friend is not so successful 
as a personal appearance, for gaining a suit. If His 
death were meritorious. His prayer must be so too, 
as being put up in the virtue of His meritorious 
blood; and though Ave are reconciled by His death, 
yet we are saved by His life, with a 'much more,' 
Rom. V. 10; not formally in regard of merit, for 
that was the effect of His death, but in regard of 
application of that merit, the end for which He 
lives, to render it efficacious to us, as it had been 



2G2 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

ill His passion valuable for us. If He separated 
Himself to death to procure it, He will employ the 
authority and dignity of His life to finish and apply 
it. As none offered so noble a sacrifice, so none 
lives a more powerful life. As when He was on 
earth, never man spake as He spake; so now He is 
in heaven, never did man or angel plead as He 
pleads. ' If whatsoever we ask in His name,' we 
shall receive, John xvi. 23, surely whatsoever lie 
asks in His own name, will not be refused. 

Love to Christ as our Advocate. 

LET our afiections be in heaven with our Advo- 
cate. Though the people of Israel were barred 
from entering into the holy of holies with the high 
priest, when he went to sprinkle the blood on the 
mercy-seat, yet they attended him with their hearts, 
continued their wishes for his success, and expected 
his return with the notice of his acceptation. Since 
Christ is entered into the holy place, and acts our 
business in the midst of His glory, we should raise 
our hearts to Him where He is, and link our spirits 
with Him; and rejoice in the assured success of His 
negotiation. Though a man be not personally pres- *- 
ent with his advocate in the court, yet his heart and 
soul is with him; the heart is where the chief busi- 
ness is. Let us not keep our hearts from Him who 
employs Himself in so great a concern for us. 

Glorify and love this Advocate. If Christ pre- 
sents our persons and prayers in heaven, it is reason 
we should live to His glory upon earth. If He car- 



STEPHEN CIIARXOCK. 203 

ries our names on His breast near His heart, as a 
signal of His affection to us, we should carry His 
name upon our hearts in a way of ingenuous return. 
We should empty ourselves of all unworthy affec- 
tions, be inflamed with an ardent love to Him, and 
behave ourselves towards Him as the most amiable 
object. This is but due to Him as He is our Advo- 
cate. 

The Glorified Eedeemer. 

IF the righteous are to shine ' as the sun in the 
kingdom of their Father,' Matt. xiii. 43, the 
Head of the righteous shines with a splendor above 
that of the sun, for He hath a glory upon His body, 
not only from the glory of His soul, as the saints 
shall have, but from the glory of His Divinity, in 
conjunction with it. The glory of His Divinity 
redounds upon His humanity, like a beam of the 
sun that conveys a dazzling brightness to a piece of 
crystal. There was an interruption of this glory 
while He was in this w^orld. though the human nature 
then was united with the divine; but this interrup- 
tion Avas necessary for those acts which He was to 
perform in our stead, for the satisfaction of God, and 
the discharge of His office. Had the glory of the 
divinity broke out upon His body. He had not been 
capable of suffering. What mortal could have stood 
before Him, much less laid hands on Him? AYhat 
mortal durst have accounted Him a blasphemer, an 
imposter, and have exercised any violence against 
Him, had His divinity so ftishioncd His humanity? 



264 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

But now it is, as it was in His transfiguration, Matt 
xvii. 2 ; the glory He had then wrought an alteration 
not onl}^ in His body, but in His garments, which 
could not be of the most splendid, as not suiting 
His present state of humiliation, yet ' they became 
shining, exceeding white as snow, so as no fuller 
on earth can white them,' Mark ix. 3; much more 
must that firm and perpetual glory in heaven have 
the same influence upon His refined body, that hath 
cast off those corruptible qualities which hung upon 
it on earth, and doth more excel in glory that body 
He had on earth, than the glory of the sun surpass- 
eth that of a glow-worm. It is such a glory as 
would dazzle mortals to behold it; for if His glory 
upon Mount Tabor cast Peter into an ecstacy, what 
effect would His glory upon His throne work upon 
a mortal nature? Whence it follows, that there 
must be a mighty change of the bodies of the glo- 
rified saints, to capacitate them for the beholding 
this glory of Christ, the intent views whereof are 
part of their happiness, John xvii. 24. 

The Substance of the Gospel. 

THE doctrine of the death of Christ is the sub- 
stance of the Gospel; though there be many 
doctrines in it beside that, there is no comfort from 
any of them, without the consideration of the Cross 
of Christ; for though God be merciful in His own 
nature, yet since sin hath made a separation between 
God and His creature, it is impossible to renew any 
communion with Him without a propitiation for the 



STEPHEN CHARXOCK.. 2G5 

offeuce. We see then Christ is the only meritorious 
cause of our justification; nothing that we can clo 
can justify us before God; we must be wholl}^ off from 
ourselves and our own righteousness, as to any de- 
pendence on it, and act faith in the death of the Son 
of God, if we would be secure here in our consciences, 
or happy hereafter. 

Love of God. 

THIS love is perpetual. He was in Christ recon- 
ciling the world; He will to the end of the 
world beseech men to be reconciled to Him. Love 
was the motive, the glory of His grace was the end; 
Avhat was so from eternity, will be so to eternity. 
His love is as strong as it was, for infinite receives 
no diminution; His glory is as dear as it was, for to 
deny His glory is to deny himself. How great will 
be the joy of those that accept it! how dismal the 
torment and sorrow of those that refuse it! 

Our Access to God. 

SINCE God was in Christ reconciling the world, 
we go to Him upon the account of an immutable 
righteousness, a righteousness He settled as an act 
of grace to us, and security to His own glory: whereas 
Adam could approach to Him but upon the account 
of a mutable righteousness, Avhich might be as the 
grass standing this day, and withered to-morrow. 
Our access to God is with a joy in the ' hope of the 
glory of God,' Eom. v. 2. And when we take hold 
of His covenant, this covenant of peace, we have His 

1^ 



266 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

word that He will make us 'joyful in the house of 
prayer/ Isa. Ivi. 6, 7; actively joyful, full of de- 
light in His service, solacing ourselves in a sweet 
consideration of the infinite s'race of a reconcilins* 
God, whereby a transcendent delight is raised in the 
soul, which is a direct delight in God as the object 
of faith, discovered in Christ, and apprehended by 
spiritual reason and sense: passively joyful, by re- 
ceivino^ in His service more of the refreshinc: waters 
of life, and being fed with the 'hidden manna,' 
which God communicates in and by Christ to His 
friends. And beside, though our services are imper- 
fect, God expects not a perfect obedience from us, 
but from His Son Christ; it is a full assurance of 
faith He expects from us, and a true heart, not a per- 
fect obedience; His promise gives us joy, though the 
sense of our imperfections creates a sorrow. Though 
we cannot delight in ourselves, we may in God, in 
His promise, in His gracious condescension, in the 
compensation He hath from His Son for us, in His 
acceptation of it, and application of it to our souls. 

The Covenant of Eedemption. 

FLY to this covenant of redemption, as well as to 
the covenant of grace, since that is the founda- 
tion of this. All other considerations of Christ's 
death, merit, and every thing stored up in Christ, 
can give us little hope, unless we consider this cove- 
nant, which supports all the other stones of the 
building. Fly to it when your souls are in heavi- 
ness; though there may be sometimes clouds upon 



STEPHEN CHARNOCK. 267 

the face of God, yet consider those compassions in 
His heart when He struck this covenant with Christ: 
He covenanted to bruise His own Son by His wrath, 
while He promised to support Him by His strength, 
and the sounding of His bowels always kept pace 
with the blows of His hand. The consideration of 
this will encourage our faintness, silence our fears, 
nonplus our scruples, and settle our staggering faith. 
Is a believer in a storm; here is an anchor to hold 
him: is he sinkino^? here is a bouo-h to catch at: is 
he pursued by spiritual enemies? here is a refuge to 
fly to. Sin cannot so much oblige God's justice to 
punish as His oath to Christ obligeth Him to save a 
repenting and believing sinner. These two cove- 
nants, that of redemption and the other of grace, are 
as a Hur and Aaron to hold up the hands of a feeble 
faith. His love cannot die as long as His faithful- 
ness remains, nor His peace with the soul perish as 
long as the covenant Avith His Son endures. This 
covenant of redemption is to be pleaded by us, as 
well as the merit of Christ's death, because the merit 
of His death is founded upon this compact. 

Chpjst Filled with the Spieit. 

HE is filled with His Spirit by the Father, i. e. 
with all the gifts and graces of the Spirit. 
That precious ointment composed of so many sweet 
and excellent ingredients, wherewith the Levitical 
high priest was anointed, Exod. xxx. was a type 
of those excellent graces of the great High Priest, 
whereby He was qualified for the exercise of His 



268 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

offices. As the Spirit espoused the human nature to 
the divine, so He espoused all His gifts and graces 
to the human. As the body was conceived by the 
power of the Holy Ghost, so His soul was beautified 
and adorned by the grace of the Holy Ghost, where- 
by He became ' fairer than the clnldren of men, and 
grace was poured into His lips.^ Psalm xlv. 2. 
' His going forth is prepared as the morning,' Hos. 
vi. 3, furnished with all things necessary to work 
out redemption and free the world from the wrath 
of God, as the sun is with light to deliver the world 
from the darkness of the night. 

'He had the Spirit not by measure,' John iii-t 34, 
not as light in a room, but as light in the sun: not 
as water hi a vessel where the bounds are visible, 
but like water in the ocean, where the depths and 
limits are unknown. In Him there was nothins^but 
Spirit and fullness, without limits for quantity; with- 
out imperfection for quality; all the treasures; the 
fountain, not the rivers. There are varieties of shifts 
as there are of stars, and the qualities of them in 
heaven; and of flowers, and the beauties of them 
upon earth; what were various in others were entire 
in Him. 

Infinite Compassion of God. 

O MARVELOUS grace! that Christ should be 
endued with the richest grace by His Father, 
to relieve our poverty; with the highest might to 
help our weakness; with a powerful assistance to 
conquer our enemies; with an overflowing fullness 



STEPHEN CHARNOCK. 269 

to fill up our emptiness: and abundant grace poured 
into His lips to comfort our dejectedness. God 
cannot show greater love than to send His Son to 
make the peace and unlock His cabinet wherewith 
to furnish Him. An old frame of thankfulness will 
not fit an evangelical discovery of love. Isa. xlii. 
9, 10. When God tells them of ' His servant in 
whom His soul delights/ and upon w^hom He had 
put His Spirit for the redemption of man, then He 
makes this use of exhortation of it, ' Sing unto the 
Lord a new song.' New love calls for new praise. 
God might have destroyed us with less cost than He 
hath reconciled us; for our destruction there was no 
need of His counsel nor of fitting out His Son, nor 
opening His treasures; a word would have done it, 
whereas our reconciliation stood Him in much charofe. 
It was performed at the expense of His grace and 
Spirit, to furnish His eternal Son to be a sacrifice for 
our atonement. An inexpressible wonder that the 
Father should prepare His Son a mortal body that 
our souls might be prepared for an incorruptible 
glory. 

The Saviour's Agony. 

HOW was His soul begirt with the wrath of God 
before His agony in the garden! What an 
excess of sorrow do those words signify, ' sore 
amazed, sorrowful, very heavy;' Matt. xxvi. 37, 
Mark xiv. 33; an inward quaking, an inexpressible 
amazement! What a deluge fell from heaven upon 
our Ark, of which that of Noah was a type! How 



AlO DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

was His soul ground to poAvder in His agony! How 
did His soul boil under the fire of wrath, and His 
blood leak through every pore of the vessel by the 
extremity of the flame! Must it not be more than a 
finite breath that thus melted His soul in the garden? 
Must it not be a stronger than a finite stroke that 
wrung out those bitter cries? Was there any visible 
person to afiiict Him? Yet His agonies there are 
thouo-ht to have more of hell-fire in them than His 
sufierings on the cross; clots of blood dropped from 
Him when there was no visible hand to strike Him: 
inconceivable must be the afflictions of His soul that 
could make such dismal commotions in His body, 
and put the whole instrument out of tune; that should 
make a dissolution of the parts, and make His heart 
like melted wax 'in the midst of His bowels.' 
Psalm xxii. 14. His spotless conscience could not 
flash such lightnings, as to melt the sword when 
nothins: touched the scabbard; His Father was then 
charging Him with our sins, actuating His knowledge 
and sense of them. He had all His lifetime a knowl- 
edge of the ingratitude and rebellion of-, sin; He 
knew how it had ofiended and injured God; how it 
had deformed and ruined the creature: now was His 
knowledge actuated, and the charging upon Him the 
punishment of them made His knowledge sensible 
and experimental. This cup discovers more bitter 
ingredients than any creature could wring out into it. 



stepiiex charnock. 271 

Christ's Love as Manifested in His Death. 

(Christ was now upon the liigliest manifestation 
J of His compassions to mankind. His death 
was the emphasis of His love; His love was stronger 
and purer than the love of any creature, not only in 
regard of the excellency of His person, but the great- 
ness of His sufferings. Had He endured only a 
death of the body, and not such a death that could 
have been inflicted only by an infinite hand, His love 
had lost much of its lustre. His love is principally 
laid upon the score of His death: 'Who loved me 
and gave Himself for me.' Gal. ii. 20. 

God Spared not His Son. 

HOW great is this love that valued our salvation 
above the life of an only Son^ and shed a 
blood more valuable than the whole creation to pre- 
serve ours, which could not be equivalent to the 
j)rice of it; and put Him into the posture of an ene- 
my to His Son to make us His friends! If the 
thunders of the law had been shot upon us, what 
strength had we to bear them? What merit to re- 
move them? How great is the love of the Eedeem- 
er, to be willing not to be spared for a time, rather 
than millions of men and women should ftiil of beinc: 
spared forever! 'It w^as for our transgressions He 
was wounded, for our iniquities He was bruised, and 
the chastisement of our peace was upon Him.' Isa. 
liii. 5. In every wound God gave Him He minded 
the full punishment of our sin, in the person of our 
Saviour, that those whom He represented might go 



272 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

free. He spared Him not, abated not a mite of what 
justice might demand, that so His people might 
have a full redemption. ' He spared not His own 
Son, but delivered Him up for us all.' Rom. vii. 
32. He did not spare Him in regard of the strength 
of justice, wherewith He punished Him. What 
could more enhance the love of God than the terrors 
inflicted on Christ? And what could more enhance 
the love of Christ than that He endured not only a 
bodily death, but a wrathful deatli in His soul for 
us? 

Let, then, this love engage every man to come to 
God throuo'h Christ. How should it ravish us into 
an humble compliance with Him and subjection to 
Him! If He hath bruised Him for us. He will not 
bruise us if we come to Him. The blood shed by 
the order of God is able to expiate a world of sins. 
God hath spent His wrath upon Him, and hath none 
for those that accept of Him. God hath discovered 
a propensity to be reconciled, though we lie open 
to the stroke of His justice and have no strength to 
withstand Him; a higher evidence He caimot give. 

Our Acceptance in Christ. 

THE acceptation of our persons and services re- 
dounds to us from the Father's acceptance of 
Christ. His love to Christ as Mediator, is the ground 
of our acceptation: *To the praise of the glory of 
His grace, wherein He hath made us accepted in the 
beloved.' Eph. i. 6. He chose Him first as the 
head, and His members in Him; He accepts Him as 



STEPHEN ClIARNOCK. 273 

the first beloved, and believers in Him. Had not 
Christ been accepted first, none could have pretended 
a holiness worthy of the notice of God. The grace 
of God is the cause, His love to Christ the o^round, 
acceptation of us in Him the efiect of both. In our- 
selves, we are the o]>jccts of His anger; in Christ, the 
marks of His choice affection. 

His death is so valuable as to procure the casting 
our sins into the depths of the sea, and the advancing 
our persons to the heights of glory, to stand before 
God in His kingdom. 

Since this acceptance how doth justice itself smile! 
The rod of God's fury falls out of His hand upon 
the sweetness of His Son's offering, and gives way 
to a sceptre of grace: nothing was omitted which 
was necessary for the pleasure of God's piercing eye. 
This may well calm the fears in our hearts, because 
It smooths the frowns in God's face. If no char<re 
can be brought against Christ, since the acknowledg- 
ment of the sufficiency of His offering, no charge can 
be brought against believers. For whom was it per- 
formed but for them? For whom was it accepted 
but for them? The acceptation must be for the 
same ends for which His sufferiuo's were endured: 
shall not then the influence of it upon them, answer 
the intention of it for them? If it should not, the 
first acceptation would be in vain: Christ must then 
return to offer another sacrifice, which shall never be. 
In the acceptation of Christ for you. He hath accept- 
ed you in Him. He stood in no need of it, but in 

relation to you; He was the eternal Son of God, 

12* 



274 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

acceptable to the Fatliel*; but by this He is estab- 
lished an eternal Saviour. An obedient faith on our 
part, will entitle us to salvation on His part: 'And 
being made perfect, He became the Author of eternal 
salvation unto all them that obey Him.' Heb. v. 9. 
Since God hath accepted Him for you, God will ap- 
pear full of omniscience to understand your wants, 
full of compassion to pity you, full of power to re- 
lieve you, full of wisdom to guide you, full of grace 
to pardon you, full of glory to bless you forever. 
Every believer will be accepted by God, because by 
his faith he owns that which gives God a rest, and 
as the grace of God assists him, so he contributes to 
God's contentment. Oh then remember your offences 
against God, to be humbled; and God's acceptation 
of the blessed offering to be comforted. The odor 
of this sacrifice was so agreeable to God, that not 
content to discharge us from the condemnation we 
had merited. He would also that we should partake 
of the life and enjoy the kingdom of His Son, judg- 
ing it not equity to make any separation between the 
Head and the members, the Redeemer and the re- 
deemed; and a disparagement to the greatness of 
the offer and offering, to shut heaven against them; 
hereby is not only condemnation removed, but eter- 
nal glory assured. It is not only a 'not perishing' 
but an 'eternal life' upon faith. John iii. 16. 



stephen charnock. 275 

The Gospel. 

THE gospel is the dove bringing an olive-branch 
of peace, j)ut into its mouth by God; it brings 
us news of the allay of His Avrath, which was due to 
our sins, and that His sword is blunted by Himself 
in the bowels of His Son, that it might not be sheath- 
ed in ours. It shows us a shelter for storms, a light 
in God's countenance even in the shadow of dark- 
ness. Here God draws near to man, that man may 
have access to Him. He makes His Son like to man, 
that man might be rendered capable of approaching 
to God. Tavo natures are joined in one person, that 
there may be an amiable conjunction of two different 
parties; He exposeth His beloved Son to the strokes 
of His justice for a time, that He might reassume His 
life with honor for ever. 

God in the gospel presents us with a Mediator of 
His own choosing, of His own fitting, of His own 
ordering; One that He will not refuse, whose inter- 
cessions He is pleased with: tliat He might keep ofi* 
the darts of divine justice from us, that we might 
draw near through the veil of His flesh, Heb. x. 20, 
that we may look upon God in Christ, without being 
dazzled by His glory or scorched by His wrath. 
Now, may devouring fire and combustible stubble 
meet together; fire without scorching, stubl)le with- 
out consuming. Here miser}^ may approach to glory, 
because glory condescends to misery. Hereby guilt 
is removed, which makes us incapable of access to 
God; and wrath is removed, which hinders our 
actual access. Here may all that Avill believe in God 



276 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

tlirougli Christ and conform to His laws, walk in the 
midst of the furnace of God's justice without having 
a hair of their heads touched, without feeling the 
smart of that which will be quick in consuming un- 
regenerate men. Since nothing else discovers any 
peace with God, no doctrine else can make any peace 
in the conscience. It is the old way gives rest to the 
soul, Jer. vi. 16, the way as old as the first promise 
of a Reconciler. All other ways, if rightly consid- 
ered, rather promote than allay suspicions of God. 
Conscience hath no ground to make any comfortable 
reflection without some plain declaration of God's 
reconcilableness and reconciliation. Conscience can 
show us our guilt, but nothing in the world evi- 
denceth the way of our peace but the gospel; no 
other religion discovers God in treaty about recon- 
ciliation. 

COMFOET AGAINST DeATH. 

IF God be the author of reconciliation by Christ, 
then death, which was the fruit of that sin which 
is now removed, can be no dreadful apparition. God 
was in Christ and is still, conquering His enemies, 
and this is one enemy which must fall under His 
sword and be made His footstool. As God w^as in 
Christ reconciling you. He is in death calling for you 
to enjoy the full-blown felicities of that peace. It is 
no more than a departure in peace, w hen God is a 
God of peace: old Simeon thought so, Luke ii. 29. 
He speaks, says Gurnal, like a merchant that had 
got all His goods on shipboard, and noAV desires the 



stj-:piien ciiahnock. 277 

master of the ship to hoist sail and begone homeward. 
Death was before a servant of divine justice; since 
justice is satisfied, it is the messenger of divine 
mercy. It was a jailer to inclose us in the prison 
of the grave; it is now a conductor to the glories of 
heaven. The reconciled soul is beyond the fears of 
it. It hath lost its sting, which was God's justice; 
Christ satisfying the one hath disarmed the other of 
what is hurtful. 



God to be Peaised in Eecoxciliation. 

SINCE God sends out such a blessing to us, we 
should send out loud prayers to Him. Heaven 
smiles upon earth, and earth should bless heaven. 
Glorify God as the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; 
though we have all immediately from^ Christ, yet 
Christ hath all from the Father. He is the propitia- 
tion for our sins, but He wxis appointed by the Father. 
He came to redeem, but He was sent by God upon 
that errand. He paid our debts as a surety, but He 
was accepted by God. He was a Mediator to bring 
us to God, but He was commissioned by God to that 
end. 

Such free and fidl compassion deserves our thank- 
fulness, though we could not merit His grace. It is 
not a contracted, half-made, or oppressive peace; it 
is an extensive, tender, and abundant ' peace, like a 
river and a flowing stream;' a peace whereby we are 
borne in His bosom. Isa. Ixvi. 12. How should 
we adore the depth of that wisdom which found a 



278 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

refuge for us when heaven and earth were at war 
with us! 

God is only praised in and through Christ; God 
and Christ are joined together in the saints' praise: 
' Blessing, honor, glory and power be unto Him that 
sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb for ever and 
ever;' Rev. v. 13; and so they should in ours. How 
beautiful will this whole work appear, when the 
whole methods of it come to be read in heaven in 
the original copy! when they shall be seen in the 
face, in the bosom of God in fair and plainer charac- 
ters! To conclude, if all the sparks that ever leaped 
out of any fire since the creation, and all the drops 
of rain that have fallen upon the world were so 
many angelical tongues, their praise would come 
short of the excess of this love. Let the praise of 
God for this be "not the business of a day, but the 
work of our lives, since eternity is too short to ad- 
mire it. 




JOHI^ BUNYAN. 

1628-1G88. 
On Prayer. 

RAYER is a sincere, sensible, and an 
AFFECTIONATE pouring out of the soul 
to God. O the heat, strength, life, vigor, 
and affection, that is in right prayer! 'As 
the hart panteth after the water-brooks, so 
panteth my soul after Thee, O God,' Psalm xlii. 1. 
'I have'longed after Thy precepts,' Psalm cxix. 40. 
'I have longed for Thy salvation,' Psalm xvii. 4. 
' My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth, for the courts 
of the Lord ; my heart and my flesh crieth out 
for the living God,' Psalm Ixxxiv. 2. 'My soul 
breaketh for the longing that it hath unto Thy 
judgments at all times,' Psalm cxix. 20. Mark 
ye here, ' My soul longeth,' it longeth, it long- 
eth, <fec. O what affection is here discovered in 
prayer! The like you have in Daniel. 'O Lord, 
hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord, hearken and do; 
defer not, for Thine own sake, O my God,' Daniel 
ix. 19. Every syllable carrieth a mighty vehemen- 
cy in it. This is called the fervent, or the work- 
ing prayer, by James. And so again, 'And being 
in an agony. He prayed more earnestly ;' Luke 



280. DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

xxii. 44; or had His aflections more and more 
drawn after God for His helping hand. O how 
wide are the most of men with their prayers from 
this prayer, that is, prayer in God's account! Alas! 
the greatest part of men make no conscience at all 
of the duty; and as for them that do, it is to be 
feared that many of them are very great strangers 
to a sincere, sensible, and aifectionate pouring out 
their hearts or souls to God; but even content them- 
selves with a little lip-labor and bodily exercise, 
mumbling over a few imaginary prayers. When 
the affections are indeed engaged in prayer, then, 
then the whole man is engaged, and that in such 
sort, that the soul will spend itself to nothing, as it 
were, rather than it will go without that good de- 
sired, even communion and solace with Christ. And 
hence it is that the saints have spent their strengths, 
and lost their lives, rather than go without the bless- 
ing, Psalm Ixix. 3; xxxviii. 9, 10; Gen. xxxii. 24, 26. 

Grace of Christ. 

THOU Son of the Blessed, what grace was mani- 
fest in Thy condescension! Grace brought Thee 
down from heaven, grace stripped Thee of Thy glory, 
grace made Thee poor and despicable, grace made 
Thee bear such burdens of sin, such burdens of sor- 
row, such burdens of God's curse as are unspeakable. 
O Son of God! grace was in all Thy tears, grace 
came bubbling out of Thy side with Thy blood, 
grace came forth with every word of Thy sweet 
mouth, Psalm xlv. 2; Luke iv. 22. Grace came out 



JOHN BUNYAN. 281 

where the whip smote Thee, where the thorns 
pricked Thee, where the nails and spear pierced 
Thee. O blessed Son of God! Here is grace in- 
deed! Unsearchable riches of o-race! Unthono-ht- 
of riches of grace! Grace to make angels wonder, 
grace to make sinners happy, grace to astonish dev- 
ils. And what Avill become of them that trample 
mider foot this Son of God? 

Christ made Sin for us. 

IS this indeed the truth of God, that Christ was 
made to be sin for me? was made the curse of 
God for me? Hath He indeed borne all ni}^ sins, 
and spilt His blood for my redemption! O blessed 
tidings! O welcome grace! 'Bless the Lord, O my 
soul, and all that is within me, bless His holy name.' 
Now is peace come; now the face of heaven is al- 
tered; 'Behold, all things are become new.' Now 
the sinner can abide God's presence, yea, sees unut- 
terable glory and beauty in Him. 

' God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto 
Himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them.' 
O what work will such a word make upon a wounded 
conscience, especially when the next words follow: 
' For He hath made Him to be sin for us, who knew 
no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of 
God in Him!' 



232 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

CoMmG TO God by Christ. 

WHAT a joy will it be to the truly godly to 
think, now that they are come to God by 
Christ! It was their mercy to begin to come, it was 
their happiness that they continued comiiig; but it 
is their glory that they are come, that they are come 
to God by Christ. To God! why, He is all! all that 
is good, essentially good, and eternally good. To 
God! the infinite ocean of good. To God, in 
friendly- wise, by the means of reconciliation; for the 
other now will be come to Him to receive His anger, 
because they come not to Him by Jesus Christ. 
Oh! that I could imagine; oh! that I could think, 
that I might write more eflfectually to Thee of the 
happy estate of them that come to God by Christ. 

Christ's Intercession. 

HIS intercession is for those for wJiom He died 
with fall intention to save them; wherefore 
it must be grounded upon the validity of His suffer- 
ings. And, indeed. His intercession is nothing else, 
that I know of, but a presenting of what He did in 
the world for us unto God, and pressing the value 
of it for our salvation. The blood of sprinkling is 
that which speaketh meritoriously, Heb. xii. 24; it 
is by the value of that that God measureth out and 
giveth unto us grace and life eternal; wherefore 
Christ's intercessions also must be ordered and ixov- 
erned by merit: ' By His own blood He entered into 
the hoi}'' place, having (l)efore by it) obtained eter- 
nal redemption for us,' for our souls. Heb. ix. 12. 



JOHN BUNYAN. 233 

Now, if by blood He entered in thitlicr, by blood 
He must also make intercession there. His blood 
made way for His entrance thither, His blood must 
make way for our entrance thither. Though here, 
again, we must beware; for His blood did make 
way for Him as Priest to intercede; His blood makes 
way for us, as for those redeemed by it, that we 
might be saved. This, then, shows sufficiently the 
worth of the blood of Christ, even His ever living 
to make intercession for us; for the merit of His 
blood lasts all the while that He doth, and for all 
them for whom He ever liveth to make intercession. 
Oh, precious blood! oh, lasting merit! 

Giving Glory to Christ. 

CHRIST ought to hear and icear the glory of our 
salvation forever. He has done it, He has 
Avrought it out. ' Give unto the Lord, O ye kind- 
reds of the people, give unto the Lord glory and 
strength.' Do not sacrifice to your own inventions, 
do not give glory to the work of your own hands. 
Your reformations, your works, your good deeds, 
and all the glory of your doing, cast them at the 
feet of this High Priest, and confess that glory be- 
longs unto Him: 'Worthy is the Lamb that was 
slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and 
strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing, Rev. 
V. 12. ' And they shall hang upon Him all the 
glory of His Father's house, the oiFspring and the 
issue, all vessels of small quantity, from the vessels 
of cups, even to all the vessels of flagons,' Isaiah 



284 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

xxii. 24. Oh! the work of our redemption by 
Christ is such as wanteth not provocation to us to 
bless, and praise, and glorify Jesus Christ. Saints, 
set to the work and glorify Him in your body and 
in your souls; Him who has bought us with a 
price; and glorify God and the Father by Him, 
1 Cor. vi. 20. 

Church Fellowship. 

THE doctrine of the Gospel is like the dew and 
the small rain that distilleth upon the tender 
grass, wherewith it doth flourish, and is kept green, 
Dent, xxxii. 2. Christians are like the several flow- 
ers in a garden, that have upon each of them the 
dew of heaven, which being shaken wdth the wind, 
they let fall their dew at each other's roots, whereby 
they are jointly nourished, and become nourishers 
of one another. For Christians to commune sav- 
ourly of God's matters one w^ith another, it is as if 
they opened to each other's nostrils boxes of per- 
fume.* Saith Paul to the church at Rome, ' I long 
to see you, that I may impart unto you some spirit- 
ual gift, to the end ye may be established; that is, 
that I may be comforted together with you, by the 
mutual faith both of you and me,' Rom. i, 11, 12. 
Christians should be often affirmins^ the doctrine of 
grace, and justification by it, one to another. 

* This is a most beautiful passage. — Offor. 



o 



john bunyan. 285 

Grace. 

GRA.CE, O happy Church of God! all things 
that happen to thee are, for Christ's sake, turned 
into grace. They talk of the philosopher's stone, 
and how, if one had it, it would turn all things into 
o'old. O! but can it turn all thino^s into ofrace? 
can it make all things work together for good? No, 
no, this quality, virtue, excellency, what shall I call 
it, nothing has in it, but the grace that reigns on the 
throne of grace, the river that proceeds from the 
throne of God. This, this turns majesty, authority, 
the highest authority, glory, wisdom, faithfulness, 
justice, and all into grace. Here is a throne! God 
let us see it. John had the honor to see it, and to 
see the streams proceeding from it. O sweet sight! 
O heart-ravishing sight! 'He shoAved me a pure 
river of water of life proceeding out of the throne 
of God.' 

The Pilgrims Entering the Celestial City. 

NOW, when they were come up to the gate, 
there was written over it in letters of ofold, 
' Blessed are they that do His commandments, that 
they may have right to the tree of life, and may 
enter in through the gates into the city.' Kev. xxii. 
14. 

Then I saw in my dream, that the Shining Men 
bid them call at the gate; the which, when they 
did, some looked from above over the gate, to wit, 
Enoch, Moses, and Elijah, &c., to whom it was said. 
These pilgrims are come from the City of Dcstruc- 



286 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

tioii, for the love that they bear to the King of this 
place; and then the pilgrims gave in unto them each 
man his certificate, which they had received in the 
beginning; those, therefore, were carried in to the 
King, who, when He had read them, said. Where are 
the men? To whom it was answered, They are 
standing without the gate. The King then com- 
manded to open the gate, ' That the righteous na- 
tion,' said He, ' which keepeth the truth, may enter 
in,' Is. xxvi. 2. 

Now I saw in my dream that these two men went 
in at the gate; and lo, as they entered, they were 
transfigured, and they had raiment put on that 
shone like gold. There were also that met them 
with harps and crowns, and gave them to them — 
the harps to praise withal, and the crowns in token 
of honor. Then I heard in my dream that all the 
bells in the city rang again for joy, and that it was 
said unto them, ' Exter ye into the joy of your 
Lord.' I also heard the men themselves, that they 
sang with a loud voice, sa^dng, ' Blessing, and 

HONOR, AND GLORY, AND POWER, BE UNTO HiM THAT 
SITTETH upon the THRONE AND UNTO THE LaIHB, FOR 
EVER AND EVER,' EcV. V. 13. 

Now just as the gates were opened to let in the 
men, I looked in after them, and, behold, the City 
shone like the sun; the streets also were paved with 
gold, and in them walked many men, with crowns 
on their heads, palms in their hands, and golden 
harps to sing praises withal. 

There were also of them that had wings, and they 



JOHN BUNYAN. 287 

answered one another without intermission, saying, 
' Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord,' Rev. iv. 8. And 
after that, they shut up the gates; which, when I 
had seen, I Avished myself among them.* 

Last Words of Mr. Stand-fast. 

WHEN Mr. Stand-fast had thus set things in 
order, and the time being come for him to 
haste him away, he also went down to the river. 
Now there was a great calm at that time in tlie river; 
wherefore Mr. Stand-fast, when he was about half- 
w^ay in, stood a while and talked to his companions 
that had waited upon him thither; and he said. This 
river has been a terror to many; yea, the thoughts 
of it also have often frightened me. Now, methinks, 
I stand easy, my foot is fixed Upon that upon which 
the feet of the priests that bare the ark of the cove- 
nant stood, while Israel went over this Jordan, Jos. 
iii. 17. The waters, indeed, are to the palate bitter, 
and to the stomach cold; yet the thoughts of what 
I am going to, and of the conduct that waits for me 
on the other side, doth lie as a glowiug coal at my 
heart. 

I see myself now at the end of my journey, my 
toilsome days are ended. I am going now to see 
that Head that Avas crowned with thorns, and that 
Face that was spit upon for me. 

I have formerly lived by hearsay and faith; but 

* James Montgomery has justly characterized this Last paragraph 
of tlie first part of tlie Pilgrim's Progress as ' a crown of glory to the 
whole work.' 



288 - DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

now I go where I shall live by sight, and shnll be 
with Him in whose company I delight mj^self. 

I have loved to hear my Lord spoken of; and 
wherever I have seen the print of His shoe in the 
earth, there I have coveted to set my foot too. 

His name has been to me as a civet-box; jqu, 
sweeter than all perfumes. His voice to me has 
been most sweet; and His countenance I have more 
desired than they that have most desired the light 
of the sun. His word I did use to gather for my 
food, and for antidotes against my faintings. ' He 
has held me, and hath kept me from mine iniquities; 
yea, my steps hath He strengthened in Hjs way.'* 

Comfort in Christ's Intercession. 
CJ INCE Christ is an Intercessor, I infer that be- 
k3 lievers should not rest at the Cross for comfort; 
justification they should look for there; but, being 
justified by His blood, they should ascend up after 
Him to the throne. At the Cross you will see Him 
in His sorrows and humiliations, in His tears and 
blood; but follow Him to where He is now,.and then 
you shall see Him m His robes, in His priestly robes, 
and with His golden girdle about His paps. Then 
you shall see Him wearing the breastplate of judg- 
ment, and with- all your names written upon His 
heart. Then you shall perceive that the wliole 
family in heaven and earth is named by Him, and 
liOAv He prevaileth with God the Father of mercies, 

* ' Tliis speech has been justly admired as one of the most striking 
passages in the wJwle work *' Pilgrim's Progress]. — Rev. Tuos. Scott, 



JOHN BUNYAN. 289 

for 3^ou. Stand still awhile and listen; yea, enter 
with boldness into the holiest, and see your Jesus 
as He now appears in the presence of God for you; 
what work He makes against the devil and sin, and 
death and hell, for you. Heb. x. 9. Ah ! it is brave 
following of Jesus Christ to the holiest, the veil is 
rent, you may see with open face as in a glass, the 
glory of the Lord. This, then, is our High-Priest, 
this His intercession, these the benefits of it ! It 
lieth on our part to improve it; and wisdom to do 
that also comes from the mercy-seat, or throne of 
grace, where He, even our High Priest, ever liveth 
to make intercession for us : to whom be glory for 
ever and ever. 

The New Song m Glory. 

NOTHING will so edge the spirit of a Christian 
as, ' Thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to 
God by Thy blood.' This makes the heavens them- 
selves ring with joy and shouting. Mark the words, 
' Thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God by 
Thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and 
people, and nation; and hast made us unto our God 
kings and priests: and we shall reign on the earth.' 
What follows now ? ' And I beheld, and I heard 
the voice of many angels round about the throne, and 
the beasts and the elders: and the number of them 
was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands 
of thousands; sajdng with a loud voice. Worthy is 
the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and rich- 
es, and Avisdom, and strength, and honor,' and glor}^, 

13 



290 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

and blessing. And every creature which is in heav- 
en, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such 
as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I 
saying, Blessing, and honor, ' and glory, and power, 
be unto Him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto 
the Lamb, for ever and ever.' Kev. v. 9-14. 

Thus also is the song, that new song that is said 
to be sung by the hundred forty and four thousand 
which stand with the Lamb upon Mount Sion, with 
His Father's name written in their foreheads. These 
are also called harpers, harping with their harps: 
'And they sung as it were anew song before the 
throne, and before the four beasts, and the elders: 
and no man could learn that song but the hundred 
and forty and four thousand, which were redeemed 
from the earth.' Rev. xiv. 1-3. 

But why could they not learn that song ? Be- 
cause they were not redeemed: none can sing of this 
song but the redeemed; they can give glory to the 
Lamb, the Laml) that was slain, and that redeem- 
ed them to God by His blood. It is faith in His 
blood on earth that w^ill make us sing this- song in 
heaven. These shoutings and heavenly songs must 
needs come from love put into a flame by the suflTer- 
ings of Christ. 




JOHN TILLOTSON, D. J). 
1630-1694. 

Eternal Happiness. 

'HIS happiness shall be eternal; and 
though this be but a circumstance and 
do not enter into the nature of our happi- 
ness, yet it is so material a one that all the 
felicities which heaven affords would be im- 
perfect without it. It would strangely damp and 
allay all our joys to think that they should some time 
have an end; and the greater our happiness were, 
the greater trouble it would be to us to consider 
that it must have a period. It would make a 
man sorrowful indeed to think of leaving such vast 
possessions. Indeed, if the happiness of heav- 
en were such as the joys of this world are, it 
were fit they should be as short, for after a little 
enjoyment, it would cloy us and we should soon 
grow weary of it ; but being so excellent, it would 
scarce be a happiness if it were not eternal. It 
would embitter the pleasures of heaven, as great 
as they are, to see to an end of them, though it 
were at never so great a distance; to consider 
that all this vast treasure of happiness would one 
day be exhausted, and that after so many years 



292 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

were past, we should be as poor and miserable again 
as we were once in this world. God hath so ordered 
things, that the vain and empty delights of this world 
should be temporary and transient, but that the great 
and substantial pleasures of the other world should 
be as lasting as they are excellent ; for heaven, as it 
is an exceeding, so it is an eternal weight of glory. 
And this is that which crowns the joys of heaven, and 
banishes all fear and trouble from the minds of the 
blessed ; and thus to be secured in the possession of 
our happiness is an unspeakable addition to it. For 
that which is eternal, as it shall never determine, so 
it can never be diminished ; for to be diminished and 
to decay is to draw nearer to an end, but that which 
shall never have an end can liever come nearer to it. 
O vast eternity ! how dost thou swallow up our 
thouo-hts and entertain us at once with delis: lit and 
amazement. This is the very top and highest pitch 
of our happiness, upon which we may stand secure 
and look down with scorn upon all things here be- 
low ; and how small and inconsiderable do they 
appear to us, compared with the vast and "endless 
enjoyments of our future state. But oh, vain and 
foolish souls, that are so little concerned for eternity, 
that for the trifles of time, and ' the pleasures of sin 
which are but for a season,' can find in our hearts to 
forfeit an everlasting felicity ! Blessed God ! why 
hast Thou prepared such a happiness for those who 
neither consider it, nor seek after it ? ' Why is such 
a price put into the hands of fools, who have no heart 
to make use of it ;' who fondly choose to gratify 



JOHN TILLOTSON. 293 

their lusts, rather than to save their souls, and sot- 
tishly prefer the temporary enjoy meuts of sin l^efore 
a blessed immortality ? 

Glorified Bodies of the Righteous. 

I^HE consideration of the glorious change of our 
bodies at the resurrection of the just, cannot 
but be a great comfort to us, under all bodily pain 
and sufferinofs. 

For these vile bodies shall he changed, and fash- 
ioned like to the glorious body of the Son of God. 
When our bodies shall be raised to a new life, they 
shall become incorruptible ; for this corruj)tible must 
put on incorrujjtion, and this mortal must jput on im- 
mortality; and then shall come to jpass the saying that 
is Vjritten, death is swallowed ujp in victory. When 
this last enemy is conquered, there shall be wo fleshly 
lusts, nor brutish passions, to fght against the soul ; 
no laiv in our members, to ivar against the law of our 
mind; no disease to torment us, no danger of death 
to amaze and terrify us. Then all the passions and 
appetites of our outward man shall be subject to the 
reason of our minds, and our bodies shall partake of 
the immortality of our souls. It is but a very little 
while, that our spirits shall be crushed, and clogged 
with these heavy and sluggish bodies ; at the resur- 
rection they shall be refined from all dregs of cor- 
ruption, and become spiritual, and incorruptible, and 
glorious, and every way suited to the activity and 
perfection of a glorified soul, and the spirits of just 
men made j^erfect. 



294 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Earthly and Heavenly Joys. 

IN our pursuit of the things of this world, we 
usually prevent enjoyment, by expectation ; we 
anticipate our own happiness, and eat out the heart 
and sweetness of worldly pleasures, by delightful 
forethouo-hts of them; so that when we come to 
possess them they do not answer the expectation, nor 
satisfy the desires which were raised about them, and 
they vanish into nothing : but the things which are 
above, are so great, so solid, so durable, so glorious, 
that we cannot raise our thoughts to an equal height 
with them ; we cannot enlarge our desires beyond a 
possibility of satisfaction. Our hearts are greater 
than the world ; but God is greater than our hearts : 
and the happiness which He hath laid up for us, is, 
like Himself, incomprehensibly great and glorious. 
Let the thoughts of this raise us above this world, 
and inspire us with greater thoughts and designs, 
than tlie care and concernments of this present life. 
We all profess most firmly to believe, that after a 
few days we shall leave this world, and all the enjoy- 
ments of it, and go to the place from whence we 
shall not return ; that we shall enter upon an un- 
changeable state of happiness or misery, according 
as we have demeaned ourselves in this present life ; 
that great care and diligence is necessary to ivorl: oid 
our otvn salvation; that there must be a great pre- 
paration of ourselves, by unspotted purity of heart 
and life, to make ourselves meet for an inheritance 
with them that are sanctified; that we must lahor^ and 
strive^ and run, and fight, and give all diligence to 



JOHN TILLOTSON. 295 

make our calling and election sure; that we had need 
to watch and jpray always, that ive may he accounted 
luorthy to escape the judgment of the great day, and to 
stand before the Son of Man. Such thoughts as these 
should continually possess our souls, and heaven 
should be always in our eye, as if, with Stephen, 
we saw the heavens ojpened, and Jesus standing at the 
right hand of God, to see how we behave ourselves 
here below, and when ive have fought a good fight, 
and finished our course, and kept the faith, to receive 
us to Himself, that where He is, there ive may he also. 

Eesurrection of Christ. 

ry^HE resurrection of Christ is a demonstration of 
J- a future state after this life, and a pledge of a 
blessed immortality in another world. For our 
Lord, by his resurrection from the dead, hath con- 
quered death, and abolished it, and brought life and 
immortality to light. He is the first fruits of them 
that ts/ep^,and His resurrection is an earnest and assur- 
ance of ours ; and from thence the apostle makes 
this inference, Therefore, 'my beloved brethren, be ye 
steadfast and unmoveahle, always abounding in the 
work of the Lord; forasmuch as ye know that your 
labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. The belief 
of a future state after this life should put us upon 
the most earnest and vigorous endeavors to secure 
this happy condition to ourselves ; if by any means^ 
as the apostle expresseth it, we may attain the resur- 
rection of the dead. It should raise us above the 



296 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

world and the lusts of it, above all the terrors and 
temptations of it. 

Excellency of Heavenly Things. 

THE transcendent and incomparable excellency 
of heavenly things above things on the earth, 
the apostle intimates by the opposition, set your af- 
fections on things above; not on things on the eartJi. 
Earthly things are perishing and transitory, gross 
and unsatisfactory, and cannot be the felicity of an 
immortal soul, being neither suited to the spiritual 
nature, nor to the immortal duration of our souls ; 
they can neither satisfy us while we live, nor preserve 
us from death, nor comfort us in it, nor accompany 
us into the other world, nor contribute any thing to 
our happiness there ; and if they can do nothing to- 
ward our happiness, why should we set our hearts 
upon them ? They that seek for happiness in earthly 
thino:s, are like the women sittins: over our Saviour's 
sepulchre with their faces bowed down to the earth ; 
they seeh the living among the dead; our happiness 
is not here, it is risen, it is above. Let our. hearts 
ascend thither, where our happiness and our treasure 
is. Why should we bestow our affections upon those 
low and mean things, when there are incomparably 
better objects to fix them upon ? 

The inference from all this shall be to engage and 
persuade us by all these arguments and considera- 
tions, to seeh and mind the things which ore above, 
Inhere Christ sitteth at the right hand of God; and to 
have our conversation there, inhere our Saviour isj 



JOHN TILLOTSON. 297 

and from whence also ive look for Him again : to 
change these vile bodies^ that they may be made like 
unto His glorious body^ according to the working of 
that mighty j)02ver, whereby He is able to subdue all 
things to Himself. Let all our actions have relation 
to another world, and our conversation declare, that 
we are mindful of another country^ that is, a heavenly. 
Is Christ our Head risen and ascended into heaven ? 
Let us in our hearts and aflections follow Him thither, 
and patiently wait till He receive our souls, and raise 
our bodies, and take us wholly to Himself, that we 
may be for ever with the Lord. 



13 



Q^- 




ISAAC BAEROW, D. D. 
1630-1705. 

Duty of Thanksgiving. 

HIS is a most sweet and delightful 
duty. Praise the Lord^ saitli the most 
experienced psalmist, /or the Lord is good; 
sing praises to his name, for it is p)l^<^sant: 
and otherwhere, Praise the Lord, for it 
is good to sing praises to our God; for it is pleasant, 
and praise is comely, Psalm cxxxv. 3 ; cxlvii. 1 ; 
ix. 1. The performance of this duty, as it espe- 
cially proceeds from good humor, and a cheerful 
disposition of mind; so it feeds and foments them; 
both root and fruit thereof are hugely sweet and 
sapid. Whence St. James : If any man he afflicted, 
let him prafj ; is any merry, let him sing psalms, 
James v. 13. Pscdms, the proper matter of which 
is praise and thanksgiving. 

Other duties of devotion have something labo- 
rious in them, something disgustful to our sense. 
Prayer minds us of our wants and imperfections; 
confession induces a sad remembrance of our mis- 
deeds and bad deserts : but thanksgiving includes 



ISAAC BAHROW. 299 

nothing uneasy or unpleasant; nothing but the 
memory and sense of exceeding goodness. 

Ail love is sweet; but that especially which 
arises, not from a bare apprehension only of the 
object's worth and dignity, but from a feeling of its 
sinofular beneficence and usefulness unto us. And 
what thou2:ht can enter into the heart of man more 
comfortable and delicious than this, that the great 
Master of all things, the most wise and mighty King 
of heaven and earth, hath entertained a gracious 
regard, hath expressed a real kindness towards us? 
that we are in capacity to honor, to please, to pre- 
sent an acceptable sacrifice to Him who can render 
us perfectly happy? that we are admitted to the 
practice of that wherein the supreme joy of para- 
dise, and the perfection of angelical bliss, consists? 
For praise and thanksgiving are the most delectable 
business of heaven; and God grant they may be 
our greatest delight, our most frequent employment 
upon earth! 

Now the blessed Fountain of all goodness and 
mercy inspire our hearts with His heavenly grace, 
and thereby enable us rightly to apprehend, dili- 
gently to consider, faithfully to remember, worthily 
to esteem, to be heartily affected with, to render all 
due acknowledgment, praise, love, and thankful 
obedience for all His (infinitely great and innumer- 
ably many) favors, mercies, and benefits freely con- 
ferred upon us: and let us say with David, 'Blessed 
be the Lord God of Israel, who only doth wondrous 
things: and blessed be His glorious name forever; 



300 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

and let the whole earth be filled with His glory. 
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlastins: 
to everlasting: and let all the people say, Amen. 
Psalm Ixxii. 18, 19; cvi. 48. 

Imitation of Cheist. 

IF any earnest desire of happiness, any high esteem 
of virtue, any true affection to genuine sanctity, 
do lodge in our breasts, we should apply this most 
excellent means of attaining them; the study and 
endeavor of imitating the life of our Lord. If we 
have in us any truth and sincerity, and do not vainl}^ 
prevaricate in our profession of being Christ's disci- 
ples and votaries of that most holy institution, let us 
manifest it by a real conformity to the practice of 
Him who is our Master and Author of our faith. If 
we have in us any wisdom or sober consideration of 
tilings, let us employ it in following the steps of that 
infallible Guide, designed by heaven to lead us in 
the straight, even and pleasant ways of righteous- 
ness, unto the possession of everlasting bliss. If we 
do verily like and approve the practice of -Christ, 
and are affected with the innocent, sweet and lovely 
comeliness thereof, let us declare such our mind by 
a sedulous care to resemble it. If we bear any honor 
and reverence, any love and affection to Christ; if 
we are at all sensible of our relations, our manifold 
obligations, our duties to our great Lord, our best 
Friend, our most gracious Redeemer; let us testify 
it by a zealous care to become like to Him : let a 
lively image of His most righteous and innocent, 



ISAAC BArvROW. 301 

most holy and pious, most pure and spotless life be 
ever present to our fancies; so as to inform our judg- 
ments, to excite our affections, to quicken our en- 
deavors, to regulate our purposes, to correct our 
mistakes, to direct, amend and sanctify our whole 
lives. Let us, with incessant diligence of study, 
meditate upon the best of histories, wherein the 
tenor of His divine practice is represented to us; re- 
volving frequently in our thoughts all the most con- 
siderable passages thereof, entertainiug them with 
devout passions, impressing them in our memories, 
and striving to express them in our conversations: 
let us endeavor continually to walk in the steps of 
our Lord, and to folloio the Lamb ivithersoever He 
goeth; which that we may be able to do, do Thou, 
O blessed Eedeemer, draw us; draw us by the cords 
of Thy love; draw us by the sense of Thy goodness; 
draw us by the incomparable worth and excellency 
of Thy person; draw us by the unspotted purity and 
beauty of Thy example: draw us by the merit of 
Thy precious death, and by the power of Thy Holy 
Spirit; draio us, good Lord, and loe shall run after 
Thee. Amen. 

Almighty God, who hast given Thine only Son to 
ha unto us both a sacrifice for sin and also an on- 
sample of godly life; give us grace, that we may 
always most thankfully receive that His inestimable 
benefit; and also daily endeavor ourselves to follow 
the blessed steps of His most holy life, through the 
same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 



302 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Consolation in Affliction. 

AS it may debase and imbitter all the prosperity 
ill the world, to consider that it is very fading 
and short-lived; that its splendour is but a blaze, its 
pleasure but a flash, its joy but as the cracking of ^ 
thorns; so it should abate and sweeten any adversity, 
to remember that it is passing away, and suddenly 
will be gone. Put, I say, the worst case that can 
be: that it were certainly determined, and we did as 
certainly know it, that those things which cause 
our displeasure should continue through our whole 
life; yet since our life itself will soon be spun out, 
and with it all our worldly evils will vanish, why are 
we troubled? What is said of ourselves, must in 
consequence be truly applied to them: They flee like 
a shadow and continue not: they are winds passing 
and coming not again; they are valors ajppearing 
^or a little time and then vanishing away; they 
loither like grass and fade aioay as a leaf ; they may 
die before us, they cannot outlive us; our life is but 
a handhreadth: and can then our evils have any vast 
bulk? Our age. is as nothing, and can any "crosses 
therein be then any great matter? How can any- 
thing so very short be very intolerable? 

We have but a very narrow strait of time to pass 
over, but w^e shall land on the firm and vast continent 
of eternity; when we shall be freed from all the trou- 
blesome agitations, from all the perilous storms, from 
all the nauseous qualms of this navigation; death 
(which maybe very near, which cannot be far off ) is a 
sure haven from all the tempests of life, a safe refuge 



ISAAC BAllROW. 303 

from all the persecutions of the world, an infallible 
medicine of all the diseases of our mind and of our 
state : it will enlarge us from all restraints, it will dis- 
charge all our debts, it will ease us from all our toils, 
it will stifle all our cares, it will veil all our dis- 
graces; it will still all our complaints and bury all 
our disquiets; it will wipe all tears from our eyes 
and banish all sorrow from our hearts: it perfectly 
will level all conditions, setting the high and low, 
the rich and poor, the wise and ignorant altogether 
upon even ground; smothering all the pomp and 
glories, swallowing all the wealth and treasures of 
the world. 

It is therefore but holding out a while, and all our 
molestation, of its own accord, w^ill expire : time cer- 
tainly will cure us, but it is better that we should 
owe that benefit to reason, and let it presently com- 
fort us: it is better, by rational consideration, to 
work content in ourselves, using the brevity and 
frailty of our life as an argument to sustain us in our 
adversity, than only to find the end thereof as a 
natural and necessary means of evasion from it. 

Our Life. 

THE Scripture aptly resembles our life to a way- 
faring, a condition of travel and pilgrimage: now 
he that hath a long journey to make, and but a little 
time of day to pass it in, must in reason strive to set 
out soon and then to make good speed; must pro- 
ceed on directly, making no stops or deflections (not 
calling in at every sign that invites him, not stand- 



30-1 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

ing to gaze at every object seeming new or strange 
to him; not staying to talk with every passenger 
that meets him; but rather avoiding all occasions of 
diversion and delay), lest he be surprised by the 
night, be left to wander in the dark, be excluded 
finally from the place whither he tends: so must we, 
in our course toward heaven and happiness, take care 
that we set out soon (procrastinating no time, but 
beginning instantly to insist in the ways of piety and 
virtue), then proceed on speedily and persist con- 
stantly; nowhere staying or loitering, shunning all 
impediments and avocations from our progress, lest 
we never arrive near or come too late imto the gate 
of heaven. St. Peter tells us that the end of all 
things doth approach, and thereupon ad^ases us to 
he sober and to loatcli unto prayer; for that the less 
our time is, the more intent and industrious it con- 
cerns us to be. And St. Paul enjoins us to redeem 
the timehecause the days are evil; that is, since we can 
enjoy no true quiet or comfort here, we should im- 
prove our time to the best advantage for the future: 
he might have also adjoined, with the patriarch 
Jacob, the paucity of the days to their badness; be- 
cause the days of our life are feiu and evil, let us 
redeem the time; man that is horn of a ivoman is 
of few days and full of trouhle: so few indeed they 
are that it is fit we should lose none of them, but 
use them all in preparation toward that great change 
we are to make: that fatal passage out of this strait 
time into that boundless eternity. So, it seems, we 
have Job's example of doing: All the days (says he) 



ISAAC BARROW. 305 

of my appointed time will I ivait^ till my change 
come. I end this point with that so comprehensive 
warning of our Saviour: Take heed to yourselves^ 
lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with sur- 
feiting and drunkenness and cares of this life, and so 
that day come upton you unawares. Watch ye there- 
fore and j)roy, that ye may be counted ivorthy to 
escape — ajid to stand before the Son of man. 

Incarnation of Christ. 

THE power of God doth brightly shine in the 
creation, the wisdom of God may clearly be 
discerned in the government of things: but the in- 
carnation of God is that work, is that dispensation 
of grace, wherein the divine goodness doth most 
conspicuously display itself. How indeed possibly 
could God have demonstrated a greater excess of 
kindness toward us, than by thus, for our sake and 
good, sending His dearest Son out of His bosom into 
this sordid and servile state, subjecting Him to all 
the infirmities of our frail nature, exposing Him to 
the worst inconveniences of our low condition? 
What expressions can signify, what comparisons can 
set out, the stupendous vastness of this kindness? 
Psalm xxxvi. 6; cviii. 4. If we should imagine, that 
a great prince should put his only son (a son most 
lovely, and worthily most beloved) into rags, should 
dismiss him from his court, should yield him up 
into the hardest slavery, merely to the intent that 
he thereby might redeem from captivity the mean- 
est and basest of his subjects, how faint a resem- 



306 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

blance would this be of that immense goodness, of 
that incomparable mercy, which in this instance the 
Kino; of all the world hath declared toward us His 
poor vassals, His indeed unworthy rebels! 

The Great Physicia];^. 

IS an overture of health acceptable to sick and 
languishing persons? Luke x. 33; Matt. ix. 
12. Behold, the great Physician, endued with ad- 
mirable skill, and furnished with infallible remedies, 
is come to cure ns of our maladies, and ease us of 
our pains, 1 Pet. ii, 24; to bind up our wounds, and 
to pour in balm (the most sovereign balm of His own 
blood) into them; to free us, not only from all mor- 
tiferous diseases, but from mortality itself: He who 
was sent to hind U2:) and heal the broken hearted; Ho 
who Himself took our infirmities^ and hear our sick- 
ness^ Isa. Ixi. 1; Luke iv. 18; Isa. liii. 4; Matt. viii. 
17; He of whom the prophet (in relation to corporal, 
and much more to spiritual infirmities) did foretell; 
God ivill come and save you: then the eyes of the 
hlind shall he opened, and the ears of the deaf shall 
he unstopped; then shall the lame 7nan leap as an 
hart, and the tongue of the dmnh shall sing, Isaiah 
XXXV. 4, 5, 6; Matt. xi. 5; Luke v. 17. He, whose art 
no disease can resist, who is able to cure our most des- 
perate, our most inveterate distempers; to heal the 
corruption and impotency of our nature, to void the 
is^norances and errors of our understandinc:, to cor- 
rect the stupidity of our hearts, the perverseness of 
our wills, the disorder of our affections, to mitigate 



ISAAC BAKKOW. 307 

our auguiwli of conscience, and cleanse our sores of 
guilt, Ezek. xxxvi. 26; Eph. ii. 10: by various effi- 
cacious medicines, by the wholesome instructions of 
His doctrine, by the powerful inspirations of His 
grace, by the refreshing comforts of His Spirit, l^y 
the salutary virtue of His merits and sufferings. 

Resurrection^ of Christ. 

THE contemplation of this point should elevate 
our thoughts and affections unto heaven and 
heavenly things, above the sordid pleasures, the 
fading glories, and the unstable possessions of this 
world; for Him ive should folloio ivJdthersoever He 
goetJi; rising with Him not only from all sinful de- 
sires, but from all inferior concernments, soaring 
after Him in the contemplations of our mind and 
affections of our heart; that although we are absent 
from the Lord in the body^ Ave may be present with 
Him in spirit, having our conversation in heaven, and 
our heart there, where our treasure is, Rev. xiv. 4; 
Eph. ii. 6; 2 Cor. v. 6; Phil. i. 23; iii. 20; Matt, 
vi. 21; for if our souls do still grovel on the earth, 
if they be closely affixed to worldly interests, deeply 
immersed in sensual delights, utterly enslaved to 
corruption, we do not partake of our Lord's resur- 
rection, being quite severed from His living body, 
and continuino^ in vast distance from Him: I shall 
therefore conclude, recommending that admonition 
of St. Paul: If ye then he risen with Christ, seek 
those things which are above, xohere Christ sitteth on 
the right hand of God: set your affections on things 



308 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

above, not on tilings on the earth: for you are dead, 
and your life is hid loith Christ in God; that ichen 
Christ, ivho is our life,, shall aj^jpear, then ye may 
also ajppear with Him in glory. Amen. 2 Pet. ii. 
19; Eom. viii. 21; Gal. vi. 8; Eev. iii. 1; 1 Tim. y. 
6; Col. iii. 1-4. 

Our Saviour's Ascension and Glorification. 

THE consideration of these points should elevate 
our thou2:hts and affections from these inferior 
things here (the vain and base things of this world) 
unto heavenly things; according to that of St. Paul, 
If ye he risen icith CJtrist, seeh the things above, 
ivhere Christ is sitting at the right hand of God, Co], 
iii. 1. To the Head of our body we should be joined; 
continually deriving sense and motion, direction and 
activity from Him; where the Master of our family 
is, there should our minds be, constantly attentive 
to His pleasure, and ready to serve Hini; where the 
city is, whose denizens Ave are, and where our final 
rest must be, there should our thoughts be, careful 
to observe the laws and orders, that we may enjoy 
the immunities and privileges thereof; in that coun- 
try where only we have any good estate, or valuable 
concernment, there our mind should be, studjdng to 
secure and improve our interest therein, Heb. xi. 16; 
our resolution should be conformable to that of the 
holy psalmist, / will lift up mine eyes to the hills, 
from whence cometh my help. Christ is our life^ 
saith St. Paul; and shall our souls be parted from 
our life? Christ, saith he again, is our hope; and 



ISAAC BAEROW. 309 

shall our mind and hope be asunder? Psalm exxi. 1; 
Col. iii. 4; Gal. ii. 20; 1 Tim. i. 1; Col. i. 27. Christ 
is the principal object of our love, of our trust, of 
our joy, of all our best affections; and shall our 
affections be severed from their best objects? By His 
being in heaven, all our treasure becometh there; 
and where our treasure is, there (if we apprehend, 
and believe rightly, there naturally) our hearts ivill 
be also: if they be not, it is a sign we take Him not 
for our best treasure. We do in our bodies sojourn 
from the Lord, as St. Paul saith; but in our spirits 
we may and should be ever present, ever conversant 
with Him, 2 Cor. v. 6; contemplating Him with an 
eye of faith, fastening our love upon Him, reposing 
our confidence in Him, directing our prayers and 
thanksgivings to Him; meditating upon His good 
laws, His gracious promises, His holy life, and His 
merciful performances for us. We should not, hy 
fixing our hearts and desires upon earthly things 
(upon the vain delights, the sordid interests, the 
fallacious and empty glories, the sinful enjoyments 
here), nor by a dull and careless neglect of heavenly 
things, avert, estrange, or separate ourselves wholly 
from Him. No : let us, unloosing our hearts from 
these things, and with them soaring upAvard, follow 
and adhere to our Lord; so shall we anticipate 
that blessed future state, so shall we assure to our- 
selves the possession of heaven, so here enjoying 
our Lord in affection, we shall hereafter obtain a 
perfect fruition of His glorious and blissful pres- 
ence: the which, God of His mercy 1)y His grace 



310 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

vouchsafe us, through the same our ever blessed 
Saviour^ to whom be for ever all glory and praise. 
Ameu. 

O God, the King of glory, who hast exalted Thine 
own Son Jesus Christ, with great triumph unto Thy 
kinofdom in heaven, we beseech Thee leave us not 
comfortless, but send Thine Holy Ghost to comfort 
us, and exalt us to the same place, whither our 
Saviour Christ is gone before; who liveth and reign- 
eth with Thee and the Holy Ghost, one God, world 
without end. Amen. 

The Life Everlasting. 

WHAT is the state of life? it is a state of high- 
est dignity and glory; of sweetest comfort 
and joy; of joy full in measure, pure in quality, 
perpetual in duration, in all respects perfect in the 
utmost capacity of our nature; wherein all our parts 
and faculties shall be raised to the highest pitch of 
perfection, our bodies shall become free from all 
corruptibility and decay, all w^eakness and disease, 
all grossness and unwieldiness, all deformity -and de- 
filement: for they shall, as St. Paul teaches us, be 
rendered incorruptible, strong, healthful, glorious, 
and spiritual: our souls also shall in their faculties 
be advanced, in their inclinations rectified, in their 
appetites satisfied; the understanding becoming full 
of light, clear and distinct in knowledge of truth, 
free from ignorance, doubt, and error; the will 
being steadily inclined to good, ready to comply 
with God's will, free from all weakness and all per- 



ISAAC BARROW. 311 

verseiiess; our affections being set in right order and 
frame, with a constant regularity tending unto that 
which is really best, and taking a full delight there- 
in: wherein we shall enjoy the blissful sight of God, 
smiling in love and favor upon us; the presence of 
our gracious Eedeemer, embracing us with most 
tender affection; the society of the holy angels, and 
of the just made perfect; whose company and con- 
versation, how unconceivably sweet and delightful 
must it be! wherein nothing adverse or troublesome 
can befall us; no unpleasant or offensive object shall 
present itself to us; no want, or need of anything 
shall appear; no care, or fear, or suspicion; no labor 
or toil, no sorrow or pain, no distaste or regret, no 
stir or contention, no listlessness or satiety, shall be 
felt, or shall come near us; where God (as it is in 
the Apocalypse) will wipe every tear from the eyes 
(of them who shall come there), and death shall be 
no more, Kev. xxi. 4; nor sorrow, nor clamor, nor 
pain any more: it is, in fine, a state in excellency 
surpassing all words to express it, all thoughts to 
conceive it: of which the brightest splendors and 
the choicest pleasures here are but obscure shadows 
and faint resemblances; comparable to which no eye 
hath seen, nor ear hath heard any thhig; nor hath it 
entered into any heart of man to conceive the like, 
1 Cor. ii. 9; as St. Paul, out of the prophet Isaiah, 
telleth us. 




JOHN HOWE, M. A. 
16301705. 

Anticipation of the Joys of Heaven. 

"^ ECKON much upon an eternal abode 
in tliat presence wliere is fulness of 
joy and pleasures for evermore. Enjoy 
by a serious, believing foresight the de- 
5 lights of heaven ; labor to rejoice in hope 
of the glory of God. Look beyond this your pres- 
ent state. Confine not your eye and delight to 
what is now to be enjoyed, but think of what shall 
be. Set before your eyes the glorious prospect of 
the blessed God communicating Himself to that 
vast assembly of angels and the spirits of just men 
made perfect, in clearest discoveries of His glory, 
and richest effusions of His goodness. The best 
appearance of things in this world, makes but a 
dull scene in comparison of this. If you look tow- 
ards God according to what now appears of His 
glory in the frame of the universe, and the course 
of His administrations and government over His 
creatures. He hath not, 'tis true, left Himself with- 
•; ut witness. And you may behold much that wouUI 
be to you the matter of delightful admiration ; if j^our 
eye be clear, and can pierce through clouds and 



JOHN HOWE. ^ 313 

darkness and a manifold veil. He hath made this 
world, and is every where in it, but it knows Him 
not. His light shines in darkness, that doth not 
comprehend it. Beams of His glory do every where 
break forth, through every creature, providence, law, 
and ordinance of His. But much of His glory that 
shines in the creation is hid by a train of second 
causes, through wdiich few look to the first. His 
law^s men judge of according to their interests and 
inclinations, while the holy, glorious majesty that 
enacted them is out of sight. His work in the world 
is carried on in a mystery. His interest lives, but is 
depressed. They who are most devoted to Him are 
supported indeed by His invisible hand, but are, in 
the meantime, low, for the most part, and afflicted. 
If you now limit and confine your apprehensions of 
Him to His present appearances, the matter of your 
delight is real, but much diminished. But conceive 
of Him (as your faith can behold Him at a distance) 
in that posture wherein having settled the eternal 
state of things He Avill finally show Himself. Con- 
ceive Him as having now gathered home all that 
have been recovered to Him out of the apostasy, and 
joined them to those numberless legions of innocent 
and pure spirits about His throne that never offended. 
Conceive Him as dispensing rewards, pouring out 
blessings, upon the loyal heads and hearts of them 
that expressed fidelity and duty to Him in the time 
and state of trial and temptation; letting His glory 
shine out with bright and direct beams, to so many 
beholdino^ and admiring eyes; giving forth the full 

14 



314 , DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

and satisfying communications of His love, and 
making rivers of pleasure flow perpetually to the 
replenishing the vast, enlarged capacities of so in- 
numerable a multitude of grateful, adoring spirits, to 
whom it is now sensibly to be perceived how His 
fulness lilleth all in all. Take this view of Him; 
and let your faith and hope thus enter into that which 
is within the veil. And remember there is only a 
little time between you and that blessed state; that 
then you are to enter into the joy of your Lord; so 
that the very element and region wherein 3^ou are to 
live for ever, shall be nothing else but delight and 

Humility. 

CHERISH the great grace of humilit}^; and be 
ever mean and low in your own eyes. That 
temper carries in it even a natural disposition to de- 
light in God. How sweet complacency will such a 
soul take in Him! His light and glory shine with 
great lustre in the eyes of such a one while there is 
not a nearer imagined lustre to vie therewith. Stars 
are seen at noon by them that descend low into a 
deep pit. They will admire God but little that ad- 
mire themselves much; and take little pleasure in 
Him, who are too much pleased with themselves. 
And how sweet a relish have His love and grace to 
an humble, lowly soul, that esteems itself less than 
the least of His mercies! With what ravishing de- 
light will Divine mercy be entertained, when it is so 
unexpectedly vouchsafed; when this shall be llic 



JOHN HOWE. 315 

sense of the soul now caught into the embraces of 
God's love, What I, vile creature! impure worm! 
what, beloved of God! Expectation, grounded 
especially upon an opinion of merit, would unspeak- 
ably lessen a favor, if it were afforded, as also ex- 
23ected evils seem the less when they come. But the 
lowly soul, that apprehends desert of nothing but 
hell, is surprised and overcome with wonder and 
delight, when the great God expresses kindness to- 
wards it. Besides that He more freely communicates 
Himself to such, To this man will I look, even to 
him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, <fec., Isa. 
Ixvi. 1, 2. And He looks to such with a design of 
habitation; heaven and earth are not to Him so 
pleasant a dwelling. DoAvn then into the dust; 
there you are in the fittest place and posture for de- 
lightful converse with God. 

The Righteous Willing to Die. 

O HAPPY souls! that finding the key is turning, 
and opening the door for them, are willing to 
go forth upon such terms, as ' knowing whom they 
have believed,' &c. And that neither 'principali- 
ties, or powers, life or death, &c., can ever separate 
them from the love of God in Christ Jesus their 
Lord.' Life, they find, hath not separated — where- 
of was the greater danger; and death is so far from 
making this separation, that it shall complete their 
union w^ith the blessed God in Christ, and lay them 
infolded in the everlasting embraces of Divine love! 
Happy they, that can licreupon w^elcome death, and 



316 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

say, 'Now, Lord, lettest Thou Thy servant depart 
in peace!' that before only desired leave to die, and 
have now obtained it; that are, with certainty of the 
issue, at the point of becoming complete victors over 
the last enemy, and are ready to enter upon their 
triumph, and take up their triumphal song, ' Death 
is swallowed up in victory. Thanks be to God, 
who giveth us the victory through Jesus Christ our 
Lord.' Happy soul! here will be a speedy end of 
all thy griefs and sorrows; they will be presently 
swallowed up in an absolute plentitude and fulness 
of joy. There is already an end put to thy torment- 
ing cares and fears; for what object can remain to 
thee of a rational fear, when once, upon grounds 
s'-icli as shake not under thee, thou art reconciled to 
death! This is the most glorious sort of victory, 
viz. by reconciliation. For so thou hast conquered, 
not the enemy only, l3ut the enmity itself, by which 
he was so. Death is become thy friend, and so no 
longer to be feared; 'nor is there any thing else, 
from whence thou art to fear hurt; for death was 
thy last enemy, even this bodily death. The-whole 
region beyond it, is to one in thy case, clear and se- 
rene, when to others is reserved the blackness of 
darkness for ever. 

O the transports of joy that do now most ration- 
ally result from this state of the case, when there is 
nothing left lying between the dislodging soul, and 
the glorious, unseen world, but only the dark passage 
of death, and that so little formidable, considering 
who hath the keys of the one, and tlie other! How 



JOHN HOWE. 317 

reasonable is it upon the account oi' somewhat com- 
mon herein to the Eecleemer and the redeemed, 
although every thing be not, to take up the follow- 
ing w^ords, that so plainly belong to this very case: 
'Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoiceth; 
my flesh also shall rest in hope. For Thou wilt not 
leave my soul in s/teol, or Jtades; Thou wilt not for- 
sake or abandon it in that wide world, neither wilt 
Thou suffer thine Hol}^ One to see corruption. Thou 
wilt show me the path of life; the path that leads 
unto that presence of Thine, wdiere is fulness of joy, 
and to those pleasures wdiich are at Thy right hand, 
or in Thy power, and which are for evermore; and 
shall never admit either of end or diminution,' 
Psalm xvi. 9-11. 

Christian Hope. 

THOUGH you admit a just and very solicitous 
feai-, be sure that you exclude not hope; though 
you apprehend your case to be dangerous, look not 
upon it as desperate. Your hope must not be in 
yourself, but in Him that raises the dead, and calleth 
things that are not, as though they w^ere; yea, makes 
them exist and be. But if you cast away all hope, 
you yield yourself to perish. This stops your breath ; 
so that even all strugglings for life, and the very 
graspings of your fainting heart, must immediately 
cease and end in perfect death. The danger of your 
case, as bad as it is, calls not for this; nor will the 
exigency of it comport w^ith it. When once the soul 
says there is no hope, Jer. ii. 25, it immediately pro- 



318 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

ceeds to say, I have loved strangers, and after them 
will I go. Your hope is as necessary to your safety 
as your fear; we are saved by hope, Rom. viii. 24, 
%. e. of the end itself, which therefore animates to all 
the encounters and diiEculties of our way, as well 
from within as from without. Great distempers ap- 
pear in you and often return; yea, such as are of a 
threatening aspect and tendency. You should yet 
consider you are under cure; the prescribed means 
and method whereof are before you. There is balm 
in Gilead, and a Physician there: One in whose hands 
none that trusted Him ever miscarried. 'Tis well if 
you find yourself sick. The whole need Him not, 
and will not therefore commit themselves to His care. 
He hath relieved many such as you, that, apprehend- 
inof their case, have been restored to Him: let them 
despair that know no such way of help. Say within 
yourself, though I am fallen and low, I shall rise 
and stand, renewed by Thee, O my God. AYas there 
never such a time with you before, when in the like 
case you cried to the Lord and He answered yon. 
and strengthened you with strength in your-.soul ? 
Psalm cxxxviii. Say within yourself, ' Why art 
thou cast doAvn, O my soul, hope thou in God; for 
I shall yet praise Him, who is the health of my 
countenance (where health shows itself in lively, 
sprightly, pleasant looks) and my God.' Psalm 
xlii. And this very hope, as it preserves life, so it 
doth the delight and pleasure of life from being 
quite extinct. The joy of hope is not to go for 
nothing, when it can only be said, not, it is well, but 



JOIIN HOWE. 319 

it sliiill be. It is pleasant to consider that the state 
wherein saints on earth are, is a state of recovery; 
that though it be not a state of perfect health, yet it 
is not (also) a state of death; bnt wherein they are 
tending to life in the perfection of it. And their 
freqnent (and very faulty) relapses shall be found 
but to magnify the more the skill and patience of 
their great Physician. Therefore, however you are 
not hence to be secure, or imposing upon Him; yet 
let not your hearts sink into an abject despair and 
sullen discontent, that you find a distempered frame 
sometimes returnino^. Let there be tender relentino-s 
after God. Your heart ought often to smite you, 
that you have been no more careful ancl watchful; 
but not admit a thought that you will therefore cast 
off all: that it's in vain ever to strive more, or seek 
to recover that good frame that you have often found 
is so soon gone. 

Meditating on Heavenly Things. 

DO not think that Christ came into the world 
and died to procure the pardon of your sins, 
and so translate you to heaven, wdiile your hearts 
should still remain clcavino^ to the earth. He came 
and returned to prepare a way for you; and then 
call, not drag you thither: that by His precepts, and 
promises, and example, and Spirit, He might form 
and fashion your souls to that glorious state; and 
make you willing to abandon all things for it. And 
lo ! now the God of all grace is calling you by Jesus 
Christ unto His eternal glory. Direct then your 



320 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

eyes and hearts to that mark, the prize of the high 
calling of God in Christ Jesus. 'Tis ignominious, 
by the common suffrage of the civilized world, not 
to intend the proper business of our calling. 'Tis 
your calling to forsake this world and mind the 
other; make haste then to quit yourselves of ^^our 
entanglements, of all earthly dispositions and aflec- 
tions. Learn to live in this w;orld as those that are 
not of it, that expect every day, and wish to leave 
it, whose hearts are gone already. 

O get then the lovely image of the future glory 
into your minds. Keep it ever before your eyes. 
Make it familiar to your thoughts. Imprint daily 
there these Vords: I shall behold Thy face; I shall 
be satisfied with Thy likeness. And see that your 
souls be enriched with that righteousness, have in- 
wrought into tliem that holy rectitude, that may dis- 
pose them to that blessed state. Then will you die 
wdth your own consent, and go away, not driven, but 
allured and drawn. You will go, as the redeemed 
of the Lord, with everlasting joy upon their heads; 
as those that know whither you go, even to -a state 
infinitely worthy of your desires and choice, and 
where 'tis best for you to be. You will part with 
your souls, not by a forcible separation, but by a 
joyful surrender and resignation. They will dis- 
lodge from this earthly tabernacle, rather as putting 
it off than having it rent and torn away. Loosen 
yourselves from this body by degrees, as we do any 
thing we would remove from a place where it sticks 
fast. Gather up your spirits into themselves. Teach 



JOHN HOWE. 321 

them to look upon themselves as a distinct thing. 
Inure them to the thoughts of a dissolution. Be 
continually as taking leave. Cross and disprove the 
common maxim, and let your hearts, which they use 
to say are wont to die last, die first. Prevent death, 
and be mortified towards every earthly thing before- 
hand, that death may have nothing to kill but your 
bodyj and that you may not die a double death in 
one hour, and sufier the death of your body and of 
your love to it both at once. Much less that this 
should survive to your greater, and even incurable, 
misery. Shake off* your bands and fetters, the ter- 
rene aftections that so closely confine you to the 
house of your bondage. And lift up your heads in 
expectation of the approaching jubilee, the day of 
your redemption; when you are to go out free, and 
enter into the glorious liberty of the sons of God; 
when you shall serve, and groan, and complain no 
longer. Let it be your continual song, and the 
matter of your daily praise, that the time of your 
happy deliverance is hastening on; that ere long you 
shall be absent from the bod}^, and present with the 
Lord. 

The Saints' Delight in God. 

IN wdiat transports have holy souls been upon the 
view and contemplation of His sovereign powder 
and dominion; His wise and righteous government; 
His large and flowing goodness, that extends in com- 
mon to all the works of His hands ! Labor to imitate 
the ingenuous and loyal affection of this kind, where- 

14* 



322 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

of you find many expressions in the sacred Volume. 
For what hath been matter of delight to saints of old, 
ought surely still as much to be accounted so. To 
give instances: 

You sometimes find them in a most complacential 
adoration of His wonderful wisdom and counsels. O 
the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and 
knowledge of God ! How unsearchable are His judg- 
ments, and His ways past finding out! Rom. xi. 33. 
And again, To God only wise be glory, through Jesus 
Christ, for ever. Amen. Chap. xvi. 27. To the King 
eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be 
honor and glory for ever, 1 Tim. i. 17, &c. To the 
only wise God our Saviour, be glory and majesty, 
dominion and power, noAv and ever, Jude 25, <fec. 
Elsewhere we have them in transports admiring His 
holiness. Who is like unto Thee, O Lord, among 
the gods ! Who is like Thee glorious in holiness, 
Exod. XV. 11. There is none holy as the Lord; for 
there is none besides Thee, neither is there any rock 
like our God, 1 Sam. ii. 2. And this is recommended 
and enjoined to His holy ones as the special -matter 
of their joy and praise: Rejoice in the Lord, ye 
righteous, and give thanks at the remembrance of 
His holiness. Psalm xcvii. 12. At other times we 
have their magnificent celebrations of His glorious 
power, and that by way of triumph over the pagan- 
ish gods: Our God is in the heavens, He hath done 
whatsoever He pleased, Psalm cxv. Their idols are 
silver and gold, &c. Be Thou exalted, O God, in 
Thine own strength, Psalm xxi. 13. We will sing 



JOHN HOWE. " 323 

and praise Thy power. Forsake me not nntil I have 
showed Thy strength unto this generation, and Thy 
130wer to every one that is to come, Psahii Ixxi. 18, 
&c. This is given out as the song of Moses and the 
Lamb: Who shall not fear Thee, O Lord, and glorify 
Thy name V Great and marvelous are Tliy works, 
Lord God Almighty, &c. And how do they magnify 
His mercy and goodness, both towards His own peo- 
ple and His creatures in general, Psalm xxxi. 19. O 
how great is Thy goodness which Thou hast laid up 
for them that fear Thee, that Thou hast wrouofht for 
them that trust in Thee before the children of men ! 
Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous, for praise is 
comely for the upright; praise the Lord with harp; 
sing unto Him with the psaltery. Psalm xxxiii. 1, &c. 
The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord. I will 
extol Thee, my God, O King, I will bless Thy name 
for ever and ever, Psalm cxlv. 1, &c. Men shall 
speak of the might of Thy terrible acts, they shall 
abundantly utter the memory of Thy great goodness, 
and shall sing of Thy righteousness. The Lord is 
gracious and full of compassion, slow to anger, and 
of great mercy. The Lord is good to all, and His 
tender mercies are over all His works. To insert all 
that might be mentioned to this purpose, were to 
transcribe a great part of the Bible. And in what 
raptures do we often find them, in the contemplation 
of His faithfulness and truth, His justice and right- 
eousness, His eternity, the boundlessness of His pre- 
sence, the greatness of His works, the cxtensiveness 
of His dominion, the perpetuity of His kingdom, the 



32-1 DEVOTlONxVL THOUGHTS. 

exactness of His government: Who is a strong God 
like unto Thee, and to Thy faithfuhicss, round about 
Thee, Psahn Ixix. Thy mercy, O Lord, is in the 
heavens, and Thy faithfulness reaches unto tlie 
clouds. Psalm xxxvi. Before the mountains were 
brouoht forth, or ever Thou hadst formed the earth 
or the world, from everlasting to everlasting Thou 
art God, Psalm xc. 2. But will God indeed dwell 
on the earth ? Behold, the heaven and heaven of 
heavens cannot contain Thee, 1 Kings viii. The 
works of the Lord are great, sought out of them that 
have pleasure therein. His work is honorable and 
glorious, Psalm cxi, &c. All Thy works shall praise 
Thee, O Lord, and Thy saints shall bless Thee; they 
shall speak of the glory of Thy kingdom, and talk 
of Thy power, to make known to the sons of men 
His mighty acts, and the glorious majesty of His 
kingdom. Psalm cxlv. Thy kingdom is an everlast- 
ing kingdom, and Thy dominion endureth through- 
out all generations. 

And His glory in the general, (which results from 
His several excellencies in conjunction,) how-loftily 
is it often celebrated with the expression of the most 
loyal desires, that it may be every where renowned, 
and of greatest complacency, in as far it is appre- 
hended so to be. The glory of the Lord shall en- 
dure for ever. They shall sing in the ways of the 
Lord, for great is the glory of the Lord. Be Thou 
exalted above the heavens, let Thy glory be above all 
the earth. Psalm civ. 31, cxxxviii. 5, Ivii. 7, 11. Let 
them praise the name of the Lord, for His name 



JOHN iiouE. 325 

alone is excellent, His glory is above the earth and 
the heavens, Psalm cxlviii. 13. When you read such 
passages as these, (whether they be elogies or com- 
mendations of Him, or doxologies and direct attribu- 
tions of glory to Him,) you are to bethink yourselves, 
with what temper of heart these things were uttered ! 
with how raised and exalted a spirit ! what high de- 
light and pleasure was conceived in glorifying God, 
or in beholding Him glorious ! How large and un- 
bounded a heart, and how full of His praise, doth 
still every where discover itself in such strains; when 
all nations, when all creatures, when every thing 
that hath breath, when heaven and earth are invited 
together, to join in the concert, and bear a part in 
His praises ! And now eye Him under the same no- 
tions under which you have seen Him so magnified, 
that in the same way }'ou may have your own heart 
wrought up to the same pitch and temper toAvards 
Him. Should it not provoke an emulation, and make 
you covet to be amidst the throng of loyal and de- 
voted souls, when you see them ascending as if they 
were all incense ! when you behold them dissolving 
and melting away in delight and love, and ready to 
expire, even fainting that they can do no more; de- 
signing their very last breath shall go forth in the 
close of a song ! I will sing unto the Lord as long as 
I live, I will sing praise to my God while I have my 
being, Psalm civ. 33. How becoming is it to resolve, 
' This shall be my aim and ambition, to fly the same, 
and if it were possible, a greater, height.' Read 
over such psalms as are more especially designed for 



326 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

the magnifying of God; Psdlms yiii. xlviii. xcv. xcvi. 
xcvii. xcviii. xcix. &c.: and when von see what were 
the things that were most taking to so spiritual and 
pious hearts; thence receive instruction, and aim to 
have your hearts alike affected and transported with 
the same things. Frame the supposition, that you 
are meant, that the invitation is directed to you, ' O 
come let us sinsf unto the Lord, let us come before 
His presence with thanksgiving, and make a joyful 
noise to Him with psalms; for the Lord is a great 
God, and a great King above all gods, &c. And 
think with yourselves. Is He not as great as He was ? 
Is He not as much our Maker as He was theirs ? Is 
it not now as true, that ' The Lord reigneth, and is 
high above all the earth, and exalted far above all 
gods.' Now since these were the considerations up- 
on which so great complacency was taken in Him, 
set the same before your own eyes. And since these 
were proposed as the matter of so common a joy, 
and the creation seems designed for a musical instru- 
ment of as many strings as there are creatures in 
heaven and earth; awake, and make haste .to get 
your heart fixed; lest 'the heavens rejoice, and the 
earth be glad, the world and all that dwell therein; 
lest the sea roar, and the fulness thereof, the floods 
clap their hands, the fields and the hills be joyful 
together, and all the trees of the wood rejoice before 
the Lord,' while you only arc silent and uncon- 
cerned.* 

* This passage is expressed in an exalted strain of sacred elo- 
quence; and no more fervid or soul-stirring one can be found in the 
writings of Ilowe. 



JOHN HOWE. 327 

Live With ETERNiTr in View. 

MORE particularly labor to have your appre- 
hensions of the future state of the unseen 
world, and eternal things, made more lively and 
efficacious daily, and that your faith of them may be 
such as may truly admit to be called the very sub- 
stance and evidence of those thino^s. Shall that sdo- 
rious everlasting state of things be always as a dark 
shadow with us, or as the images w^e have of things 
in a dream, ineffectual and vanishing, only because 
we have not seen Avith our eyes, where God Himself 
hath by His express word made the representations 
of them to us, who never deceived us, as our own 
eyes and treacherous senses have done ? Why do 
we not live as just now entering into the eternal 
state, and as if we now beheld the glorious appear- 
ing of the great God our Saviour, when we are as 
nmch assured of them as if wq beheld them ? Why 
do we not oftener view the representation of the 
heavens vanishing, the elements melting, the earth 
flaming, the angels every where dispersed to gather 
the elect, and them ascending, caught up to meet the 
Redeemer in the air, ever to be with the Lord? 
What a trifle will the world be to us then ! 




EZEKIEL HOPKINS, D. D. 

1G33-1690. 

The Christian's Joy. 

HEAVENLY Christian feels some- 
times a ponderous and weighty joy; a 
joy springing up in Lis soul, almost in- 
tolerable, and altogether unutterable; 
a joy, that melts him into ecstasy and 
rapture. How infinitely doth he then disdain, 
that any soul should be so wretchedly sottish, as 
to prefer the world before, or equalize it with God ! 
He thinks the happiness he then enjoys so great, 
that, although he believes it is, yet he cannot con- 
ceive how it should be more or greater iu heaven 
itself. Then the soul claps its wing: it would fain 
take its flight, and be gone; it breathes, it pants, 
it reaches, after God, and falls into an agony of joy 
and desire inconceivably mixed together. Can the 
world give us any such overpowering joy as this? 
It may afford us corn and wine ; the weak recruits 
of a frail life : but, when it hath emptied all its store 
and abundance into our bosoms, it is not worthy to 
be mentioned with the love and favor of God, which 
is hetter than life itself, Psalm Ixiii. 3. And therefore, 
the psalmist makes it his prayer. Psalm iv. 6, 7. 



EZEKIEL IIOPKIXS. 329 

Lord, lift Thou uj) the light of Thy counteiiance upon 
us. Thou hast put gladness in my heart, "more than 
in the time that their corn and %mne increased. 

Inconstancy of Earthly Enjoyments. 

WHEN the sun shines bright and warm, all the 
flowers of the field open and display their 
leaves, to receive him into their bosoms ; but, when 
night comes, they fold together, and shut up all their 
glories : and, though they were like so many little 
suns shining here below, able, one Avould think, to 
force a day for themselves ; yet, when the sun with- 
draws his beams, they droop, and hang the head, and 
stand neglected, dull and obscure things. So hath 
it fared with us : while God hath shone upon us with 
warm and cherishing influences, we opened, and 
spread, and flourished into a great pomp and glory; 
but He only hides His face, draws in His beams, and 
all our beautiful leaves shut up, or fall to the ground, 
and leave us a bare stalk, poor and contemptible. 

Pardon of Sin. 

PARDON of sin is, in Scripture, set forth by very 
sweet and full expressions. It is called, a blot- 
ting out of transgression : a metaphor taken from a 
creditor's crossing the debt-book, signifying thereby 
a discharge of the debt. And, lest Ave might possi- 
bly fear God will implead us for them without book, 
the prophet adds forgetting unto blotting out : Is. 
xliii. 25. /, even /, am lie, that hlotteth out thy trans- 
gressions for my name's saJtc; and I will not remeni- 



330 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

her thy sins. It is called, a covering of our sins : 
Psalm xxxii. 1. Blessed is the man, tv/iose transgres- 
sion is forgiven^ and ivJiose sin is covered. Yea, we 
have a farther ground of comfort, for it is not only 
a covering of om- sins, but it is a covering of God's 
face from them. Psalm li. 9. Hide Thy face from, 
my sinSj and blot out all mine iniquities. It is a cast- 
ing of them behind God's back, as a thing that He 
will never more regard: Is. xxxviii. 17. Thou hast 
cast all my sins behind Thy back. And, lest we 
should suspect He should turn again to behold them, 
it is called, a casting of them into the bottom of the 
sea : Mic. vii. 19, as we do with things we would 
have irrecoverably lost and gone. It is a scattering 
them as a thicJc cloud : Is. xliv. 22, when the vapors 
of it are so dissipated, that there shall not remain the 
least spot, to obstruct the shining of God's face and 
favor upon our souls. Yea, and so perfect an aboli- 
tion shall be made of all our iniquities, that, though 
Divine justice should enter into a strict search and 
scrutiny after them, they shall not be found against 
us : so the prophet Jeremiah tells us, Jer. 1...20. In 
those days, shall the iniquity of Israel be sought for; 
and there shall be none : and the sins of Judah; and 
they shcdl not be found. How hath God hea2)ed up 
expressions of his grace and mercy one upon another ! 
and studied words, as it were, to assure us of tlie 
validity of our pardon ; giving to us abounding con- 
solations, as our sins have been al)oundino' \ 



EZEKIEL HOPKINS. o3I 

Grace Opposing Sin. 

C^ RACE is an immortal seed, that will certainly 
X sprout up and flourish into glory: it is a living 
fountain, that will certainly spring up unto eternal 
life ; a ray of heavenly light, that will wax brighter 
and brighter to a heavenly day. It is immortal, in 
its seed ; victorious, in a spark ; triumphant, in its 
dawn : yea, take it when it is weakest, when this 
dawn is clouded, when this spark twinkles, when 
this seed is unspirited ; yet, even then, is it mighty 
through God, and is still an over-match for shi. 

Heavenly Rest. 

THAT rest, that is there to be expected and en- 
joyed, is operative working rest: it is both rest 
and exercise, at once; and, therefore, it is a true 
paradox. Though the saints in heaven rest from their 
working, continually are they blessing and praising 
God; ascribing glory, and honor, and power to Him 
that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb for ever- 
more: always are they beholding, admiring and 
adoring God, and burning in love to each other, and 
mutually rejoicing in God and in one another. And 
this is the work of that eternal rest; a work never to 
be intermitted nor to cease. 

Heavenly Hope. 

HOPE is called, the anchor of the soul — that eii: 
teretJt into that ivithin the veil: Heb. vi. 19, 
that is, into heaven: it lays hold on all that glory, 
that is there laid up and kept in reversion for us. 



832 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Hope is, in itself, a solid and substantial possession; 
for it stirs up the same affections, it excites the same 
joy, delight and complacency, as fruition itself doth. 
It is the taster of all our comforts: and, if they be 
but temporal, it not only tastes them, but sometimes 
quite devours them; and leaves us in suspense 
whether it be not better to be expectants than en- 
joyers. Heavenly hope gives the same real content- 
ment and satisfaction: it antedates our glory; and 
puts us into the possession of our inheritance, whilst 
we are yet in our nonage: only it doth not spend 
and devour its object, beforehand, as earthly hope 
doth. 

The Work of Grace and Sanctification. 

GEACE is glory in the seed, and glory is but 
grace in the flower. Thus the apostle, 2 Cor. 
iii. 18, We are changed into the same image from 
glory to glory: that is, the image of God is still per- 
fecting in us by His Spirit, carrying on His work 
from one measure and deo^ree of o:race unto another. 
For the whole life of a Christian here on -earth, is 
but as it were one continued sittino^ under the hand 
and pencil of the Holy Ghost; till those first lines 
and obscurer shadows, which were laid in His new 
birth, receive more life, sweetness and beauty from 
His progressive sanctification. And this is a being 
changed from glory to glory. And when this is come 
to that perfection as to need only the last hand, and 
the completing touch, then, God glorifies us by the 
full consummation of our holiness and happiness in 



EZEKIEL HOPKINS. 333 

heaven. Thus Christ prays, John xvii. 1, The hour 
is come: glorify Thy Son: and so, v. 5, Glorify 
Thou me ivith Thine own self idth the glory luhich 1 
had ivith Thee before the world was. And so, when 
our hour is likewise come, when we have attained to 
the full measure of our stature in Christ Jesus, God 
will then glorify us with Himself; in that glory, 
which He hath prepared for us before the world was. 

Co^irORT IN THE DeATH OF PlOUS FrIENDS. 

IS it your own loss which you lament; because 
they are taken from you, with whom, nay for 
whom, you would willingly have died, and given 
up 3^ourselves to the death? even this is but the 
effect of self-love, and shows that you are more 
concerned in your own contentment than in their 
glory; and, that you might enjoy them yourselves, 
you would keep them from their near and intimate 
enjoyment of God. Can you not, for a while, dis- 
pense with their absence, for their advantage; and 
make up the comfort which you want in their 
presence, by the comfort which you have in the 
assurance of their happiness ? What our Saviour 
saith to his disciples, John xiv. 28, that may I say to 
you: If you love them, j^ou will rejoice, because 
they are gone to their Father. And this separation, 
by this absence of theirs, is but for a short time: do 
you but tread the paths of their example and follow 
their track, and, as their works went before them to 
heaven, so yours shall follow you; where you shall 
rest from all your sorrows and troubles; where no 



334 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

affliction nor discontentment shall overcast your per- 
fect joy; where, without fear of another separation, 
you shall be satisfied in the enjoyment of one an- 
other, and all in the enjoyment of God. 




THOMAS KEN", D.D. 
1637-1711. 

A Pkayer ror Spiritualized Affections. 

f^^P^ LORD, enligliteu my understand- 
ing, that I may know Thee ; sanctify my 
affections, that I may love Thee ; and put 
Thy fear into my heart, that I may dread 
to offend Thee. 
Wean my affections, O Lord, from the things 
of this world, and whatever my state and condi- 
tion may be here, give me grace therewith to be 
content. 

O my God ! let the consideration of the emptiness 
of pleasure, the troubles and miseries of riches, and 
the shortness and vanity of all things in the world, 
inspire me with due contempt of all enjoyments here 
below; and make me ever shun these hindrances to 
a life of holiness and virtue, that I may with the 
greater freedom enjoy Thee, O my God ! in medita- 
ting on Thy perfections and Thy glories. Let me, 
dearest Jesus, have those influences of Thy blessed 
Spirit in my retirements, that I may at last grow 
wholly weary of the world, and then fix my thoughts 
upon that heavenly kingdom, where true pleasures, 



336 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

fulness of riches, and lasting honors are only to be 
met withal ; whither let Thy mercy speedily bring 
me, that I may be satisfied with the fulness of Thy 
presence, and meditate for ever on Thy great perfec- 
tions, joining with all the glorious attendants on Thy 
throne in endless songs of Thy eternal praises. Amen. 

On Communion with God. 

RETIRE, O my soul ! from the busy world, and 
employ thyself about that for which thou wert 
created: — The contemplation of thy God. I will 
hasten to my closet, or yonder solitary walk, and 
there sequestered from a vexatious world, I will not 
suffer a single thought of it to approach me, unless 
by way of pity and contempt. 

How delightful is it, O my soul ! for thee to enjoy 
this sweet communion with thy God, and thus to 
dwell upon divine objects. Here am I safe, and at 
rest in this dear place of quiet; and earnestly pity 
all the men of business and hurry, whose heads are 
full of perplexing contrivances, to procure a little 
happiness in a Avorld where there is no such thing. 

O blessed freedom ! O charming solitude ! I will 
grasp you, and I will hold 3^ou fast — the delight of 
silence and retreat ! Here I can unburthen my soul, 
and pour it out before my God. Here I can wrestle 
with the powers of heaven, and not let them go till 
I have obtained a blessing. Here I can confess my 
sins, and with hopes of comfort lay open my troubled 
breast before the merciful Hearer of my prayers. 



tpiomas ken. 337 

On The Love of the Saviour. 

OGOD, my Saviour and my Lord, grant, I be- 
seech Thee, that the contemplations of Thy 
dear love may ever inspire my inflamed heart with 
the zealous return of love to Thee, my God, and with 
the most fervent charity to all the members of Thy 
holy Church, whether they are my friends or my 
causeless enemies. O let me never, by the coldness 
of my affections for my neighbors and fellow-Chris- 
tians, make myself uuAvorthy of that love of Thine 
which has now employed my^iieditations; and since 
without charity, no other virtue or religious duty is 
acceptable in Thy sight, let it be my daily exercise 
to attain it, that at length I may be a perfect profi- 
cient in the school of love, and my humble soul may 
breathe out nothing else; that no provocation or af- 
fronts of the most wilful malice may ever stir up in 
me the spirit of revenge, or abate my charity; but 
let this celestial fire of heavenly love ever burn in 
my fervent breast upon earth, till it is perfected at 
last in the blessed regions of eternal love. 

On The Joys of Hj:aven. 

HAIL, the despised followers of the poverty of 
Jesus ! He had no estates, — He had no pur- 
chase on earth, not ' a hole wherein to lay His sacred 
head.' In this you were like your suffering Lord; 
for your treasures were in heaven, where you now 
enjoy them with an assurance of an everlasting pos- 
session; you are now no longer heirs but actual in- 
heritors of that kingdom of inexpressible wealthy 

15 



338 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

from Avhicli He has utterly debarred all that are en- 
cumbered with riches here below, and place their 
security and reliance on them. What divine melody 
is this, O my soul, which thus charms my ravished 
thoughts ? What vigorous echoes of joy inexpressi- 
ble are these I hear ? These can be none other than 
the voices of angels. Oh, the fervor of this joy ! as 
if their heavenly breasts were unable to contain the 
flaming zeal within. Lo ! how they break forth into 
the most ardent expressions, and pathetic hallelujahs 
to your Creator's glory ! Hark ! what heavenly song 
is this I hear? 'Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Al- 
mighty ! which was, and is, and is to come. Bless- 
ing, honor, power, and glory, be unto Him that sit- 
tcth upon the throne, and to the Lamb, for ever and 
ever !' 

A Pkayer for one in Affliction. 
^ T ICNOW, Lord, that Thy judgments are right, 

_L and that Thou of very faithfulness hast caused 
me to be troubled; ' Psalm cxix. 75; for 'before I 
was afflicted I went astray: but now have I kept Thy 
word.' Psalm cxix. 6. Blessed be Thy goodness 
for afflicting me. 

I humbly beg of Thee, O merciful Father, that 
this affliction may strengthen my faith, which Thou 
sawest was growing weak; fix my hope, which was 
staggering; quicken my devotion, which was lan- 
guishing; re-kindle my charity, which was cooling; 
revive my zeal, which was dying: confirm my obe- 
dience, which was wavering; recover my patience, 



THOMAS KEN. 339 

which was fainting; mortify my pride, which was 
presuming; and perfect my repentance, which was 
daily decaying: for all these and the like infirmities, 
to which my soul is exposed, O make Thy affliction 
my cure ! 

Grant, O my God, that this affliction Thou hast 
in mercy laid on me, may wean all my affections from 
the world, Avhich I was apt to grow too fond of; 
rescue me from those occasions of evil of which I was 
in danger; secure me from those temptations which 
were ready to assault me; restrain me from those sins 
to which my nature was strongly inclined; preserve 
me from all those abuses of health I am apt to incur; 
and purify my soul from all that dross, and from all 
those vicious propcnsions which either my repentance 
has left behind, or which I have since contracted. 

O my God, let Thy affliction produce my amend- 
ment, and all the happy effects in me, which it is 
wont to do in Thy children, and which Thou in 
mercy dost design it should, and then continue Thy 
affliction, if it seem good in Thy sight: behold, Lord, 
'happy is the man whom Thou thus correctest.' 
Job V. 7. 

What is best for me, O my God, I know not: my 
flesh desires a deliverance from this distemper, and 
if it be Thy pleasure, O Lord, deliver me: my spirit 
desires that Thou only wouldst choose for me. Do 
Thou then, O Heavenly Father, choose for me, be- 
cause Thou art my Father, and out of Thy fatherly 
tenderness wilt be sure to choose what is best for 
me. I resign my own w^ill entirely to Thine. Let 



340 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

me be enabled to say, after my gracious Saviour's 
example, ' Father, if Thou be willing, remove this 
cup from me: nevertheless, not my will, but Thine, 
be clone.' St. Luke xxii. 42. 

Hear, Lord, and have compassion on me, for the 
merits and sufferings of Jesus Christ, whose perfect 
resignation may I always imitate. Amen. 

The Eighteous Eteknally Secure. 

THIS world is founded upon the seas, and es- 
tablished on the floods; the very foundation 
of it is laid in mutability. But he that loves God, 
and trusts in His Beloved, is like Mount Sion, that 
cannot be removed, but stands fast for ever; he is 
built on the rock of ages, he stands firm on a height 
that has no precipice — is above all assaults — and is 
in eternal security. 




THOMAS COMBER, D. D. 
1644-1699. 

Meditations on the Loed's Supper. I. 

OST merciful Jesus, although Thou 
reservest the full manifestation of Thy 
love to my soul till the glorious resur- 
rection, yet, as if Thou wert impatient 
of so great a delay. Thou here givest 
me a pledge of Thy love, and an earnest of my title 
to a never fading bliss. Thou hast dearly bought it 
for me, and Thou hast freely given it to me ; where- 
fore I will vigorously seek it, patiently wait for it, 
and earnestly expect it. Ah! my gracious Re- 
deemer, here I am vexed with crosses, oppressed 
with enemies, troubled with corruptions, and tossed 
on the waves of a thousand sins and miseries. But 
it is my comfort, amid all these sorrows, to receive 
this assurance that I shall, ere long, be translated 
into a blissful state, never to know sin or feel pain ; 
to be in danger of enemies or fear of evil any 
more. O how welcome shall be that blessed hour 
that summons me to enter into the joys of my 
Lord ! While I continue here, let me behave my- 
self, O my Saviour, as the heir of Tliy kingdom, 
crucifying those sins that crucified Thee, and would 



342 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

exclude me from those felicities wliicli Tliou hast 
offered me. Lord, I would hate everything that 
keeps me from heaven, and love nothing but what 
may further me in my way thither. O give me 
Thy grace to live as one that is above all the trifling 
pleasures and sorrows of this lower world, and to 
conduct m^^self as becomes an heir of glory, as one 
designed to be a companion of angels, and to partake 
of Thy bliss for ever and ever. 



II. 

WILL go to Thy table with joy and tell of Thy 
works with gladness, O most mighty Saviour, 
who hast not only died for my sins, but risen again 
for my justification. Indeed, what comfort would I 
have found in this memorial of Thy death, if it had 
not been for Thy resurrection. This sacrament then 
would only have represented Thy sufferings, and 
renewed my sorrow : to think that so excellent a Per- 
son had failed of my deliverance! but now it is be- 
come a feast of joy, because it is an assurance- of Thy 
resurrection, as well as a commemoration of Thy 
passion. Since Thou livest, glorified Jesus, we live 
also. Thy resurrection gives life to our hopes, makes 
our sorrows light, our lives cheerful, and our death 
the gate of immortality. Our fears are dispelled, 
and our troubled hearts are quieted with this, — The. 
Lord is risen; yea. The Lord is risen indeed. 



THOMAS COMBER. 



III. 



34:8 



BLESSED Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our 
faith, who art the same yesterday^ to-day^ and 
for ever; Thou hast given spiritual meat to them that 
fear Thee, and ivilt ever be mindful of Thy covenant: 
but my goodness is as a morning cloud which soon 
passes, and my devotion ^ze^ like a shadow and never 
continues in one stay. O do Thou establish me ivith 
Thy free Spirit, that I may not so easily forfeit my 
comfort, forget my duty, and break my vows, as I 
have formerly done. How unwearied art Thou, 
gracious Saviour, in doing well unto me! How con- 
stant is Thy love! How amiable and attractive are 
Thy endless mercies and Thy varied graces! And 
shall I be so ungrateful to Thee, and so cruel to 
myself, as to forsake Thee and my own happiness! 
Alas! I justly suspect my own weakness; I fear the 
power and policy of my enemies; and I do with 
shame and sorrow call to mind my former returns to 
folly. Therefore, O blessed Redeemer! I do most 
earnestly entreat Thee never to leave me to myself. 
I beseech Thee to give me constant and continual 
supplies of Thy grace, that I may be able to perform 
whatsoever I have promised. O let not forgetful- 
ness or indevotion seize on me hereafter. Let me 
hold fast that which I have, and daily strive to gain 
more; and finally make me faithful unto death; and 
80 shall I receive from Thee the crown of life, when 
I appear before Thee at the last day. 




BEJ^JAMIN JENKS. 
1646-1724. 

A MOKNING PeAYER. 

^^ LOED God Almiglity, Tliou art the 
sovereign Majesty of heaven and earth, 
against whom all our sins have been 
committed, and by whom alone they can 
be pardoned ! there is none but Thee, by 
whom our iniquities can be subdued, our souls be 
sanctified or our necessities suj^plied. But Thou 
art able, and also ready to hear and help, to bless 
and save Thy people that call upon Thee; Thou 
delightest to show mercy, and lovest the occasions 
of glorifying Thy compassion. We come to Thee 
therefore, O Lord, begging that mercy, which Thou 
knowest we extremely want, and grace to help us 
in this time of our need. We beg the same for 
the sake of Thine infinitely beloved Son who alone 
is worthy, and in whose precious blood is all our 
trust. 

We are unclean, Lord, we are unclean ; and Thou 
mayest well abhor our guilty souls : but O look upon 
us in the Son of Thy love ; and prepare us for the 
mercies which Thou hast treasured up for us in Him. 
Make us to feel the burden and the bitterness ot 



BENJAMIN JENKS. 345 

our sins; nor let us ever attempt to cover and con- 
ceal them, lest they find us out at the last, and over- 
whelm us with shame and misery. Holy Father! 
carry on with power Thy great work, even the work 
of faith and the sanctification of our souls. Quicken 
us, O Lord our God, and stir us up to Thy work; 
and assist us in the performance of all our duties, 
which of ourselves Thou knowest we are unable to 
perform. Work in us to will and to do of Thy good 
pleasure; establish the things, O God, which Thou 
hast already wrought for us; and go on to work 
mightily upon our hearts by Thy grace, till our souls 
are fitted for the enjoyment of Thy glory. 

Gracious Lord, Thy mercies are fresh and new to 
us every morning. We have laid us down and slept, 
and awaked again; for Thou hast sustained us: Thou 
hast kept us from the terrors of the night and from 
all evil accidents; so that we are once more risen in 
peace and sa/ety. Glory be to Thee, O God of our 
salvation, who art still so mindful of us, so merciful 
unto us. Go on, we pray Thee, to be good to us 
this day, and teach us how to demean ourselves 
aright, and to order our affairs to Thy glory. O 
direct our undertakings and prosper our endeavors. 
Rule our hearts in Thy fear and love, and keep us 
living to Thy praise and honor. Behold, we com- 
mit ourselves to Thee, and shelter ourselves under 
the shadow of Thy wings: O keep us from evil, and 
help us to do that which is good and pleasing to our 
God, through Jesus Christ. Give us. Lord, all that 

we have asked as we should; foroivc us all that we 

15* ' ° 



346 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 



have asked amiss; and bestow on us all things need- 
ful, which we should have asked; and which we con- 
tinue to ask, in the comprehensive words of Thy 
dear Son — Our Father, &c. 



o 



An Evening Peayee. 

UR ever blessed and most gracious God! Thou 
art the Lord and giver of our lives, and of all 
the blessings we enjoy. To Thee we owe ourselves, 
and all that we are capable of rendering unto Thee. 
For by Thee, O Lord, we were created; and through 
Thy good Providence it is that we have been spared 
and provided for unto this present time. From 
Thee, our God, comes all our help; and in Thee is 
reposed all our hope. Thou art the bountiful giver 
of all the good that our souls desire, and the merci- 
ful withhoider of all the evil that our sins deserve. 
We acknowledge Thy great and daily goodness to 
us, and our own exceeding unworthiness of the least 
of all Thy mercies. We take shame and confusion 
to ourselves, that we have so little improved and so 
greatly aliused all Thy patience with us, and all the 
various instances of Thy bounty to us. We confess 
it to be a heinous aggravation of our ofiences, that 
we have done so much against Thee, after all the 
great things Thou hast done for us. But we desire, 
O Lord, to be humbled for our offences; and we en- 
treat Thy gracious favor, in Christ Jesus, for the 
pardon of them. Forgive us, we pray Thee, for His 
sake, all the sins that ever we have committed 
against Thee, and absolve us from all the evil 



P>Ex\ JASMIN JExNKS. 347 

whereof we now stand gnilty before Thee. And, 
being justified by faith, let us have peace with God, 
through our Lord Jesus Christ. 

And seeing Tliou art pleased yet to hold our souls 
in life, and to make us find and feel, by every day's 
experience, how abundantly gracious and merciful 
Thou art, O give us hearts more sensible of Thy love, 
more afiected with Thy mercy, and more thankful 
for those continued favors, which Thou art pleased 
to multiply unto us. And help us to show forth 
Thy praise, not only by speaking good of Thy name, 
but by ordering our conversation aright, and by 
adorning the gospel of God our Saviour in all things. 

And now, most merciful Father, we humbly recom- 
mend ourselves, and all that we have, to Thy care 
and protection; beseeching Thee, for Thy dear Son's 
sake, to preserve and defend, to bless and keep us, 
both in soul and body. We know that by reason 
of our weakness and wickedness we are exposed to 
many and great dangers; but we commit ourselves' 
to Thee, trusting that Thou wilt sustain us. O be 
with us through the night season and grant us com- 
fortable repose; that our frail nature being refreshed, 
and our decayed strength renewed, we may rise 
as^ain better fitted for the duties of the followino- 
day, if Thou shalt be pleased to add another day to 
our lives. And as Thou daily multiplicst Thy 
mercies to us, be pleased also to increase our repent- 
ance, and to renew us daily after Thine image: that 
every day may not only bring us nearer to Thy king- 
dom, but make us fitter for the enjoyment of that 



348 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

glory which Thou hast prepared for them that love 
Thee. 

Accept these our prayers, most gracious and mer- 
ciful Lord God: and for all the good things we have 
received, or at present enjoy, or hope for in future 
from Thy bountiful hands, enable us to render our 
grateful thanks: and let it be our employment now, 
as we hope it shall be hereafter, abundantly to utter 
the memory of Thy great goodness, and to sing of 
Thy praise without ceasing. Amen and Amen. 

A Peayer on Going Abroad. 

OLORD! Thou art the same God in all places: 
and nowhere can I go but Thou art there. 
Both at home and abroad, on my way and at the end, 
Thou art ever with me, by Thine universal presence. 

let me also experience the presence of Thy grace, 
and of Thy good Spirit wath me; to conduct and 
guide me continually, to protect and save me from 

'all dangers and mischiefs, and to make my w^ay pros- 
perous and all my affairs successful. Let the bless- 
ing of the Lord folloAv me and rest upon mer- and do 
Thou preserve my going out and my coming in; and 
never leave me nor forsake me, O Lord, but be my 
God and guide this day, in all this journey and all 
my life long. And make me to feel that my w^hole 
life is but a pilgrimage and passage through this 
world; in which I am continually hastening home 
to the end of all my travels, and to the place ^vhere 

1 must take up my everlasting abode. 

O merciful God! make me continually mindful of 



BENJAMIN JENKS. 3^9 

that progress, and of that journey's end: and keep 
me from either wandering from Thy way or falling 
into sin of an}^ kind; which would be the greatest 
evil that could come upon me. Take care of me, I 
beseech Thee, and lead me, and keep me: and after 
all my journeyings here, O bring me safe at last to 
Thy holy hill, and to Thy heavenly rest; even to 
that blessed end of my faith, the everlasting salva- 
tion of my soul. I humbly ask this through the 
greatness of Thy mercy to me in Thy dear Son, my 
gracious Lord and only Saviour, Jesus Christ. Amen. 

A Peayer for Faith and Trust in God. 

WITHOUT faith, it is impossible to please Thee, 
O God: and therefore I come to beg of 
Thee that faith which is Thy gift. Lord, help my 
unbelief; and increase my faith. Whatever Thou 
hast revealed, let me take it upon the credit of Thy 
word: and where I have Thy promise, let me not 
stagger through unbelief, but fully persuade myself 
that it shall be as Thou hast said. O bless and en- 
rich my soul with such a holy, lively and unfeigned 
faith, as may enlighten my mind and purify my 
hearty and influence my whole life; such a faith as 
may enable me to receive Jesus Christ for my Sa- 
viour, and heartily to give up myself to Him as my 
Lord: that, being ruled and sanctified l)y Him in 
this life, I may be for ever saved and glorified by 
Him in the life that is to come. O help me so to 
assent unto the truths, that I may also consent to the 
terms of the gospel. And give me that effectual 



350 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

faith Avliich shall work by love; that faith which 
shall enable me to overcome the world, and to fix 
my attention on those great and glorions things 
which are nnseen and eternal. 

In my greatest darkness and distress, O let me 
trust in the name of the Lord and stay myself upon 
my God; committing my ways unto Thee, and cast- 
ing my burthen upon Thee, and putting my trust in 
Thee, though Thou slay me. Let me trust in Thine 
almighty power to help and save; in Thy tender in- 
clinations to pity and relieve; and in the sure pro- 
mises which Thy love hath made (and which Thy 
faithfulness will certainly make good) unto all that 
wait and call upon Thee. And though I am not 
presently answered in the Welshes of my heart, O let 
me tarry and wait patiently for the salvation of the 
Lord; and have my eyes upon the Lord my God, till 
Thou have mercy upon me. Yea, make me so sound 
and strong in the faith, that my faith may never fail : 
J)ut that it may be found to praise and honor and 
glory in every time of trial; and at the great appear- 
ino; of oui Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. 

A Pkayer for Increase of Grace. 

BLESSED Saviour! who earnest into the world 
that we might have life, and have it more 
abundantly, let me receive out of Thy fulness grace 
sufficient for me; that I may be strong in the Lord, 
and ready to every good work. My Life, my Strength 
and my Redeemer! leave me not under the curse of 
barrenness, to halt or decline in my S2:)iritual estate: 



BENJAMIN JENKS. 351 

but, as Thou liast wrought all my works in me, 
stablish, I beseech Thee, that which Thou hast 
wrought for me; and strengthen the things which 
remain, that are ready to die. Let the seeds of grace 
which Thou hast sown in my heart be watered by 
Thy good Spirit; that my soul may prosper and in- 
crease with the increase of God, even as a watered 
garden or as a spring whose waters fail not. Make 
me to grow in knowledge and in grace; and to 
abound in all those fruits of righteousness, which are 
by Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God; so 
that I may have the witness in myself, that I am 
Thy servant. O my Lord, carry on with power the 
work of faith and holiness in my soul; that my sin- 
ful corruption may grow weaker and weaker; and 
Thy grace in me may grow stronger and stronger; 
till, from groaning under the body of sin and death, 
I come to triumph over all the enemies of my soul. 
And as Thou art pleased to afford me the means of 
grace, O grant me the increase of Thy grace that 
they may not be lost upon me; but that in the use 
of them I may be made still wiser and holier and 
better, and fitter for Thy blessed acceptance in Jesus 
Christ my only Saviour. Amen. 

A PiixWER FOR God's Gracious Presence. 

MY Lord and my God! whom have I in heaven 
but Thee? and there is none upon earth that 
I desire besides Thee. O be not as a stranger to the 
soul in Avhicli Thou hast planted an inclination to 
serve Thee: but bless and honor me with that divine 



352 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

fellowship of which Thou hast made me capable, and 
which my soul panteth after. O give me the satis- 
faction to find that Thou hast given me a heart to 
seek. Yea, give me grace, O my Lord, to go on 
seeking till I find Thee, whom my soul desires above 
ail to love. Let me endure any thing rather than 
Thine absence and displeasure; and desire nothing 
so much as Thy presence and favor. 

And be not Thou far from me, O my God; but 
let me experience Thy gracious presence with me, 
and behold Thy goodness passing before me. Lord 
Jesus, Thou hast promised to be with Th}^ people 
even to the end of Thy Avorld: O come, be with my 
spirit and dwell in my heart by faith. Be with me, 
O ni}' Saviour, every where and at all times, in 
health and in sickness, in prosperity and trouble, in 
all estates and in all events and circumstances of my 
life; let Thy presence sanctify and sweeten to me 
whatever befalls me. Never leave nor forsake me 
in my present pilgrimage, but abide with me till 
Thou hast brouo^ht me safe throuo-h all trials and 
dangers to Thy heaA^enly kingdom; that I may there 
dwell in Thy sight and enjoy Thy love, and inherit 
Thy glory for evermore. Amen. 

A Pkayer on Peeparatiox for Death. 

LORD, what is our life but a vapor, that appears 
for a little time and then vanisheth awa}^! Even 
at the longest, how short! and at the strongest, how 
frail! and when we think ourselves most secure, yet 
we know not what a day may bring forth, nor how 



BENJAMIN JENKS. 353 

soon Thou mayest come to call us to our last account. 

Quickly shall we be as water spilt on the ground, 

that cannot be gathered up again; quickly snatched 

away from hence, and our place here shall kuow us 

no more for ever. Our daj^s, one after another, are 

spent apace: and we know not how near to us is our 

last day, when our bodies shall be laid in the grave, 

and our souls be called to appear at the tribunal of 

God, to receive their eternal doom. Yet how have 

... • . 

I lived in this world, as if I should never leave it; 

hoAv unmindful of my latter end! how improvident 
of my time! how careless of ni}^ soul! how negligent 
in my preparation for my everlasting condition! so 
that Thou mayest justly bring my last hour as a 
snare upon me, to surprise me in my sins, and to cut 
me off in my iniquities. But, O Father of mercies, 
remember not my sins against me; but remember 
Thy own tender mercies and Thy loving kindnesses, 
which have been ever of old. O remember how 
short my time is; and spare me, that I may recover 
strength before I go hence and be no more seen. 
Make me so wise as to consider my latter end: and 
teach me so to number my daj^s that I may apply 
my heart to true wisdom. Lord, what have I to do 
in this world but to make ready for the world to 
come! O that I may be mindful of it, and be care- 
ful to finish my work before I finish my course! 

In the days of my health and prosperity, O that I 
may remember and provide for the time of trouble, 
and sickness and death, when the world's enjo^^ments 
Avill shrink away from me, and prove utterly unable 



354 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

to support and comfort me. Let me never allow 
myself in any course of living wherein I would be 
loath or afraid to die. But let me see my corrup- 
tions mortified and subdued, that they may never rise 
up in judgment against me. Enable me so to die 
unto sin daily that I may not die for sin eternally. 
Instruct me, good Lord, and assist me in my prepa- 
ration for a dying hour: that I may not then be 
fearfully surprised; but may meet it with comfort 
and composure. Quicken me to a serious concern 
about that great work: and help me to perform it 
acceptably and with good success. O that I may be 
fitted for heaven ere I leave this earth, and may have 
peace with God through Jesus Christ, before I de- 
part hence into that state in which I must abide for 
ever! O my Lord, make me so ready to meet Thee 
at Thy coming, that Thine appearance may be the 
matter of my hopes and desires, and joyful expecta- 
tions: that I may look and long for that blessed 
time when Thou wilt put an everlasting period to 
all my troubles and temptations, and exchange my 
present state of infirmity and sin for a state of end- 
less happiness and glory. O Thou who art my life 
and my strength, help me so to live as, at the hour 
of death, I shall wish I had lived; and so to make 
ready for death all my days that, at my last day, I 
may have nothing to do but to die, and cheerfully to 
resign my spirit into Thy gracious hands. O my 
Father, hear and answer my humble petitions; and 
let me find a merciful admission to Thy favor and 
Thv Idnjrdom, for the sake of Jesus Christ. Amen. 




MATTHEW HEjNTRY. 
1662-1714. 

Pleasuees of Communion With God. 

^>V''^^J^ DAY in God's courts, and an hour 
at His table in communion witli Him, 
is very pleasant, better than a thou- 
sand days, than ten thousand hours, 
in any of the enjoyments of sense; but 
this very much increaseth the pleasantness of it, 
that it is the pledge of a blessed eternity, which 
we hope to spend within the veil, in the vision 
and fruition of God. Sabbaths are sweet, as they 
are earnests of the everlasting sabbatism, or keep- 
ing of a Sabbath, (as the apostle calls it, Heb. iv. 
9,) which remains for the people of God. Gospel 
feasts are therefore sweet, because earnests of the 
everlasting feast, to which we shall sit down with 
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob. The joys of the 
Holy Ghost are sweet, as they are earnests of that 
joy of our Lord, into which all Christ's good and 
faithful servants shall enter. Praising God is sweet, 
as it is an earnest of that blessed state, in which we 
shall not rest day or night from praising God. The 
communion of saints is SAveet, as it is an earnest of 



356 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

the pleasure we hope to have in the ' general assem- 
bly, and church of the first-born,' Heb. xii. 23. 

They that travel wisdom's ways, though sometimes 
they find themselves walking in the low and dark- 
some valley of the shadow of death, where they can 
see but a little way before them, yet at other times 
they are led with Moses to the top of Mount Pisgah, 
and thence have a pleasant prospect of the land of 
promise, and the glories of that good land, not with 
such a damp upon the pleasure of it as Moses had, 
Dent, xxxiv. 4, ' Thou shalt see it with thine eyes, 
but thou shalt not go over thither;' but such an ad- 
dition to the pleasure of it as Abraham had, when 
God said to him. Gen. xiii. 14, 15, 'All the land 
which thou seest, to thee will I give it.' Take the 
pleasure of the prospect, as a pledge of the posses- 
sion shortly. 

Exercise of Holy Joy and Peaise. 

LET us be much in the exercise of holy joy, and 
employ ourselves much in praise. Joy is in the 
heart of praise; as praise is the language of- joy; let 
us engage ourselves to these, and quicken ourselves 
in these. God has made these our duty, by these to 
make all the oth^r parts of our duty pleasant to us; 
and for that end we should abound much in them, 
and attend upon God with joy and praise. Let us 
not crowd our spiritual joys into a corner of our 
hearts, nor our thankful praises into a corner of our 
prayers, but give both scope and vent to both. Let 
us live a life of delight in God, and love to think of 



MATTHEW HENRY. 357 

Him as we do of one whom we love and value. Let 
the flowing in of every stream of comfort lead us to 
the fountain; and in every thing that is grateful to us, 
let us ' taste that the Lord is gracious.' Let the dry- 
ing up of every stream of comfort drive us to the 
fountain; and let us rejoice the more in God for our 
being deprived of that which we used to rejoice in. 
Let us be frequent and large in our thanksgiving; it 
will be pleasant to us to recount the favors of God, 
and thus to make some returns for them, though poor 
and mean, yet such as God will graciously accept. 
We should have more pleasure in our religion, if we 
had but learned 'in every thing to give thanks,' 
1 Thess. V. 18, for that takes out more than half the 
bitterness of our afflictions, that we can see cause 
even to be thankful for them; and it infuseth more 
than a double sweetness into our enjoyments, that 
they furnish us with matter for that excellent heav- 
enly work of praise; 'sing praises unto His name, 
for it is pleasant,' comfortable, as well as comely. 
Psalm cxxxv. 3. 

Meditation on the Heavenly Rest. 

LET us converse much with the glory that is to 
be revealed. They that by faith send their 
hearts and best affections before them to heaven, 
while they are here on this earth, may in return fetcli 
thence some of those joys and pleasures that are at 
God's right hand. That which goes up in vapors 
of holy desire, though insensible, in 'groanings 
wliich cannot l)e uttered ' will come down airain in 



358 DEVOTIONAL THOUGIirS. 

dews of heavenly consolations, that will make the 
soul as a watered garden. Let us look much to the 
end of our way, how glorious it will be, and that 
will help to make our way pleasant. This abund- 
antly satisfies the saints, and is the fatness of God's 
house on earth, Psalm xxxvi. 8, 9. This makes them 
now to drink of the river of God's pleasures, that 
with Him is the fountain of life, whence all these 
streams come, and in His light they hope to see 
light, — everlasting light. By frequent meditations 
on that rest which remains for the people of God, 
Heb. iv. 3, we now enter into that rest, and partake 
of the comfort of it. Our hopes of that happiness 
through grace would be very much strengthened, 
and our evidences for it cleared up insensibly, if we 
did but converse more with it, and the discoveries 
made of it in the Scripture. We may have foretastes 
of heavenly delights, while we are here on earth, — 
clusters from Canaan, while we are yet in this wilder- 
ness, — and no pleasures are comparable to that which 
these afford. That is the sweetest joy within us, which 
is borrowed from the joy set before us; and we de- 
prive ourselves very much of the comfort of our re- 
ligion, in not having our e^^e more to that joy. We 
rejoice most triumphantly, and with the greatest de- 
grees of holy glorying, when we * rejoice in hope of 
the glory of God,' Eom. v. 2. In this our heart is 
glad, and our glory rejoiceth. Psalm xvi. 9. 



matthew henry. 359 

The Bible. 

LET us value the Bible as the best book, because 
it is a book for the soul; it discovers our souls 
to us as a glass, aucl is a ' clisccruer of the thoughts 
aucl inteuts of the heart.' It discovers to our souls 
the way that leads to their present and future hap- 
piness. In the Scriptures we think we have eternal 
life, — life for the soul. It is the excellency of the 
word of God, that it ' converteth the soul, it enlight- 
ens the mind, it rejoiceth the heart;' and for this we 
should value it, because it makes the soul wise to 
salvation, and furnisheth it for every thing that is 

good. 

Pious Ejaculations. 

BE frequent and serious in pious ejaculations. 
In waiting upon God we must often speak to 
Him, — must take all occasions to speak to Him, — 
and when we have not opportunity for a solemn ad- 
dress to Him, He will accept of a sudden address, 
if it come from an honest heart. In these David 
waited on God all day, as appears by Psalm xxv. 1, 
'Unto Thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul,' to Thee 
do I dart it, and all its gmcious breathings after 
Thee. We should in a holy ejaculation ask pardon 
for this sin, strength against this corruption, victory 
over this temptation, and it shall not be in vain. 
This is to pray always, and without ceasing. It is 
not the length or language of the prayer that God 
looks at, but the sincerity of thq heart in it; and 
that shall be accepted, though the prayer be very 
fihort, and the groanings such as cannot 1)e uttered. 



360 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

A Life of Communion AYith God. 

IF there be a heaven upon earth, certainly this is 
it, by faith to set the Lord always before us, 
having an eye to Him with suitable affections , as the 
first cause and last end of all thino's that concern us. 
And so, having communion with Him in providences 
as well as ordinances, when we receive the common 
comforts of every day from His hand with love and 
thankfulness, and bear the common crosses and dis- 
appointments of every day, as ordered by His will, 
with patience and submission; w^hen we commit 
every day's care to Him, and manage every day's 
business and converse for Him; having a constant 
habitual regard to God in the settled principles of 
the divine life, and frequent actual outgoings of soul 
towards Him in pious ejaculations, the genuine ex- 
pressions of devout affections; then we live a life of 
communion with God. Did we know by experience 
what it is to live such a life as this, we would not 
exchange the pleasures of it for the peculiar treas- 
ures of kings and provinces. 

The Soul's Tkumph Over Death. 

LEARN then, my soul, learn thou to triumph 
over death and the grave: 'O Death ! where is 
thy sting ? O Grave ! where is thy victory ?' Hav- 
ing laid up thy treasure within the veil, and remitted 
thy best effects and best affections thither, and having 
received the earnest of the purchased possession, be 
still looking, still longing, for that blessed hope. 
Fear not death, for it cannot hurt thee, but desire it 



IMATTTfEW HENRY. 361 

rather, for it will greatly befriend thee. When the 
* earthly house of this tabernacle shall be dissolved/ 
thou shalt remove to the house not made with hands, 
eternal in the heavens. Wish then, wish daily, for 
the coming of Thy Lord, for He shall appear to thy 
joy. ' The vision is for an appointed time, and at the 
end it shall speak, and shall not lie.' Look through 
the windows of this house of clay, like the mother 
of Sisera, when she waited for her son's triumphs, 
and ciy through the lattice, ' Why is His chariot so 
long in coming, why tarry the wheels of His char- 
iot ?' Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly. 

Divine Knowledge. 

THERE is no pleasure in any learning like that 
of learning Christ, and the things that belong 
to our everlasting peace; for that which is known is 
not small and trivial, is not doubtful and uncertain, 
is not foreign to us, and which we are not concerned 
in; which are things that may much diminish the 
pleasure of any knowledge; but it is great and sure, 
and of the last importance to us, and the knowledge 
of it gives us satisfaction: hei'e we may rest our souls. 
To know the perfections of the divine nature, the un- 
searchable riches of divine grace, to be led into the 
mystery of our redemption and reconciliation by 
Christ, this is food; such knowledge as this is a feast 
to the soul; it is meat indeed, and drink indeed; it 
is the knowledo-e of that which the ano^els desire to 
look into, 1 Peter i. 12. If the knowledge of the 
law'of God w^as so sweet to David, ' sweeter than 

16 



362 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

honey to his taste/ Psalm xix. 10, and cxix. 103, how 
much more so should the knowledge of the gospel 
of Christ be to us ? When God gives this wisdom 
and knowledge, with it He gives joy to him that is 
good in His sight, Eccl. iii. 26. 

A Sacraj^iental Petition. 

LORD, meet me with a blessing, a Father's blessing, 
at Thy table : grace Thine own institutions with 
Thy presence; and fulfil in me all the good pleasure 
of Thy goodness, and the work of faith with power, 
for the sake of Jesus Christ my blessed Saviour and 
Redeemer. To Him, with the Father, and the Eter- 
nal Spirit, be everlasting praise. Amen. 




THOMAS WILSON, D. D. 
1663-1755. 

Afflictions. 

rFLICTIONS are no marks of God's 
displeasure. Jesus loved Mary and Laz- 
arus, yet they were both afflicted. 

Punishment is due to sin. We must 
be punished here or hereafter; it is the 
cause of all afflictions, and designed by our gracious 
God to bring us to repentance. 

Prosperity is a most dangerous state; we fancy it 
IS owning to our merit, and it is followed with pride, 
neglect of duty, fearlessness. « 

It is happy for us w^hen God counts us worthy to 
suffer for His name's sake; to contend with Satan, as 
Job did, and be able, through God's grace, to over- 
come so powerful a spirit. 

Afflictions, undergone with resignation, are the 
great test of our love of God; when we love Him, 
when He chastens us. May God sanctify all our 
afflictions to us all. 

May I receive every thing from Thy hand wdth 
patience and with joy ! 

Remember me, O God, in the day of trouble. 



364 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Secure me, by Thy grace, from all excess oi fear, 
concern, and sadness. 

Let the afflictions I meet with be in some measure 
serviceable towards the appeasing of Thy wrath. 
Let them prove the happy occasion of forwarding 
my conversion and salvation. 

The Saviour's Patience. 

WHAT sorrows did He undergo, and with what 
patience did He suffer them ! Patient when 
Judas uuAvorthily betrayed Him w^ith a kiss; patient 
when Caiaphas despitefully used Him; patient when 
hurried from one place to another; patient when 
Herod with his men of war set Him at naught; 
patient when Pilate so unrighteously condemned 
Him; patient when scourged and crowned with 
thorns; patient when His cross was laid upon Him, 
when He was reviled, reproached, scoffed at, and 
every way abused. Lord Jesus, grant me patience, 
after this cxarRple to bear Thy holy will in all things. 

A Prayer for Submission of Spirit. 

FORTIFY my soul, blessed Jesus, with the same 
spirit of submission with which Thou under- 
wentest the death of the Cross, that I may receive 
all events with resignation to the will of God; that 
I may receive troubles, afflictions, disappointments, 
sickness, and death itself, without amazement; these 
being the appointment of Thy justice for the punish- 
ment of sin, and of Thy mercy for the salvation of 
sinners. 



THOMAS WILSON. 365 

Let this be the constant practice of my life, to be 
pleased with all Thy choices, that when sickness and 
death approach, I may be prepared to submit my 
will to the will of my Maker. 

And O that, in the mean time, my heart may 
always go along with my lips in this j^etition, — Thy 
will he done. Amen. 

A Morning Prayer. 

BLESSED be the Lord for His mercies renewed 
unto me every morning; for my ^^reservation 
and refreshment^ and for all the l^lessings of the night 
past; — for which all thanks and glory be to Thee, 
my God and Father ! 

Gracious God, continue to me these, and all other 
Thy blessings, so long, and in such a measure, as 
shall be most for Thy glory and my salvation. 

Possess my soul, I beseech Thee, with a true and 
saving faith, and with such a sense of Thy goodness 
to me, and of my dependance upon Thee, that it may 
be my delight, as it is my interest and duty, to serve 
and obey Thee. 

But that I may serve Thee with a quiet mind, for- 
give me all my sins, I beseech Thee, for Thy dear 
Son's sake, and withhold the judgments of which my 
conscience is afraid. 

Keep it ever in the heart of Thy servant, that it is 
an evil thing and bitter to forsake and offend the 
Lord. And above all things, Jceep me from icilful 
and deliberate sins, that I may never grieve Thy 
Holy Spirit, nor provoke Thee to leave me to myself. 



366 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Let Thy restraining grace preserve me from the 
temptations of the worlds the Jlesh^ and the devil; 
that I may fall into no sin, nor run into any kind of 
danger; but that all my doings may be ordered by 
Thee, that I may do always that which is righteous 
in Thy sight: and that I may live and act as having 
Thee, O God, the constant witness of all my thoughts, 
designs, words, and actions. 

May I never render myself, by new sins, unworthy 
of Thy guidance and protection ! 

Suffer me not to go astray, or bring me back by 
such ways as to Thee shall seem meet. 

May I love Thee with all my heart, and all man- 
Idnd for Thy sake ! And may I ever have this sure 
proof of Thy love abiding in me, that I study to 
please Thee, and to keep Th}^ commandments ! And 
that I may forgive, and love, and do good to my 
neighbors, as becomes a disciple of Jesus Christ ! 

Assist me by Thy grace, faithfully to perform all 
the duties of my calling; and thankfully to receive, 
and patiently to bear, whatever Thy providence shall 
order for me. 

Preserve me from an idle and useless life; ever 
remembering, that the night cometh when no man can 
work; and that now is the time in which to provide 
for eternity. 

And grant, O Lord, that no worldly pleasure, no 
worldly business, may ever make me lose the sight 
of death. 

And may the thoughts of death oblige me to be 
truly and sincerely good; to mortify all ^9?7c7e, and 



THOMAS WILSON. 367 

vanity^ covetousness^ hatred, envy, and malice; to be 
serious, sober, and loatchful, while I continue in this 
state of trial. 

Hear me, O Heavenly Father, not according to my 
imperfect petitions, but according to the full mean- 
ing of that holy prayer, which Thy beloved Son hath 
taught us, in compassion to our infirmities: 

Our Father, which art in heaven, &c. 

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, (&c. 

An Evening Prayer. 

THAT it hath pleased Thee, O God, to add an- 
other day to the years of my life, and to keep 
me from the dangers ^f an evil world: For these, 
and for all Thy mercies from day to day bestowed 
upon me, I bless Thy good and gracious iDrovidence, 
most earnestly beseeching Thee to pardon my ofiences 
of the day past, and to grant that they may never 
rise up in judgment against me. 

Lord, the frailty of man, Avithout Thee, cannot but 
fall: in all temptations, therefore, I beseech Thee to 
succor me, that no sin may ever get the dominion 
over me. 

Give me a salutary dread of the corruption of my 
OAvn heart: Make me truly sensible of the end of 
sin, and mindful of my own infirmities and back- 
slidinjrs. 

Vouchsafe unto all sinners a true sense of their 
unhappy state, a fear of Thy judgments, and grace 
and strength to break their bonds. 

Enlighten my soul with saving truth. Correct me 



368 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

ill mercy, and reduce me when I go astray. Make 
me ever mindful of my latter end, and fix in my 
heart a lively sense of the happiness and misery of 
the world to come. 

May the thoughts of death mortify in me all pride 
and covetousness, and a love for this world; and may 
my firm belief of a judgment to come make me ever 
careful to please Thee, my Lord and Judge, that I 
may find mercy at that day ! 

Grant that I may lie down to sleep with the same 
charitable and forgiving temper, in which I desire 
and hope to die. 

And may the Almighty God take me, and all that 
belong to me, under His gracious and powerful pro- 
tection ! May He give His angels charge concerning 
us, and keep us in perpetual peace and safety, 
throu£:h Jesus Christ our Lord. 

St. John, xvi. 23. Verily ^ I say unto you^ What- 
soever ye shall ask the Father in my name^ He will 
give it you. 

Li Thy name, O Jesus, and in the full meaning of 
the words which Thou hast taught us, I piny God, 
for Thy sake, to hear me, and to give me what is 
most convenient for me: 

Our Father^ which art in heaven^ i&c. 

The Grace of our Lord Jesxis Christy (Mc, 




ISAAC WATTS, D. D. 
1G74-1748. 

Holy Breathings. 

HAPPY day and liappj hour indeed, 
that shall finish the long absence of my 
Beloved, and place me within sight of my 
adored Jesus! When shall I see that 
lovely, that illustrious Friend, who laid 
down His own life to rescue mine, His own valua- 
ble life to ransom a worm, a rebel that deserved 
to die? He suffered, He groaned. He died; but 
He rose again, the blessed Saviour arose. He 
lives. He reigns exalted over all the creation. 
Faith beholds Him risen, and reigning, but it is 
through a glass, it is at a distance, and but dark- 
ly. I wait, I hope for a more divine pleasure; it 
is a delight worth dying for, to behold Him face 
to face, to see Him as He is, to converse with His 
wondrous person, and to survey His glories. Alas ! 
my soul is too patient of this long distance and 
separation. O for the wings of love, to bear my spirit 
upward in holy breathings! Methinks I would 
long to be near Him, to be with Him, to give Him 
my highest praises and thanks for my share in His 
dying love. I would rise to join with the blessed 



370 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

acclamations, the holy songs of the saints on high, 
while they behold their exalted Saviour. How sweet 
their songs ! How loud their acclamations ! This is 
the man, the God-man who died for me ! This is the 
Son of God, who was buifetted, who was crowned 
with thorns, who endured exquisite anguish, and un- 
known sorrows for me, who was scourged, and wound- 
ed, and crucified for me ! This is the glorious Per- 
son, the Lamb of God, who washed me from my 
sins in His own blood. Blessing, honor, and salva- 
tion to His holy name for ever. Amen. 

I shall behold His glories there, 
And pay Him my eternal share 
Of praise, and gratitude, and love^ 
Among ten thousand saints above. 

Holy Fortitude. 

GIVE me, O my God, give me the spirit of 
prayer, and let me keep ever near to the throne 
of grace, that my soul may not come thither as a 
stranger, but that in every surprise I may address 
Thee as a God near at hand, and that in the name 
of my great High Priest, Jesus the Son of God, I 
may find grace ready to help me in the time of need. 
Wean me, O Lord, from all the delights and hopes 
of flesh and sense ! Mortify me to all the honors 
and the joys of a perishing life, and a vain world. 
Arm my soul all over with a religious hardiness, that 
I may venture into the field of battle, and may scarce 
feel the wounds which I receive in Thy cause. Give 
me the happy skill of diverting my fears, when I 



ISAAC WATTS. 371 

cannot at once subdue them, and lead me into proper 
employments of my heart and hand for this jDur- 
pose. 

I would live as under the eye of God. I would 
take notice of His hand*in all the affairs of life, and 
all the danorers that attend me. I Avould learn of 
Moses to endure the fight of afflictions, as seeing Him 
who is invisible. Let me hear Thy voice, O Jesus, 
my Saviour, let me hear Thy voice walking upon 
the waters; when I am tossed about upon the waves of 
distress and difficulty, speak to my soul and say. It 
is I^ be not afraid. 

I would be bravely prepared for the worst of suf- 
ferings to which my circumstances in this life may 
expose me. I would be ready to meet contempt and 
scandal, poverty, sickness, and death itself. Jesus 
can support me in the heaviest distresses, though all 
the sorrows I fear should come upon me. He can 
bear me on the wings of faith and hope, high above 
all the turmoils and disquietudes of life: He can carry 
me through the shadow of the dark valley, and scat- 
ter all the terrors of it. Give me, O Lord, these 
wings of faith and hope, and bear me upon them 
through all the remains of my short journc}^ in the 
wilderness: Make me active and zealous in Thy 
cause while I live, and convey me safely above the 
reach of fear, through the valley of death, to the 
inheritan^je prepared for me in the land of light. 
Then my fears shall cease for ever, for enemies and 
dangers are not known in that land. There all our 
conflicts shall be changed into everlasting triumphs, 



372 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

while songs of honor and salvation ascend in a full 
choir to the grace that has made us overcomers. 
Amen. 

Fly to tiie Mercy-seat. 

FLY daily to the mercy-seat for divine aidj Com- 
mit thy soul and body to the keeping of Christ; 
He is exalted and authorized to take care of sinners, 
who make Him their refuge; He is also compassion- 
ate, and ready to succor the tempted. There is 
cleansing virtue in the blood of Christ to wash away 
the foulest guilt, and to sprinkle the conscience of 
the humble penitent with peace and pardon; and 
there is all-sufficient power and grace with Him to 
subdue the most raging vices. Make haste to Him 
by humble faith, and most importunate pra^^er; Con- 
tinue instant at the throne: Never rest till He hath 
by His providence and His grace delivered you from 
the dangerous temptation, or made you conqueror 
over the sin that easily besets you. There are a 
thousand souls in heaven, who were once conflicting 
here with the same impure temptations, but they 
gained the victory by the blood and Spirit of Christ, 
cuicl are made more than conquerors through Him icho 
hath loved them. 

Uncertainty of Life. 

WE are all borderers upon the river of death, 
"which conveys us into the eternal w^orld, and 
we should be ever waiting the call of our Lord, that 
we may launch away with joy to the regions of im- 
mortality: But thoughtless creatures that we are, we 



ISAAC WATTS. 373 

are perpetually wandering far up into the fields of 
sense and time, we are gathering the gay and fading 
flowers that grow there, and filling our laps with 
them as a fair treasure, or making garlands for am- 
bition to crown our brows, till one and another of us 
is called off on a sudden and hurried away from this 
mortal coast: Those of us who survive are surprised 
a little, we stand gazing, we follow our departing 
friends with a weeping eye for a minute or two, and 
then we fall to our amusements again and grow busy, 
as before, in gathering the flowers of time and sense. 
O how fond we are to enrich ourselves with these 
perishing trifles, and adorn our heads with honors 
and withering vanities, never thinking Avhich of us 
may receive the next summons to leave all behind 
us and stand before God! but each presumes ' it will 
not be sent to me.' We trifle with God and thing-s 
eternal, or utterly forget them, Avhile our hands and 
our hearts are thus deeply engaged in the pursuit of 
our earthly delights: All our powers of thought and 
action are intensely busied amongst the dreams of 
this life, while we are asleep to God, because we 
vainly imagine He will not call us yet. 

Awake to God. 

WHEN we are awake, we are not only fitter for 
the coming of our Lord to call us away by 
death, and fitter for His appearance to the great 
judgment, but we are better prepared also to attend 
Him in every call to present duty, and more ready 
to meet His appearance in every providence. It is 



374: DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

the Christian soldier Avho is ever awake and ou liis 
guard, that is only fit for every sudden appointment 
to new stations and services; He is more prepared 
for any post of danger and hazardous enterprise, and 
better furnished to sustain the rouofhest assaults. 
We shall be less shocked at sudden afflictions here 
on earth, if our souls keep heaven in view and are 
ready winged for immortality. When we are fit to 
die, we are fit to live also and to do better service 
for God, in whichsoever of His worlds He shall 
please to appoint our station. ' My business, O 
Father, and my joy is to do Thy will among the 
sons of mortality, or among the spirits of the blessed 
on high.' 

' Let us remember we have slept too long already 
in days past, and it is but a little while that we are 
called to watch.' We have worn away too much of 
our life in sloth and drowsiness. The night is far 
spent with many of us, the day is at hand; it is noio 
high time to atoahe out of sleep, for now is our salva- 
tion nearer than when loe first believed, Rom. xiii. 11, 
22. Another hour or two, and the night will be at 
an end with us; Jesus, the Morning Star, is just ap- 
pearing: What, can we not watch one hour? Matt. 
xxvi. 40. O happy souls, that keep themselves 
awake to God in the midst of this dreaming world! 
Happy indeed when our Lord shall call us out of 
these dusky regions, and we shall answer His call 
with holy joy and spring upward to the inheritance 
of the saints in lio'ht! Then all the seasons of dark- 
ness and slum])criug will be finished for ever; there 



ISAAC WATTS. 375 

is no need of laborious watchfulness in that world, 
where there is no flesh and blood to hang heavy 
upon the spirit; but the sanctified powers of the soul 
are all life and immortal vigor. There is no want 
of the sunbeams to make their daylight, or to irra- 
diate that city; the, glory of God enlightens it with 
divine splendors, and the Lamb is the light thereof. 
Rev. xxi. 23. No inhabitant can sleep under such a 
united blaze of grace and glory: No faintings of na- 
ture, no languor or weariness are found in all that 
vital climate; every citizen is for ever awake and busy 
under the beams of that glorious day; zeal and love, 
and joy, are the springs of their eternal activity, and 
there is no night there, Rev. xxii. 5. 

Heavenly Rest. 

THE grace of God works us up to a preparation 
for heaven, ' by carrying us through those trials 
and sufieriugs, those labors and conflicts here in this 
life, which will not only make heaven the sweeter to 
us, but will make it more honorable for God Him- 
self to bestow this heaven upon us.' When the 
spirits of a creature are almost worn out with the 
toilsome labors of the day, what an additional sweet- 
ness does he find in rest and repose ! What an in- 
ward relish and satisfaction to the soul, that has been 
fatigued under a long and tedious war with sins and 
temptations, to be transported to such a place where 
sin cannot follow them, and temptation can never 
reach them ! How will it enhance all the felicities 
of the heavenly world when we enter into it, to feel 



376 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

ourselves released from all the trials and distresses, 
and sufferings which we have sustained in our travels 
thitherwards ! The review of the waves and the 
storms wherein we had been tossed for a long season , 
and had been almost shipwrecked there, will make 
the peaceful haven of eternity, to which we shall 
arrive, much more agreeable to every one of the 
sufferers, 2 Cor. iv. 17, Our light afflictions^ which are 
hut for a moment^ are in this way working for us a 
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory ^ and 
preparing us for the possession of it. 

There shall I bathe nw weary soul 

In seas of heavenly rest. 
And not a wave of trouble roll 

Across my peaceful breast. 

No Sorrow in Heaven. 

IN that world there is no ^rrow, for there is no 
sin; the inhabitants of that city, of the heavenly 
Jerusalem, shall never say I am sick; for the people 
that divell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity^ 
Isaiah xxxiii. 24. When the righteous are dismissed 
from this flesh they enter into peace, their bodies 7'est 
in their beds of earth, and their spirits walk in 
heaven, each one in his own uprightness, Isaiah Ivii. 
2. And as there is no sin within them to render 
them uneasy, so there is no troublesome guest, no 
evil attendant without them, that can give them fear 
or pain; no sinners to vex them, no tempter to de- 
ceive them, no spirit of hell to devour or destroy, 
Isaiah xxxv. 9, 10, No lion shall be there, nor any 



ISAAC WATTS. 377 

ravenous beast shall go up thereon, it shall not befou7id 
there; but the redeemed shall walk there. And the 
ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Zion 
with songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads; they 
shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorroio and sighing 
shall flee away. 



w 



Our Pious Departed Friends. 
THEN we think of our pious friends departed, 
our foolish imagination is too ready to indulge 
and improve our sorrow. We sit solitary in the 
parlor and tlie chamber, we miss them there, and we 
cry, ' They are lost.' We retire melancholy to the 
closet, and bewail a lost father, or lost mother, or 
perhaps a nearer and dearer relative. We miss them 
in our daily conversation, we miss them in all their 
friendly offices, and their endearing sensible charac- 
ters, and we are ready to say again, ' Alas ! they are 
lost.' This is the language of flesh and blood, of 
sense and fancy. Come, let our faith teach us to 
think and speak of them under a more cheerful and 
a juster representation: They are not utterly lost, for 
they are present with Christ and with God. They 
are departed our world, where all things are imper- 
fect, to those upper regions where light and perfec- 
tion dwell. They have left their offices and stations 
here among us, but they are employed in a far divin- 
er manner, and have new stations and nobler offices 
on high. Their places on earth indeed know them 
no more, but their places in heaven know them well, 
even those glorious mansions that were prepared for 



378 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

them from the foundation of the world. Then* place 
is empty in the earthly sanctuary, and in the days 
of solemn assembly, but they appear above in the 
heavenly Jerusalem as fair pillars an d ornaments in 
the temple of God on high, and shall for ever dwell 
with Him there. 

Are the spirits of the just, who are departed from 
earth, made perfect in heaven? then they are not the 
proper subjects for our perpetual sorrows and end- 
less complaints. Let us moderate our grief, there- 
fore, for that very providence that has fixed them in 
perfect holiness and joy. 

We lament their absence, and our loss indeed is 
great; but the spirit of Christian friendship should 
teach us to rejoice in their exaltation. Is it no plea- 
sure to think of them as released from all the bonds 
of infirm nature, from pains of mortality, and the 
disquietudes of a sinful world ? Is it not better to 
lift our eyes upward, and view a parent or beloved 
friend adorned with perfect grace and complete in 
glory, exulting in the fulness of joy near the throne 
of God, than to behold him laboring under the tire- 
some disorders of old age, groaning under the anguish 
and torment of acute distempers, and striving with 
the troublesome attendants of this sinful and painful 
state ? Do we profess fondness and afiection for those 
that are gone, and shall we not please ourselves a 
little in their happiness, or at least abate our mourn- 
ing? Doth not St. Paul tell the Corinthians, this is 
what loe icish, even your perfection? 2 Cor. xiii. 9; 
and should not saints in the lower world take some 



ISAAC WATTS. 379 

satisfaction when a felloAv-saiut is arrived at the sum 
of his own wishes, even perfect holiness and joy on 
high ? 

The Lord's Supper. 

HOW happil}^ is the Lord's swpjper contrived by 
divine wisdom to represent the death and love 
of our blessed Saviour, and the benefits that we de- 
rive from His sufferings ? Jesus Christ crucified is 
evidently set forth before our eyes^ Gal. iii. 1. He is 
represented even in His bleeding and dying love, 
while the bread is broken, and the wine poured out 
before us. O how should we loose the springs of 
pious passion at such a season ! How should our* 
love to our Redeemer kindle and rise high at the 
sight of the sufferings of the Son of God, who took 
our flesh and blood, that He might be capable of dy- 
ing; that His flesh might be torn, and cut and bruised, 
that His blood might be spilled for our sakes, that 
He mio^ht bear such ao:onies as belono^ed to sinful 
creatures, with a gracious design to deliver us from 
misery and everlasting death. For ever blessed be 
the name of Jesus, who has suffered such pangs and 
sorrows in our stead, and blessed be His wisdom and 
grace who has appointed the continual repetition of 
such an ordinance, and such a lively memorial of His 
dying love, to touch all the springs of religious af- 
fection within us. 



380 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

The End of Time. 

IT is finished, said our blessed Lord on the Cross: 
It is finished, may every one of His followers 
say at the hour of death, and at the end of time: 
My sins and follies, my distresses and my sufierings, 
are finished for ever, and the mighty angel swears to 
it, that the time of these evils is no longer; they are 
vanished, and shall never return. O happy souls, 
who have been so wise as to count the short and un- 
certain number of your days on earth, as to make an 
early provision for a removal to heaven ! Blessed 
are you above all the powers of thought and lan- 
guage. Days, and months, and years, and all these 
'short and painful periods of time, shall be swallow- 
ed up in a long and blissful eternity; the stream of 
time which has run between the banks of this mortal 
life, and borne you along amidst many dangerous 
rocks of temptation, fear, and sorrow, shall launch 
you out into the ocean of pleasures which have no 
period: those felicities must be everlasting, for du- 
ration has no limits there; time with all its measures 
shall be no more. 

No Pain Among the Blessed. 

O GLORIOUS and happy state I where millions 
of creatures who have dwelt in bodies of sin 
and pain, and have been guilty of innumerable fol- 
lies aHd ofiences against their Maker, yet they are all 
foi'iriven, their robes are washed and made white in 
the blood of Jesus, their iniquities are canceled for 
ever, and there shall not be one stroke more from 



ISAAC WATTS. 3g2 

the hand of God to chasten them, nor one more sen- 
sation of pain to punish them. Divine and illustri- 
ous privilege indeed, and a glorious world, where 
complete sanctification of all the powers of nature 
shall for ever secure us fi-om new sins, and where the 
springs and causes of pain shall for ever cease, both 
within us and without us ! Our glorified bodies shall 
have no avenue for pain to enter; the gates of heaven 
shall admit no enemy to afflict or hurt us; God is our 
everlasting friend, and our souls shall be satisfied 
with the rivers of pleasure ivhicJi fioiv for ever at the 
right hand of God, Psalm xvi. 11. 

No Night in Heaven. 
• r TNDER our darkest nights, our most inactive 

v_J and heavy hours, our most uncomfortable sea- 
sons here on earth, let us remember we are travel- 
ing to a world of light and joy.' If we happen to 
lie awake, in midnight darkness, and count the tedi- 
ous hours one after another in a mournful succession, 
under any of the maladies of nature, or the sorrows 
of this life, let us comfort ourselves that we are not 
shut up in eternal night and darkness without hope, 
but w^e are still making our way towards that coun- 
try where there is no night, where there is neither 
sin nor pain, malady nor sorrow. 

What if the blessed God is pleased to try us by 
the withholding of light from our eyes for a season? 
What if we are called to seek our duty in dark prov- 
idences, or are perplexed in deej) and difiicult con- 
troversies, wherein we caimot find the light of truth? 



382 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

What if we ' sit in darkness and mourning, and see 
no light, and the beams of divine consolation are cut 
ofi'j let us still trust in the name of the Lord., and stay 
ourselves ujpoyi our God^ especially as He manifests 
Himself in the Lamb that was slain, the blessed 
medium of His mercy:' Isaiah 1. 10. Let us learn 
to say with the prophet Micah, in the spirit of faith, 
Micah vii. 8, 9: When I sit in darkness^ the Lord 
will he a light unto me; — He will bring me forth to 
the light and I shall behold His righteousness. 

Blessed be God, that the night of ignorance, 
grief, or affliction, which attends us in this world, is 
not everlasting night. Heaven and glory are at 
hand; wait and watch for the morning Star, for Jesus 
and the resurrection. Roll on apace in your ap- 
pointed course, ye suns and moons, and all ye twink- 
ling enlighteners of the sky; carry on the changing 
seasons of lio^ht and darkness in this lower world 
with your utmost speed, till you have finished all 
my appointed months of continuance here. The 
li«rht of faith shows me the dawnino^ of that orlorious 
day, which shall finish all my nights and darknesses 
for ever. Make haste, O delightful morning, and 
delay not my hopes. Let me hasten, let me arrive 
at that blessed inheritance, those mansions of para- 
dise, where night is never known, but one eternal 
day shall make our knowledge, our holiness, and om* 
joy eternal. 



isaac watts. 383 

Joy at the Resurrection. 

A WAKE, O my soul, and bless the Lord with 
JTA- all thy powers, and give thanks with holy 
joy for the gospel of His Son Jesus. It is Jesus, by 
His rising from the dead, has left a divine light upon 
the gates of the grave, and scattered much of the 
darkness that surrounded it. It is the gospel of 
Christ which casts a glory even upon the bed of 
death, and spreads a brightness upon the graves of 
the saints in the lively views of a great rising-day. 
O blessed and surprising prospect of faith ! O illus- 
trious scenes of fnture vision and transport ! When 
the Son of God shall bring forth to public view all 
His redeemed ones, who had been long hidden in 
night and dust, and shall present them all to God 
the Father in His own image,- bright, and holy, and 
unblemished, in the midst of all the splendors of the 
resurrection ! O blessed and joyful voice, when He 
shall say Avith divine pleasure, Here am /, and the 
children which Thou hast given me: Isaiah viii. 18; 
Heb. ii. 13. We have both passed through the 
grave, and I have made them all conquerors of death, 
and vested them with immortality, according to Thy 
divine commission ! Thine they were^ O Father^ and 
Thou hast given them into my hands, and behold I 
have brought them all safe to Thy appointed man- 
sions, and I present them before Thee xmthout sjpot 
or blemish, John xvii. 6. 

• And many a parent of a pious household in that 
day, when they shall see their sons and their daugh- 
ters around them, all arraved with the beams of the 



384 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Sun of righteousness, shall echo with holy joy to the 
voice of the blessed Jesus, Lord, here am /, and 
the children ivhich Thou hast given me, Heb. ii. 13. 
I was afraid, as Job once might be when his friends 
suggested this fear; I was afraid that my children 
had sinned against God, and He had cast them away 
for their transgression, Job viii. 4. But I am now 
convinced, when He seized them from my sight, He 
only took them out of the way of temptation and 
danger, and concealed them for a season in His safe 
lii ding-place: I mourned in the daytime for a lost son 
or a lost daughter, and in the night my couch was 
bedewed with my tears: I was scared with midnight 
dreams on their account, and the visions of the grave 
terrified me, because my children were there: I gave 
up myself to sorrow, -for fear of the displeasure of 
my God both against them and against me: But how 
unreasonable were these sorrows ! How groundless 
were my fears ! How gloriously am I disappointed 
this blessed morniug ! I see my dear oifspring called 
out of that long retreat where God had concealed 
them, and they arise to meet the divine call; I hear 
them answering with joy to the happy summons. 
My eyes behold them risen in the image of my God 
and their God; they are near me, they stand with 
me at the right hand of the Judge; now shall we 
rejoice together in the sentence of eternal blessed- 
ness from the lips of my Lord, my Redeemer, and 
their Redeemer. 



isaac watts. 385 

Death of Pious Youth. 

OUR blessed Jesus ivalks among the roses and 
lilies in the garden of His church, and when 
He sees a wintiy storm coming upon some tender 
plants of righteousness, He hides them in the earth 
to preserve life in them, that they may bloom with 
new glories when they shall be raised from that bed. 
The blessed God acts like a tender Father, and con- 
sults the safety and the honor of His children, when 
the hand of His mercy snatches them away before 
that powerful temptation comes, which He foresees 
would have defiled and distressed, and almost destroy- 
ed them. They are not lost, but they are gone to 
rest a little sooner than we are. Peace be to that 
bed of dust where they are hidden, by the hand of 
their God, from unknown dangers ! Blessed be our 
Lord Jesus, who has the keys of the grave, and never 
opens it for His fiivorites but in the wisest season. 

Death of Christian Relatives. 

IF our departed relative were a Christian indeed, 
and gave us comfortable hope in his death, then it 
leads our thoughts naturally to heaven, and most 
powerfully touches the springs of our heavenly 
hopes. It raises our pious wishes to the upper 
world, and we say, as Thomas did at the dcatli of 
Lazarus, Let us go, that ive may die icith him, John 
xi. 16. Let us go to our God and our holy kindred, 
and enjoy their better presence there. Let us not 
sorrow for the dead as those that mourn ivithout hope^ 
1 Thess. iv. 13, but look upward to things unseen 

17 



386 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

and forward to the great rising-day, and rejoice in 
the promised and future glories that are beyond life 
and time. 

Every dear relative that dies and leaves us, gives 
us one motive more to be willing to die: Their death 
furnishes ns with one new allurement toward heaven, 
and breaks off one of the fetters and bonds that tied 
us down to this earth. Alas ! w^e are tied too fast to 
these earthly tabernacles, these prisons of flesh and 
blood. We are attached too much to flesh and blood 
still, though we find them such painful and such sin- 
ful companions. We love to tarry in this world too 
well, though we meet with so many weaning strokes 
to divide our hearts from it. O it is good to live 
more loose from earth, that Ave may be ready for 
the parting hour: Let us not be angry with the sov- 
ereifrn hand of God that breaks one bond after 
another; though the strokes be painful, yet they 
loosen our spirits from this cottage of clay; they 
teach us to practice a flight heavenward in holy med- 
itations and devout breathings; and we learn to say, 
Hoiv long^ O Lord, Jioiv long 9 

The recollection. — Have any of us lately felt such 
parting strokes as these ? Have we lost any of our 
beloved kindred ? God calls upon us now, and en- 
quires, ' What have you learned of these divine les- 
sons V I would ask myself this day, Have I seen the 
emptiness and the insufficiency of creatures, and re- 
called my hope and confidence from every thing be- 
neath and beside God? Have I passed through this sol- 
cnui hour of trial well, and shown my supreme love 



ISAAC WATTS. 387 

to Gvjd, and my most entire submission to His sover- 
eignty, by resigning so dear a comfort at His de- 
mand ? Have I been tanglit by the inward pain 
which I felt at parting, and by the smart which still 
remains, how dansferous a thino^ it is to love a crea- 
ture too well ? Have I dnly considered my past 
conduct toward my relations deceased, and does it 
approve itself to my conscience at the review ? Or 
have I found matter for self-condemnation and repen- 
tance ? Have I treasured up the memory of their 
virtues in my heart, and set them l)efore me as the 
copy of my life ? Have my thoughts followed the 
soul of my dear departed friend, and traced it with 
pleasure to the world of blessed spirits; and does 
my own soul seem to fix its hope and joy there, and 
to dwell there above ? Are my thoughts become 
more spiritual and heavenly? Do I live more as a 
borderer on the other world, since a piece of me is 
gone thither ? And am I ready for the summons, if 
it should come before to-morrow ? 

Happy Christian, who has been taught by the 
spirit of grace to improve the death of the dearest 
relative to so divine an advantage. The words of 
my text are then fulfilled experimentally in you: 
Death is yours: Death itself is made a part of your 
treasures. The parting stroke is painful indeed, but 
it carries a blessing in it too: for it has promoted 
your heavenly and eternal interest. 



38(S DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 



o 



The Believer's Possessions. 
• 73 EMEMBEE, O my soul, death ts thine: There 
J_\) is nothing in that dark valley shall hurt thee. 
Lift up thy head, arise, and shake thyself out of the 
dust. Let thy faith take a sweet prospect over the 
little hills of time, and beyond the vale of death: Look 
far into the invisible world, and banish all thy fears 
under the strong allurement of the joys that are pre- 
pared for thee; wait with pleasure for the hour of 
thy departure, and rejoice and triumph when the 
divine message shall come. While thou continuest 
here, life is thine. When thou goest hence, death is 
thine; things present and tilings to come are thine; 
and the invisible world to which thou art hastenino^, 
has everlasting joys in reserve for thee: Heaven it- 
self is thine: Heaven is the inheritance of all the 
saints: The glories laid up there are waiting for thy 
possession: The dissolution of thy earthly tabernacle 
shall convey thee into the midst of them. 

'Awake, arise, and meet the haj^py moment, when 
thou shalt l)e undressed of this sinful llesh and blood: 
O let these defiled garments ever sit loose about thee, 
that they may be cast off without pain and regret: 
Go, my soul, at the summons of thy God and Father, 
and when thy symptoms of dying nature shall say, 
Ilar/v, He calleth thee, let thy faith and thy love, and 
thy joy answer. Lord, I come. Go, my soul, at the 
invitation of thy Redeemer, at the voice of thy 
Beloved: Behold, He appears. He comes! Go forth 
and meet Him. Drop this fleshy clothing with holy 
delight; arise, put on thy beautiful garments, and 



ISAAC WATTS. 389 

shine, for the glory of the Lord is rising iqjon thee: 
Go shine among the sjnrits of the just made j^erfact, 
thyself a spirit released from earth, and divested of 
all imperfection. O happy farewell to life and time ! 
O glorious entrance into immortality !' 



The Christian's Hidden Life in Heaven. 

HOW little is death to be dreaded by a believer, 
since it will bring the soul to the full posses- 
sion of its hidden life in" heaven ! It is a dark valley 
that divides between this world and the next; but it 
is all a region of light and blessedness beyond it. 
We are now borderers on the eternal world, and we 
know but little of that invisible country. Approach- 
ing death opens the gates to us, and begins to give 
our holy curiosity some secret satisfaction; and yet 
how we shrink backward wdien that glorious un- 
known city is opening upon us ! and are ready to beg 
and pray that the gates might be closed again: ' O ! 
for a little more time, a little longer continuance in 
this lower visible world !' This is the lanffuao-e of 
the fearful believer; but it is better to have our 
Christian courage wrought up to a divine height, and 
to say, ' Ojpen, ye everlasting gates, and he ye lift up, 
ye i7nmortal doors, that we may enter into the 
place where the King of glory is.' There shall we 
see God, the great unkuviwn, and rejoice in His over- 
flowing love. We shall see Him not as Ave do on 
earth, darkly, through the glass of ordinances; but 
inferior spirits shall converse with the supreme Spirit, 



390 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

as bodies do with bodies; that is, face to face, 1 Cor. 
xiii. 12. 

There shall we behold Christ our Lord in the dig- 
nity of His character as Mediator, in the glory of 
His kingdom, and the all-sufficiency of His Godhead; 
and we shall be for ever with Him. There shall we 
see millions of blessed spirits, w^ho have lived the 
same hidden life as we do, and passed through this 
vale of tears, with the same attending difficulties and 
sorrows, and by the same divine assistances. They 
were unknown, and covered with dust as we are, 
wliile they dwelt in flesh, but they appear all-glori- 
ous and well-known in the world of spirits, and 
exult in open and immortal light; we shall see them, 
and w^e shall triumph wdth them in that day; we 
shall learn their language, and taste their joys; we 
shall be partakers of the same glory, which Christ 
our life diffuses all around Him, on the blessed in- 
habitants of that intellectual world. 

There shall we sec His face 

And never, never sin; 
And from the rivers of His grace 

Drink endless pleasures in. 

All-sufficiency of God. 

THE Godhead is an infinite ocean of life and 
blessedness, and finite vessels may be for ever 
swelling, and for ever filling in that sea of all-suffi- 
ciency. There must be no tiresome satiety in that 
everlasting entertainment. God shall create the joys 
of His saints ever fresh: He shall throw open His 



ISAAC WATTS. o91 

endless stores of blessing, unknown even to the first 
rank of ano-els: and feast the sons and dauo'hters of 
men with pleasures akin to those which were pre- 
pared for the Son of God. For verily He took not 
upon Him the nature of angels, but the likeness of 
sinful flesh: and when He shall appear the second 
time without sin to our salvation, we shall then be 
made like Him, for we shall see Him as He is. 




THOMAS ADAM. 

1701-1784. 

The Man of Prayer. 

O Y>^ords can describe tlie blessed- 
ness of a soul wbicli lives in com- 
munion with God; asking and receiving, 
seeking and finding, knocking and having 
the door opened. For what is happiness 
but this? Or how can we describe it better, than 
by saying that a man wishes for the very thing he 
ought, and is sure to have it? And such is the 
man of prayer, the Christian. He chooses the 
Fountain of all ha23piness for his portion, and can- 
not be disappointed of his desire. He is happy in 
the very act of prayer, knowing it to be the right 
frame of his mind, the proof of his renewed state, 
and his capacity for receiving blessing from God. 
And he is happy in the returns of it; increasing in 
knowledge, faith and holiness, and passing through 
the world with a hope full of immortality. O bless- 
ed Jesus, teach us all to pray : for the desire is 
from Thee, and Thou givest Thyself with it, and we 
cannot receive Thee till we do pray. 



o 



THOMAS ADAiM. 393 

Prayers. I. 
LORD, we pray Thee send down Thy Spirit to 
kmdle the holy fire of love in our hearts. Let 
the sense of Thy excellencies and perfections, various 
gifts and blessings, be always present to our minds, 
and the continual subject of our meditations, that we 
may adore and bless and imitate Thee. The heavens 
declare Thy glory, the earth is filled with Thy 
bounties, and wherever we turn our eyes we see 
Thee in the riches of Thy goodness. But Thou hast 
more especially manifested Thy love to mankind, 
and magnified Thy name and Thy glory, by giving 
Thy only begotten Son to die for us. Give us, we 
beseech Thee, such a knowledge of Thee, as the God 
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and such an 
assured faith in Th^^ great mercy to us in Him that 
we may love Thee, for the great love whercAvith 
Thou hast loved ns, and all mankind for Thy sake; 
do all our works on this ground; and be accepted 
of Thee for the sake, and through the alone merits 
of Jesus Christ. Amen. 

IL 

HOLY Father, open our eyes, we beseech Thee, 
to see the danger and misery of our condition 
in sin. Let Thy Son be our Master to teach us the 
strictness and purity of Thy law; let Thy Spirit go 
Avith us into the depth of our hearts, to convince us 
of our transgressions of it; that we may fly to the 
mercy of the gospel, be revived with a sense of for- 
giveness, live unto Him that died for us, and do all 

17'^ 



394 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

our works from a holy principle of faith and love to 
Thee. Deliver us from all guile and hypocrisy, from 
all blindness and hardness of heart; and as we know 
the Lord Jesus Christ to be the way, the truth, and 
the life, grant that we may humbly and thankfully 
receive Him in the grace and power of all His offices. 
Oh! grant, for Thy mercy's sake, that as He is the 
only rest of our guilty consciences, the reliever of 
all our burdens, and has opened the kingdom of 
heaven to all believers, we may rejoice in His salva- 
tion, be faithful to His truth, commit our souls to 
Him to be guided in the way which leadeth to ever- 
lasting life, and be received into Thy kingdom of 
glory, through Him, our blessed Saviour and Re- 
deemer. Amen. 

HI. 

OLORD, who hast sent Thy blessed Son a light 
into the world, and giveSt Thy Spirit to guide 
us into all truth; grant us grace thankfully to re- 
ceive and obediently to follow, the doctrine He has 
delivered to us in Thy name. Let the study of Thy 
Word be our constant employment and the delight 
of our souls, that we may know Thee the only true 
God, and Jesus Christ whom Thou hast sent. From 
all blindness and hardness of heart, from all guile 
and insincerity, good Lord, deliver us. Help us to 
discover and remove all the impediments to Thy 
coming and gracious presence in our souls. Open 
our eyes, turn us from darkness to light, confirm us 
in the faith of Thy mercy, and make us fruitful in 



THOMAS ADAM. 395 

all good works. Grant that, by Thy holy inspira- 
tion, we may think those tilings that be good, and, 
by Thy merciful guiding, may perform the same, 
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. 

IV. 

OLORD our God, pour upon us the spirit of 
grace and supplications, to receive the instruc- 
tions and follow the doctrine of the great Teacher, 
Thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord, with all humility 
and thankfulness. As Thou hast tau2:ht us what is 
acceptable unto Thee, and delivered to us the rule 
of holy living; we beseech Thee, turn the desire of 
our hearts to it, and all our hearts to Thee, in prayer 
for a blessing upon wdiat we learn from Thy holy 
Word. Convince us of our blindness, corruption and 
weakness, that we may come to Christ for help, re- 
joice in His salvation, and in the power of the Holy 
Ghost be enabled to do whatever Thou requirest of 
us. Make us Thy own people, make our souls and 
bodies Thy living temples; that, consecrating our- 
selves to Thee in faith and purity, and reverencing 
Thee in our hearts, we may gladly embrace all occa- 
sions of presenting ourselves before Thee in Thy 
house, as the house of prayer, worship Thee in spirit 
and in truth whilst we live here upon earth; and 
sing praises to Thee for ever in heaven, with all 
those whom Thou hast redeemed to Thyself by the 
blood of Jesus Christ, our l^lessed Lord and Saviour. 
Amen. 




PHILIP DODDRIDGE, D.D. 
1702-1751. 

Praising the Loed. 

[RAISE the Lord, all ye His saints; 
be tliankful unto Him, and bless His 
name! Praise Him, wlio graciously pur- 
posed 3^our salvation, and predestinated 
you to the adoption of children by Jesus 
Christ unto Himself! Praise Him, who rendered 
this purpose effectual, and wrought it out by a 
high hand and outstretched arm! Praise Him, 
who gave His own Son to be a sacrifice for you, 
and to bring in everlasting righteousness! Praise 
Him, who sent His Spirit, as the great agent in 
His Son's kingdom, to bring the hearts of sinners 
to a subjection to the gospel, and gently to capti- 
vate them to the obedience of faith ! Praise Him, 
who has revealed this glorious gospel to you, at so 
great a distance of time and place! Praise Him, 
who has impressed your hearts with a disposition to 
regard it ! Praise Him, who has subdued your pre- 
judices against it! Praise Him, who, having im- 
planted faith in your souls, continues even to this 
day to animate and support it ! Let all ranks and 
ages join in this cheerful song! Praise ye the Lord, 



rillLir DODDRIDGE. 397 

ye that are rich in temporal possessions, if you have 
been enabled to renounce the Yfoiicl as your portion, 
and to triumph over it by this divine principle! 
Praise Him, you that are poor in this world, if you 
are rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which 
God has promised to them that love Him! Praise 
Him, you that are cheerful and vigorous, and capable 
of rendering Him that active service which may speak 
the gratitude of your hearts towards Him! Praise 
Him, you that are weak and languishing, since His 
strength is made perfect in your weakness, and your 
infirmities illustrate tlie force of that faith which He 
has wrought in you! Praise Him, ye youths who, 
with this guide and companion of your way, are set- 
ting forth in the journey of life with courage, and 
lifting up your feet in His paths! Praise Him, ye 
aged saints, who stand on the borders of eternity, 
and live in a daily expectation, that you shall receive 
the end of your faith in the salvation of your souls! 
Begin that work now, in which you are all so soon 
to join! Break forth into one joyful anthem, and 
sing: ' Xot unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to Thy 
name be all the praise of that salvation, which Thou 
hast already begun in our souls, and which Thy faith- 
fulness has engaged to complete.' 

The Water of Life. 

a^HE waters which followed Israel througli the 
- wilderness, failed when they came into an in- 
habited land. But this river of life will never for- 
sake the believer; it will flow with him sweetly 



398 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

through the dark valley of the shadow of death, till 
it spreads itself into wider and deeper streams, in 
the lovely regions of the heavenly Canaan. Thus 
we are told, that in the New Jerusalem the river of 
the water of life proceedeth from the throne of God 
and of the Laml:). And thus our Lord assures the 
woman of Samaria, Wliosoever drinketh of the water 
that I shall give him, shall never thirst; but it shall 
be in him as a well of water springing up into ever- 
lastino^ life. What then remains, but that we each 
of us cry out, as she did. Lord, give us of this living 
water, that we may thirst no more, nor come, as now, 
to these ordinances to draw! 

Clear spring of life! flow on, and roll 
With growing swell from pole to pole, 
'Till flowers and fruits of paradise 
Round all tliy winding current rise! 

Still near thy stream may I be found, 
Long as I tread this earthly ground! 
Cheer with thy wave death's gloomy shade; 
Then through the fields of Canaan spread! 

A Devout Meditation. 

OMY God, what shall I say? what, but that 1 
love Thee above all in the power of language 
to express. While I feel Thy sacred Spirit breath- 
ing upon my heart, and exciting these fervors of 
love to Thee, I cannot doubt of its influence, any 
more than I can doubt of the truth of this animal life 
while I exert the acts of it. Surely, if ever I knew 
the appetite of hunger, my soul hungers after right- 
eousness, and lono's for a 2:reater couformitv to Thy 



PHILIP DODDRIDGE. 399 

blessed nature and Avill. If ever my palate felt 
thirst, my soul thirsts for God, even the living 
God! and for a more abundant communication of 
His favor. If ever my weary body knew what it 
was to wish for the refreshment of my bed, and 
longed for rest, even so my soul, with sweet acqui- 
escence, rests upon Thy gracious bosom, O my 
Heavenly Father, and returns to its repose in the 
embraces of its God, who has dealt so bountifully 
with it. And if ever I saw the face of a beloved 
friend or child with complacency and joy, so I re- 
joice in beholding Thy mercy, O Lord, and in call- 
ing Thee my Father in Christ. Such Thou art, and 
such Thou wilt be for time, and for eternity. What 
have I more to do but to commit myself to Thee for 
both, and leave Thee to choose my inheritance, and 
order my affairs for me, while all my business is to 
serve Thee, and all my delight to praise Thee. My 
soul follows hard after my God, because His right 
hand supports me. Let it still bear me up, and I 
shall still press forward. 



H 



Our Great Intercessor. 

OW admirable and how amiable does the 
blessed Jesus appear, when considered as the 
great Intercessor of His people! 

How admirable is He in this view! What an honor 
is done Him in the heavenly world! How dear to 
the Father does He appear to be, when God will not 
accept the services of the greatest and best of man- 
kind, unless presented by Him; and for His sake will 



400 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS 

graciously regard the meanest and vilest sinner! 
And how great does this Intercessor appear m Him- 
self ! 'Blessed Jesus,' may the Christian say, 'Avho 
is like unto Thee, who canst at once sustain so many 
different relations, and canst fill them all with their 
proper offices, of duty to Thy Father, and of love to 
Thy people! who canst thus bear, without encumber- 
ing Thyself, without interfering with each other, the 
priestly censer and the royal sceptre! How wise are 
Thy counsels! How extensive Thy views! How 
capacious Thy thoughts! and yet, at the same time, 
how compassionate Thy gracious heart! That amidst 
all the exaltations of heaven, all the splendors of 
Thy Father's right hand, Thou shouldst still thus 
graciously remember Thine humble followers! That 
Tliine eye should be always watchful over them. 
Thine ear be alwa^^s open to their prayers. Thy 
mouth be ever ready to plead for them, and Thine 
arm to save them! As if it were not love enough to 
descend and die, unless Thou didst forever live and 
reign for them, and even glory in being made Head 
over all for Thy church.' 

'But especially,' may the Christian say, ' when I 
think of Thee, blessed Jesus, not only as the Inter- 
cessor of TJiy people in general, but as my Inter- 
cessor; when I think that Thou hast espoused my 
character and my cause, vile and obnoxious as it is; 
and that Thou art recommending my poor broken 
services, which I daily blush to present before Thee; 
and art using Thine interest and Thine authority in 
the world above, to complete my salvation, which 



rillLIP DODDKIEGE. 401 

Thou hast begun; what shall Thy poor servant say 
unto Thee? All these astonishing and kind regards 
to me, who am unworthy to wash the feet of the least 
of Thy followers! Shall not the wonders of such 
condescending grace engage my gratitude to all 
eternity? M}^ praises now are so exceeding feeble, 
and so low, I am almost ashamed to offer them. O 
when shall those nobler praises begin, which I hope 
ere long to offer in that world of perfection to which 
Thy gracious intercession is bringing me?' 

A Prayer for Gospel Blessings. 

BLESSED Jesus, Thou that knowest all things, 
knowest that I tliirst after the blessings of Thy 
gospel. Thou seest that I most ardently long for 
the pardon of sin, the favor of God, the influences of 
Thy Spirit, and the glories of Thine heavenly king- 
dom. I am fully persuaded, that with regard to all 
these Thou art able to do for me abundantly above 
all I can ask or think. And wilt Thou not relieve 
me? Wilt Thou not give me to drink? Wherefore, 
then, are Thine invitations published in the gospel? 
Why does Thy Spirit even now work upon my heart, 
and raise there this fervency of desire? Wherefore 
didst Thou weep? Wherefore didst Thou bleed? 
Wherefore didst Thou die, if Thou hadst no compas- 
sion for perishing sinners? But Thou hast compas- 
sion; Thou hast already extended it to thousands on 
earth and millions in heaven. Lord, I believe; help 
Thou my unbelief ! I throw myself at Thy feet; nor 



402 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

can 1 fear I shall perish there, unless infinite power 
be weakened, and infinite love be exhausted. 

My Father's House. 

IF it be so pleasant to me now and then, to cast a 
longing look towards my Father's house, and to 
read, as it were, this letter which His goodness sends 
to me, and to receive in the wilderness the tokens of 
His care, what will it be to come and dwell with 
Him, and with all my brethren in the Lord? O earth! 
all thy charms are not worth a moment's stay. It 
would be better, much better for me to be dissolved. 
How would my heart leap to see His chariot appear- 
ing! How welcome would the messenger be by 
which He should call me to His house, and to His 
bosom! 

Heaven Our Home. 

SEEING heaven is our country, let us take care to 
live like those who belong to such a country. 
This is what the apostle recommends to us by his 
own example. Our conversation, saith he, is in 
heaven; or we behave ourselves like citizens of 
heaven. Let us remember, that whilst we are in 
this world, we sojourn in a strange land, and are at 
a distance from our home; and, therefore, do not let 
us be inordhiately afiected with anything in it. Let 
us not be too much transported with the entertain- 
ments, nor too much dejected with the disappoint- 
ments which we meet with in tliis land of our 
pilgrimage; l)ut, let us be carrying on a constant, 



rillLIP DODDrwILGE. 403 

regular design of a liappy abode in this glorious 
country; and let all the actions of our life have a 
tendency towards it; and to animate us to prosecute 
our journey with the greatest vigor and cheerfulness, 
let us be endeavoring to form an acquaintance Avith 
it. In the Scripture, God has given us a map of this 
heavenly Canaan. Let us take our notions of it from 
thence, and make this description of it very familiar 
to us. Let us keep up a constant correspondence 
with it, by frequent- and earnest addresses to the 
throne of the King of heaven, and by meditating 
and discoursing upon the happiness of it. Let us be 
zealous for the interests of this heavenly country, 
and do our utmost to increase the number of the in- 
habitants of it. Let us endeavor to reflect an honor 
upon it, by imitating the manners of those who live 
there, and showing the same zeal for the honor of 
God, and the same afiectionate regard to the good 
of our fellow creatures, that they do. Especially, 
let us maintain a peculiar aflection for our fellow- 
citizens, and endeavor to help them forAvard on their 
journey thither. And, in the last place, let us be 
ready to leave this world, whenever it shall please 
God to give us a dismission from it; that so w^e may 
go into this country where we shall be no more 
strangers and foreigners, but felloio-citizens ivith the 
glorified saints^ and of the highest household of God. 



-iOi DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Death to the Believee. 

AET thou, oh believer! unwilling to think of 
death? Methinks the remembrance of it should 
be thy daily refuge, and thy daily joy. For terrible 
as it is to him who goes on still in his trespasses, to 
thee it must have an angel's face. Dost thou not, 
know that it is a friendly messenger sent to thee 
from heaven to tell thee that an habitation there is 
ready to receive thee? that the da^^s of thy warfare 
are fully accomplished, so that' the crown of victory 
is immediately to be set on thine heJid; and the tri- 
umphant palm to be borne? Dost thou not know, 
oh Christian! that when conquered, it was also re- 
conciled by a Redeemer, and added to the treasures 
and possessions of His people. It is now become a 
gentle slumber, in which thou shalt lose thy fatigues 
and thy cares, thy sorrows and thy fears; and from 
which thou shalt awake to transporting joy and in- 
corruptible glory. How canst thou forget so kind 
a friend, from whom thou hast such grand and such 
certain expectations? How canst thou forget that 
important day which shall be the period of calamity 
and of sin, and the commencement of complete holi- 
ness, of eternal felicity? 

A Prayer on Co^kOiiTTiNG the Soul to Jesus. 

BLESSED Jesus! I have heard of Thy power and 
Thy love; and I believe what I have heard of 
them. Conscious that I have in my breast an im- 
mortal spirit, and trembling in a survey of its infinite 
importance, I humbl}^ beg leave to consign it to Thy 



rillLTP DODDrwTDGE. 405 

faithful care. Lord Jesus, receive my s])irit! I 
would now call upon Thee with all the earnestness 
of a dying creature. From this hour, from this mo- 
ment, receive it! Oh! take it under Thy care; wash 
it in Thy blood; adorn it with Thy righteousness; 
form it, O Lord! by Thy Spirit, to every branch of 
the Christian character; to every lineament of Thy 
blessed image: to a full conformity to that employ- 
ment and happiness for which the spirits of Thy 
people are intended. And oh! watch over it, while 
I travel through this dangerous wilderness; andAvhen 
it breaks loose from the flesh, fold it in Thine em- 
brace. Eemember, O Lord! if I should not be able 
to repeat it, remember the huml)le petition wdiich I 
have now uttered. Remember Thy word unto Thy 
servant, on which Thou hast caused me to liojge; and 
be surety unto me for good against all the terrors of 
death and hell; against all the frailties of this deo-en- 
crate nature, in the meantime yet more to be feared. 

Safe in Jesus. 

BLESSED Jesus, I rejoice in Thee as my hope, 
and the louder the storm rages around me, the 
more violently the enemies of my soul are invadino- 
me, the closer will I adhere to Thee, and the more 
will I rejoice in Thy care. 

Advice to the Afflicted. 

OTHOU afflicted, thou who art tossed with the 
tempest, and not comforted! look unto Jesus. 
Let thy conflicts and dangers drive thee to Him; 



40G DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

thougli Satan would thereby attempt to drive thee 
from Him. Accustom not thyself to think of Christ 
as dreadful and severe. Terrify not thyself with the 
thought of the iron rod of vengeance, whilst thou 
feelest thyself disposed to submit to the golden 
sceptre of His grace, to the pastoral rod by which 
He guides His sheep. And when thou findest thy 
doubts arising, flee to the representations and assur- 
ances of His Word, and pra}^, that the influences of 
His Spirit may strengthen thy faith in them. 



Mutual Joy of Christ and Believers in Heaven. 

THERE they shall be no longer exposed to ne- 
cessities and alarms; but all the purposes of 
His love shall be completed in their everlasting 
security and jo}^ And surely the gracious Redeemer 
must be inconceivably delighted, when He there sees 
of the travail of His soul. When He has with a gen- 
tle and gracious hand conducted His sheep through 
the dark valley of the shadow of death, with what 
joy will He open to them those better pastures! with 
what conofratulations will He receive them to a state 
of inseparable nearness to Him, and administer unto 
them an abundant entrance into the everlasting king- 
dom of their Lord and Saviour ! Therefore it is 
beautifully represented in the book of the Revelation, 
as the business and joy of Christ, even on the throne 
of His glory, to lead on His saints to the various 
scenes of divine pleasure and enjoyment, which arc 
provided for them tliere. The Lamb which is in the 



PHILIP DODlJPJDGE. 407 

midst of the "throne shall feed them, and shall lead 
them mito fountains of living waters. 

And, O gracious Redeemer, what will the joy of 
Thy flock then be, when thus fed and conducted by 
Thee! If it be so delightful at this humble distance, 
to believe ourselves the objects of Thy care and 
favor, and to taste of these little streams which Thou 
art causing to flow in upon us here in the wilderness, 
what will that river of life be? If it be now the joy 
of our hearts, awhile to forget our cares and our 
fears, when we are perhaps at Thy table, and to lean 
our Avear}^ heads for a few moments on Thy dear 
breast; what will it be, forever to dwell in Thine 
embrace, and to say once for all, Eeturii unto thy 
rest, O my soul, for the Lord hath dealt bountifully 
with thee! Bountifully indeed! when they who were 
brought out with weeping, and led on with suppli- 
cation, shall, as the redeemed of the Lord, come to 
Zion with songs, and everlasting joy upon tlieir 
heads, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away. 

In the meantime, we rejoice in hope of this blessed 
scene, and would raise such feeble praises, as earth 
Avill admit, to this great Shepherd, whose arm is so 
strong to guard us; whose bosom is so soft to cher- 
ish us; and whose heart is so compassionate, notwith- 
standing all our unworthiness, as to exert that arm 
for our protection, and to open that bosom for our 
repose. 



4:08 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

A Model of Devotion for the Evening. 

OMY God, Thou art ever merciful and gracious. 
Thou causest the outgoing of the morning, and 
the return of the evening to rejoice with me. I now 
oifer Thee my repeated tribute of praise. May my 
prayer come before Thee as incense, and the lifting 
up of my hands as an evening sacrifice. 

I heartily thank Thee, that my forfeited life hath 
been lengthened out another day; and that every 
period and every moment of it, has been crowned 
with the instances of Thy care and Thy bounty. I 
thank Thee for my food and raiment. I thank Thee 
for my health, for the enjoyment of my friends, for 
the success of my studies; and, above all, for oppor- 
tunities of conversing with Thee and of offering Thee 
my humble services, though I acknowledge them 
infinitely beneath Thy regard. 

I earnestly entreat Thy gracious forgiveness with 
regard to all the sins which I have this day been 
chargeable with. Innumerable evils compass me 
about. And in the most innocent and most faithful 
days of my life, I see abundant need, to forfeit Thy 
favor and to awaken Thy displeasure. May the blood 
of Christ Jesus be sprinkled upon my soul, to cleanse 
me from this new guilt which I have contracted, as 
well as from all I have formerly contracted. For 
His sake continue Thy gracious protection this night. 
Deliver me from all dangers and temptations. Give 
me speedy, sound and refreshing sleep; and awake 
me in due time, fitted and determined for the duties 
of the dny. Aiid never leave me nor forsnko me till 



PHILIP DODDRIDGE. 409 

Thoii hast brought me to that happy world, Avhere 
these revolutions of nature shall be known no more* 
but where there shall be one everlasting day of 
glory and of joy, through Jesus Christ. Amen. 

Salvation Near. 

YOU have salvation, complete salvation, in view; 
and it approaches; it is nearer than when you 
believed; it comes daily nearer and nearer. We may 
look upon every true Christian and say to him, and 
especially to one advanced in the journey of life, 
Thoit art not far from the kingdom of God. A few 
days, or at most a few years more, will bring Thee 
to its glories and joys. Thou shalt be there, even in 
the kingdom, beholding the King in His glory, eat- 
ing bread and drinking wine there, living and reign- 
ing with Him. Bear it daily in Thy mind, and en- 
deavor to form thy soul more and more to that song 
in which, I hope, through Divine grace, so many of 
us shall join: Salvation be to Him that sitteth iipon 
the throne, and to the Lamb, who has redeemed iis to 
God by His blood, and made us kings and ^7^iests; 
that we might reign and worship for ever. To Him 
be glory, world without ende Amen. 

Awake, ye saints, and raise your eyes 

And raise your voiees high ; 
Awake, and praise that sovereign love, 

That shows salvation nigh. 

On all the wings of time it flies. 

Each moment brings it near; 
Then welcome each declining day! 

"Welcome each closing year! 
18 



410 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Not many years their rounds shall run, 

Nor many mornings rise, 
Ere all its glories stand revealed 

To our admiring eyes. 

Ye wheels of nature, speed your course; 

Ye mortal powers, decay; 
Fast as ye bring the night of death, 

Ye bring eternal day. 



\ 




JONATHAN EDWARDS, A.M. 
1703 1758. 

On Eeligious Affections. 

,0W insensible and unmoved are most 
men about the great things of another 
world ! how dull are their affections ! how 
heavy and hard their hearts in these 
matters! here their love is cold, their de- 
sires languid, their zeal low, and their gratitude 
small. How they can sit and hear of the infinite 
height and depth, and length and breadth of the 
love of God in Christ Jesus ; of His giving His in- 
finitely dear Son to be offered up a sacrifice for 
the sins of men, and of the unparalleled love of 
the innocent, holy Lamb of God manifested in His 
dying agonies. His bloody sweat. His loud and bit- 
ter cries and bleeding heart; and all this for ene- 
mies, to redeem them from deserved, eternal burn- 
ings, and to bring to unspeakable and everlasting 
joy and glory; and yet be cold, heavy, insensible 
and regardless! Where are the exercises of our 
affections proper, if not here? what is it that more 
requires them? and what can be a fit occasion of 
their lively and vigorous exercise, if not such as this ? 
Can any thing be set in our view greater and more 



412 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

important? any thing more wonderful and surprising? 
or that more nearly concerns our interest! Can we 
suppose that the wise Creator implanted such princi- 
ples in oin* nature as the affections, to lie still on such 
an occasion as this? Can any Christian, who believes 
the truth of these things, entertain such thoughts? 

The Saint's Love to God. 

THE love of God in the most eminent saints in 
this world, is truly very little in comparison 
of what it ought to be. Because the highest love 
that ever any attain to in this life is poor, cold, ex- 
ceeding low, and not worthy to be named in com- 
parison of what our obligations appear to be, from 
the joint consideration of these two things: viz. 1. 
The reason God has given us to love Him, in the 
manifestations He has made of His infinite glory, in 
His Word and works; and particularly in the gospel 
of His Son, and what He has done for sinful man by 
Him. And, 2. The capacity there is in the soul of 
man, by those intellectual faculties which God has 
given it, of seeing and understanding these reasons, 
which God has given us to love Him. How small 
indeed is the love of the most eminent saint on earth, 
in comparison of what these things jointly considered 
do require! And of this, grace tends to convince 
men; and especially eminent grace: for grace is of 
the nature of light and brings truth to view. And 
therefore he that has much grace, apprehends much 
more than others that great height to which his love 
ought to ascend; and he sees better than others how 



JONATHAN EDWAKDS. 413 

little a way he has risen towards that height. And 
therefore, estimating his love by the whole height of 
his duty, hence it appears astonishingly little and 
low in his eyes. 

Christ's Invitations. 

HOW much Christ appears as the Lamb of God 
in His invitations to you to come to Him and 
trust in Him! With what sweet grace and kindness 
does He, from time to time, call and invite you; as 
Prov. viii. 4: 'Unto you, O men, I call, and my 
voice is to the sons of men.' And Isaiah Iv. 1, 2, 3: 
' Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, 
and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat; 
yea, come, buy wine and milk without money, and 
without price.' Hoav gracious is He here in inviting 
every one that thirsts, and in so repeating His invi- 
tation over and over, ' Come ye to the waters; come, 
buy and eat; yea, come!' Mark the excellency of 
that entertainment which He invites you to accept 
of, ' Come, buy wine and milk!' your poverty, having 
nothing to pay for it, shall be no objection, — ' Come, 
he that hath no money, come without money, and 
without price!' What gracious arguments and ex- 
postulations He uses with you! ' Wherefore do ye 
spend money for that which is not bread? and 
your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, 
and let your soul delight itself in fatness.' As much 
as to say, It is altogether needless for you to con- 
tinue la]:)oring and toiling for that Avhich can never 



414 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

serve your turn, seeking rest in the world and in 
3^our own righteousness: I have made abundant pro- 
vision for you of that which is really good, and will 
fully satisfy your desires and answer your end, and 
stand ready to accept of you: you need not be afraid; 
if you will come to me, I will engage to see all your 
wants supplied and you made a happy creature. As 
He promises in the third verse, ' Incline your ear, 
and come unto me: Hear, and your soul shall live, 
and I will make an everlasting covenant with you. 
even the sure mercies of David.' And so, Prov. ix. 
at the beginning. How gracious and sweet is the 
invitation there: 'Whoso is simple, let him turn in 
hither;' let you be never so poor, ignorant and blind 
a creature, you shall be welcome. And in the fol- 
lowing words, Christ sets forth the provision that 
He has made for you, ' Come, eat of my bread and 
drink of the wine which I have mingled.' You are 
in a poor famishing state, and have nothing where- 
with to feed your perishing soul; you have been 
seeking something, but yet remain destitute. Heark- 
en how Christ calls you to eat of His bread and to 
drink of the wine that He hath mingled! And how 
much like a lamb does Clirist appear in Matt. xi. 
28-30: 'Come unto me, all ye that labor and arc 
heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my 
yoke upon you and learn of me, for I am meek and 
lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest to your souls. 
Por my yoke is easy and my burden is light.' O 
thou poor distressed soul! whoever thou art, con- 
eider that Christ mentions thy very case, when He 



JONATHAN EDWAKD8. 415 

calls to them who labor and are heavy laden! How 
He repeatedly promises you rest if you come to Him! 
In the 28th verse he says, 'I will give you rest.' 
And in the 29th verse, ' Ye shall find rest to your 
souls.' This is what you want. This is the thing 
you have been so long in vain seeking after. O hoAv 
sweet would rest be to you if you could but obtain 
it! Come to Christ, and you shall obtain it. And 
hear how Christ, to encourage you, represents Him- 
self as a lamb! He tells you that He is meek and 
lowly in heart; and are you afraid to come to such 
a One? And again, Rev. iii. 20: 'Behold, I stand at 
the door and knock: if any man hear my voice and 
open the door, I will come in to him, and I w^ill sup 
with him and he with me.' Christ condescends not 
only to call you to Him, but He comes to you; He 
comes to your door and there knocks. He might 
send an ofiicer and seize you as a rebel and vile male- 
factor; but instead of that He comes and knocks at 
your doof, and seeks that you would receive Him 
into your house as your friend and Saviour. And 
He not only knocks at your door, but He stands there 
waiting while you are backward and unwilling. And 
not only so, but He makes promises what He will do 
for you if you will admit Him, what privileges He 
will admit you to; He will sup with you, and you 
with Him. And again. Rev. xxii. 16, 17: *I am the 
root and the offspring of David, and the bright and 
morning star. And the Spirit and the bride say, 
Come. And let him that heareth say. Come. And 
let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, 



416 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

let him take of the water of life freely.' How does 
Christ here graciously set before you His own win- 
ning attractive excellency! And how does He con- 
descend to declare to you not only His own invita- 
tion, but the invitation of the Spirit and the bride, 
if by any means He might encourage you to come! 
And how does He invite every one that will, that 
they may ' take of the water of life freely,' that they 
may take it as a free gift, however precious it be, 
and though it be the water of life! 

Spiritual Light. 

TTlxnS is the most excellent and divine wisdom that 
JL any creature is capable of. It is more excellent 
than any human learning; it is far more excellent 
than all the knowledge of the greatest philosophers 
or statesmen. Yea, the least glimpse of the glory 
of God in the face of Christ, doth more exalt and 
ennoble the soul than all the knowledge of those that 
have the greatest speculative understanding in di- 
vinity without grace. This knowledge has the most 
noble object that can be, viz. the divine glory and 
excellency of God and Christ. The knowledge of 
these objects is that wherein consists the most excel- 
lent knowledge of the angels, yea, of God Himself. 

This knowledge is that which is above all others 
sweet and joyful. Men have a great deal of pleasure 
in human knowledge, in studies of natural things; 
but this is nothing to that joy which arises from this 
divine light shining into the soul. This light gives 
a view of those things that are immensely the most 



JONATHAN EDWARDS. 417 

exquisitely beautiful, and capable of delighting the 
eye of the understanding. This spiritual light is the 
dawning of the light of glory in the heart. There 
is nothing so powerful as this to support persons in 
affliction, and to give the mind peace and brightness 
in this stormy and dark world. 

This light is such as effectually influences the in- 
clination and changes the nature of the soul. It as- 
similates our nature to the divine nature, and chano^es 
the soul into an image of the same glory that is be- 
held. 2 Cor. iii. 18: 'But we all with open face, 
beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are 
changed into the same image, from glory to glory, 
even as by the Spirit of the Lord.' -This knowledge 
will wean from the world and raise the inclination 
to heavenly things. It will turn the heart to God as 
the fountain of good, and to choose Him for the only 
portion. This light, and this only, will bring the 
soul to a saving close with Christ. It conforms the 
heart to the gospel, mortifies its enmity and opposi- 
tion against the scheme of salvation therein revealed: 
it causes the heart to embrace the joyful tidings, and 
entirely to adhere to, and acquiesce in, the revelation 
of Christ as our Saviour: it causes the whole soul to 
accord and symphonize with it, admitting it with 
entire credit and respect, cleaving to it with full in- 
clination and afiection; and it efiectually disposes the 
soul to give up itself entirely to Christ. 



IS* 



418 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Pardon for the Greatest Sinners. 

CHRIST will not refuse to save the greatest sin- 
ners, who in a right manner come to God for 
mercy; for this is His work. It is His business to 
be a Saviour of sinners; it is the work upon which 
He came into the world; and therefore He will not 
object to it. He did not come to call the righteous^ 
but sinners to repentance, Matt. ix. 13. Sin is the 
very evil which He came into the world to remedy: 
therefore He will not object to any man that he is 
very sinful. The more sinful he is, the more need 
of Christ. The sinfulness of man was the reason of 
Christ's coming into the world; this is the very 
misery from which He came to deliver men. The 
more they have of it, the more need they have of 
being delivered: 'They that are whole need not a 
physician, but they that are sick,' Matt. ix. 12. The 
physician will not make it an objection against heal- 
ing a man who applies to him, that he stands in great 
need of his help. If a physician of compassion comes 
among the sick and wounded, surely he will not re- 
fuse to heal those that stand in most need of healing, 
if he be able to heal them. 

Herein doth the gloi^y of grace by the redemption 
of Christ much consist, viz. in its sufficiency for the 
pardon of the greatest sinners. The whole contri- 
vance of the way of salvation is for this end, to 
glorify the free grace of God. God had it on His 
heart from all eternity to glorify this attribute; and 
therefore it is that the device of saving sinners by 
Christ was conceived. The greatness of divine grace 



JONATHAN EDWARDS. * 419 

appears very much in this, that God by Christ saves 
the greatest offenders. The greater the guilt of any 
sinner is, the more glorious and wonderful is the 
grace manifested in his pardon: Rom. v. 20. 'Where 
sin abounded, grace did much more abound.' The 
apostle, when telling how great a sinner he had been, 
takes notice of the abounding of grace in his pardon, 
of which his great guilt was the occasion: 1 Tim. i. 
13. ' Who was before a blasphemer and a persecu- 
tor, and injurious. But I obtained mercy; and the 
grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant, with 
faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.' The Ee- 
deemer is glorified, in that He proves sufficient to 
redeem those who are exceeding sinful, in that His 
blood proves sufficient to wash awa^^ the greatest 
guilt, in that He is able to save men to the uttermost 
and in that He redeems even from the fi^reatest 
misery. It is the honor of Christ to save the greatest 
sinners when they come to Him, as it is the honor of 
a physician that he cures the most desperate diseases 
or wounds. Therefore, no doubt, Christ will be 
willing to save the greatest sinners if they come to 
Him; for He will not be backward to glorify Him- 
self and to commend the value and virtue of His own 
blood. Seeing He hath so laid out Himself to re- 
deem sinners. He will not be unwilling to show that 
He is able to redeem to the uttermost. 

Pardon is as much offered and promised to the 
greatest sinners as anj^, if they will come aright to 
God for mercy. The invitations of the gospel are 
always in universal terms: as, Ho, every one that 



420 • DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

thirstetli; Come unto me, all ye that labor and are 
heavy laden; and, Whosoever will, let him come. 
And the voice of wisdom is to men in general: Pro v. 
viii. 4. ' Unto you, O men, I call, and my voice is 
to the sons of men.' Not to moral men, or religious 
men, but to you^ O men. So Christ promises, John 
vi. 37: 'Him that cometh to me, I will in no wise 
cast out.' This is the direction of Christ to His 
apostles, after His resurrection, Mark xvi. 15, 16: 
' Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to 
every creature: he that believeth and is baptized, 
shall be saved.' Which is agreeable to what the 
apostle saith, that ' the gospel was preached to every 
creature which is under heaven,' Col. i. 23. 

Attkactions in the Saviour. 

THE wisdom of God hath contrived that there 
should be in the person of the Saviour all man- 
ner of attractives to draw us to Him. He has in Him 
all possible excellency. He is possessed of all the 
beauty and glory of the God-head. So that there 
can be no manner of excellency, nor degree of excel- 
lency that we can devise, but what is in the person 
of the Saviour. But yet so redundant has the wis- 
dom of God been, in providing attractives in order 
that we should come to Christ, it hath so ordered 
that there should also be all human excellencies in 
Him. If there be any thing attractive in this con- 
sideration, that Christ is one in our own nature, one 
of us; this is true of Christ. He is not only in the 
divine, l>ut in the human nature. He is truly a man, 



JONATHAN EDWARDS. 421 

and has all possible human excellencies. He was of 
a most excellent spirit; wise and holy, condescend- 
ing and meek, and of a lowly, benign and benevolent 
disposition. 

Again: The wisdom of God hath chosen a person 
of great love to sinners, and who should show that 
love in the most endearing manner possible. What 
more condescending love can there be, than the love 
of a divine person to such worms of the dust? What 
freey* love can there be than love to enemies? What 
greater love can there be than dying love? And 
what more endearing exj)resszo7i of love, than dying 
for the beloved? And the wisdom of God hath so 
contrived that Christ shall sustain that office which 
should most tend to endear Him to us, and draw us 
to Him: the office of a Redeemer, a Redeemer from 
eternal misery, and the purchaser of all happiness. 

And if all this be not enough to draAV us, the wis- 
dom of God hath ordered more; it hath provided us 
a Saviour that should offer Himself to us in the most 
endearing relation. He offers to receive us as friends. 
To receive us to a union with Himself, to become 
our spiritual husband and portion forever. And the 
wisdom of God has provided us a Saviour that woos 
in a manner that has the greatest tendency to win 
our hearts. His w^ord is most attractive. He stands 
at our door and knocks. He does not merely com- 
mand us to receive Him: but He condescends to 
apply Himself to us in a more endearing manner. 
He entreats and beseeches us in His Word and by 
His messengers. 



422 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

The wisdom of God hath contrived that there 
should be all manner of attractives in the benefits that 
Christ offers you. There are not only the excellen- 
cies of the person of Christ to draw you to Him, but 
the desirable benefits He offers. Here is what is 
most suitable to the cravins^s of the human nature. 
Men when distressed and burdened, long for ease 
and rest: here it is offered to us in Christ. ' Come 
unto me,' says He, ' all ye that labor and are heavy 
laden, and I will give you rest.' Men when in fear 
of danger, long for safety; here it is provided for 
us in Christ. God promises that He will become a 
shield and buckler, a strong rock and high tower to 
those that trust in Him. Those that mourn need 
comfort: Christ tells us that ' He came to comfort 
those that mourn,' Isa. Ixi. 2. The blind need to 
have their eyes opened. The light is sweet to men: 
Christ offers to anoint our eyes with eye-salve that 
we may see glorious light. He will be our sun, and 
the light of God's countenance. What is more dear 
to men than life? Christ hath purchased for men 
that they should live for ever, Psalm xxi. 4. ' He 
asked life of Thee, and Thou gavest it Him, even 
length of days for ever and ever.' How greatly is 
a crown prized and admired by the children of men! 
And Christ offers this; not a corruptible crown, but 
an incorruptible and far more glorious crown than 
any worn by earthly kings: a crown of glory, the 
lustre of which shall never fade, nor decay; with an 
everlasting kingdom. Do men \o\e iileasures? Here 
are pleasures for ever more. What could there bo 



JONATHAN EDWARDS. 423 

more to draw our hearts to Jesus Christ, and to 
make us willing to accept of Him for our Saviour, 
with all His unspeakable benefits? 

Our Journey towards Heaven. 

LABOR to be much acquainted with heaven. If 
you are not acquainted Avith it, you will not be 
likely to spend your life as a journey thither. You 
will not be sensible of its worth, nor will you long 
for it. Unless you are much conversant in your 
mind with a better good, it will be exceeding diffi- 
cult to you to have your hearts loose from these 
things, and to use them only in subordination to 
something else, and be ready to part with them for 
the sake of that better good. Labor therefore to 
obtain a realizing sense of a heavenly world, to get 
a firm belief of its reality, and to be very much con- 
versant with it in your thoughts. 

Seek heaven only by Jesus Christ. Christ tells us 
that He is the way, and the truth, and the life, John 
xiv. 6. He tells us that He is the door of the sheep. 
' I am the door, by me if any man enter in he shall 
be saved; and go in and out and find pasture,' John 
X. 9. If w^e therefore would improve our lives as a 
journey towards heaven, we must seek it by Him, 
and not by our own righteousness; as expecting to 
obtain it only for His sake, looking to Him, having 
our dependence on Him, who has procured it for us 
by His merit. And expect strength to walk in holi- 
ness, the way that leads to heaven, only from Him. 

Let Christians help one another in going this jour- 



424: DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

ney. There are many ways whereby Christians 
might greatly forward one another in their way to 
heaven, as by religious conference, &c. Therefore 
let them be exhorted to go this journey as it w^ere 
in company, conversing together, and assisting one 
another. Company is very desirable in a journey, 
but in none so much as this. Let them go united, 
and not fall out by the way, which would be to hin- 
der one another; but use all means they can to help 
each other up the hill. This would insure a more 
successful traveling, and a more joyful meeting at 
their Father's house in glory. 




JOHN WESLEY, A.M. 
1703-1791. 

Keligion in the Heart. 

ET thy religion be the religion of 
the heart. Let it lie deep in thy inmost 
soul. Be thou little, and base, and mean, 
and vile (beyond what words can ex- 
press) in thy own eyes; amazed and 
humbled to the dust, by the love of God which is 
in Christ Jesus. Be serious. Let the whole stream 
of thy thoughts, words and actions, flow from the 
deepest conviction that thou standest on the edge 
of the great gulf, thou and all the children of men, 
just ready to drop in, either into everlasting glory 
or everlasting burnings! Let thy soul be filled 
with mildness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering 
towards all men ; — at the same time that all which 
is in thee is athirst for God, the living God ; long- 
ing to awake up after His likeness, and to be sat- 
isfied with it ! Be thou a lover of God, and of all 
mankind! In this spirit, do and suffer all things I 
Thus show thy faith by thy works; thus 'do the 
will of thy Father which is in heaven!' And, as 
sure as thou now walkest with God on earth, thou 
shalt also reign with Him in glory ! 



426 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Walking by Faith. 

THEY that live by faith, ivalJc by faith. But 
what is implied in this? They regulate all 
their judgments concerning good and evil, not with 
reference to visible and temporal things, but to things 
invisible and eternal. They think visible things to 
be of small value, because they pass away like a 
dream; but, on the contrary, they account invisible 
things to be of high value, because they will never 
pass away. Whatever is invisible is eternal : the 
things that are not seen, do not perish. So the 
apostle: ' The things that are seen are temporal; 
but the things that are not seen are eternal.' There- 
fore, they that walk * by foith ' do not desire the 
' things which are seen;' neither are they the object 
of their pursuit. They * set their affection on things 
above, not on things on tlie earth.' They seek only 
•the things which are 'where Jesus sitteth at the 
right hand of God.' Because they know ' the 
things that are seen are temporal;' passing away 
like a shadow; therefore, they ' look not at them:' 
they desire them not; they account them as nothing: 
but ' they look at the things which are not seen; 
that are eternal ;' that never pass away. By these 
they form their judgments of all things. They 
judge them to be good or evil, as they promote or 
hinder their welfare, not in time, but in eternity. 
They weigh whatever occurs in this balance: what 
influence has it on my eternal state? They regulate 
all their tempers and passions, all their desires, joys 
and fears,by this standard. They regulate all their 



JOHN WESLEY. 427 

thoughts and designs, all their words and actions, so 
as to prepare them for that invisible and eternal 
world, to which they are shortly going. They do 
not dwell, but only sojoimi here; not looking upon 
earth as their home, but only 

' Traveling through Immanuel's ground, 
To fairer worlds on high.' 

Our Kedemption Near. 

THE time of our eternal redemption draweth 
nigh. Let us hold out a little longer, and all 
tears shall be wiped from our eyes, and we shall 
never sigh nor sorrow any more. And how soon 
shall we forget all we endured in this earthly taber- 
nacle, when once we are clothed with that house 
which is from above? We are now but on our jour- 
ney towards home, and so must expect to struggle 
with many difficulties; but it will not be long ere 
we come to our journey's end, and that will make 
amends for all. We shall then be in a quiet and 
safe harbor, out of the reach of all storms and dan- 
gers. We shall then be at home in our Father's 
house, no longer exposed to the inconveniences, 
which, so long as we abide abroad in these tents, we 
are subject to. And let us not forfeit all this hap- 
piness for want of a little more patience. Only let 
us hold out to the end, and we shall receive an 
abundant recompense for all the trouble and uneasi- 
ness of our passage, which shall be endless rest and 
peace. 



428 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Second Coming of Christ. 

SEE ! see! He cometh ! He maketh the clouds 
His chariot ! He rideth upon the wings of the 
wind ! A devouring fire goeth before Him, and after 
Him a flame burneth ! See! He sitteth upon His 
throne, clothed with light as with a garment, arrayed 
with majesty and honor! Behold, His eyes are as a 
flame of fire. His voice as the sound of many waters! 
How will ye escape? Will ye call to the moun- 
tains to fall on you, the rocks to cover you? Alas, 
the mountains themselves, the rocks, the earth, the 
heavens, are just ready to flee away! Can ye pre- 
vent the sentence? Wherewith? With all the sub- 
stance of thy house, with thousands of gold and sil- 
ver? Blind wretch ! Thou earnest naked from thy 
mother's womb, and more naked into eternity. Hear 
the Lord, the Judge! ' Come ye blessed of my 
Father! inherit the kingdom prepared for you from 
the foundation of the world.' Joyful sound ! How 
widely difierent from that voice which echoes through 
the expanse of heaven, ' Depart, ye cursed, into 
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his an- 
gels!' And who is he that can prevent or retard 
the full execution of either sentence? Vain hope! 
Lo, hell is moved from beneath to receive those who 
are ripe for destruction ! And the everlasting doors 
lift up their heads, that the heirs of glory may come 
in. 



john wesley. 429 

Felicity of Heaven. 

OH when shall we arrive, at that happy land 
where no complaints were ever heard, where 
we shall all enjoy uninterrnpted health both of body 
and mind, and never more be exposed to any of those 
inconveniences that disturb our present pilgrimage? 
When we shall have once passed from death unto 
life, we shall be eased of all the troublesome care 
of our bodies, which now takes up so much of our 
time and thoughts. We shall be set free from all 
those mean and tiresome labors which we must now 
imdergo to support our lives. Yon robes of light, 
with which we shall be clothed at the resurrection 
of the just, will not stand in need of those careful 
provisions which it is so troublesome to us here 
either to procure, or to be without. But then, as 
our Lord tells us, ' Those who shall be accounted 
worthy to obtain that world, neither marry nor are 
given in marriage, neither can they die any more, but 
they are equal to the angels.' Their bodies are 
neither subject to disease, nor want that daily suste- 
nance, which these mortal bodies cannot be without. 
'Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats; but 
God will destroy both it and them.' This is that 
perfect happiness which all good men shall enjoy in 
the other world. A mind free from all trouble and 
guilt, in a body free from all pains and diseases. 
Thus our mortal bodies shall be raised immortal. 
They shall not only be always preserved from death 
(for so these might be if God pleased), but the na- 
ture of them shall be wholly changed, so that they 



430 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

shall not retain the same seeds of mortality: they 
cannot die any more. . 

The Poor in Spirit. 
^ ryiHEIRS is the kingdom of heaven.' Whoso- 
JL ever thou art, to whom God hath given to be 
* poor in spirit,' to feel thyself lost, thou hast a right 
thereto, through the gracious promise of Him who 
cannot lie. It is purchased for thee by the blood of 
the Lamb. It is very nigh: thou art on the brink 
of heaven ! Another step, and thou enterest into 
the kingdom of righteousness, and peace, and joy! 
Art thou all sin? ' Behold the Lamb of God, who 
taketh away the sin of the world !' — All unholy? 
See thy ' Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, 
the riofhteous !' — Art thou unable to atone for the 
least of thy sins? ' He is the propitiation for [all 
thy] sins.' Now believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, 
and all thy sins are blotted out ! — ^Art thou totally 
unclean in soul and body? Here is the ' fountain 
for sin and uncleanness !' ' Arise, and wash away 
thy sins !' Stagger no more at the promise through 
unbelief ! Give glory to God ! Dare to believe! 
Now cry out from the ground of thy heart, 

' Yes, I yield, I yield at last, 

Listen to Thy speaking blood ; 
Me, with all my sins, I cast 
On my atoning God !' 




WILLIAM ROMAINB, A. M. 
1714-1795. 

Privileges of Prayer. 

HOU goest, O my soul, to meet thy 
God in it — to converse with thy Fa- 
ther — to call on Him for the fulfilling of 
His promises made in Jesus — to wait on 
Him for His answers — and to give Him 
His glory. Oh what blessed seasons hast thou en- 
joyed in this communion with thy God ! How has 
He manifested His nearness to thee, and bounty 
towards thee! Hast thou not found His heart 
open, His ears open, and His hands open, to grant 
thee the request of thy lips ? And when thou hast 
not found such sweet fellowship with thy God in 
prayer, yet thy dependence on His faithful word has 
been exercised and improved. Thou hast left thy 
petitions with thy Friend and Advocate, trusting to 
that most glorious description of Him in Rev. viii. 
3, 4; *And another angel came and stood at the 
altar, having a golden censer; and there was given 
unto him much incense, that he should ofi'er it with 
the prayers of all saints upon the golden altar, which 
was before the throne. And the smoke of the in- 
cense, which came with the prayers of the saints. 



432 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

ascended uj) before God out of the angel's hand.' 
O Thou great Angel of the covenant, thus present 
my prayers! They are nothing Avorth, but as per- 
fumed with Thy divine odors. Let them ever 
ascend before God out of Thy hand with the smoke 
of the incense of Thy sacrifice and intercession. 
Blessed Spirit of prayer, increase my faith, that I 
may trust more to a prayer-hearing God and Father, 
who is abvays ready to grant every good thing 
promised to His children in Christ Jesus. Amen. 

Peayers. I. 

LO, I come before Thee, Holy Father! to plead 
the blood-sheddino^ and the rio^hteousness of 
Thy dear Son; and I hope my plea will be admitted, 
through the intercession of the Hio^h Priest of the 
house of God. Oh, look. Thou God of peace, upon 
the face of Thy Beloved! See me in Him. I desire 
to be found in Him, And for His sake let the faith- 
ful witness for Thy love in Jesus abide with me, that, 
in hearing and reading Thy word, in prayer and 
meditation. He may increase my faith in Thee and 
love to Thee. 

O God the Holy Ghost! I beseech Thee to make 
practical upon my heart what Thou hast revealed in 
Scripture of the Father's love. Deliver me from 
guilt and condemnation by the sprinkling of the 
blood of Jesus. Apply it effectually. Apply it con- 
tinually. Help me to believe with more comfort in 
my conscience, and with more steadfastness in my 
walk, that His blood cleanseth from all sin. O 



WILLIAM ROMAINE. 433 

blessed Spirit! carry on Thy work in my soul. Lead 
me from faith to faith, that I may at all times have 
freedom to enter within the veil to a reconciled God 
and Father, and may be able to maintain peace with 
Him against doubts and fears, against corruptions 
and enemies. Oh, teach me to draw near to Him 
with a true heart, steadfastly persuaded of His love, 
and in full assurance of faith. This is Thy gracious 
office: Oh, fulfil it in me, that my heart may be 
sprinkled from an evil conscience, and my body 
washed with pure water. Let me find grace suffi- 
cient for me, for Jesus' sake; to whom, with Thee, 
O Father, and the eternal Spirit, three persons in 
one Jehovah, be equal honor and glory for ever and 
ever. Amen. 

n. 

OFATHEK of mercies, hear me for Jesus' sake! 
I acknowledge my sinfulness and unworthiness, 
even in my closest walk with Thee. I am less than 
the least of Thy mercies; yea, deserving the heaviest 
of Thy vengeance. It is of the Lord's mercy, that 
it has not fallen upon me long ago; and I trust in 
His word, that it will never fall upon me. Who is 
a God like unto Thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and 
passeth by the transgression of the remnant of Thine 
heritage? Thou retainest not Thine anger against 
them for ever; because Thou delightest in mercy. 
Glory be to Thee for Thine unspeakable mercies: 
for Thou hast given me faith in the atonement of 

Jesus, l)y whom I have peace with Thee, my recon- 

19 



434 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

ciled God, and by whom 1 have experienced Thy 
great love to me. On Thee, O my God, is still my 
hope. I look up to Thee, the giver of those graces, 
for strength to maintain them in my daily walk. 1 
do believe in the sacrifice and righteousness of Im- 
manuel; Lord, help mine unbelief! I find it hard 
to preserve in my practice, what I believe to be true 
in doctrine; and therefore on Thy present help I 
must continually depend. Lord, strengthen me 
mightily by Thy Spirit in the inner man against 
temptations. I am daily and hourly called upon to 
exercise my faith; and when Thy grace does not 
hold me up, I fall. The fiery darts of Satan easily 
inflame me, when they are thrown at my legal hopes, 
fiilse dependencies, or self righteous tempers. My 
shield, which should quench them, is ready to drop 
out of mine hand. I should fall a prey to the enemy 
and the fire would consume me, if Thy mercy was 
not over me for good. O my God and Father, 
strengthen my faith against the wiles and assaults of 
Satan, and against the workings of mine own unbe- 
lief. When these trials come, keep me sensible of 
my weakness, and dependent on Thy promised 
strength, that I may meet them strong in the Lord 
and in the power of Thy might. Oh let every trial 
teach me more of Thy peace iu my conscience, and 
more of Thy love in my heart, that I may keep on 
in a steady course, walking humbly with my God. 
This is the work of Thy good Spirit. I cannot pre- 
serve, nor improve His graces, unless He be every 
moment present with me. He is the giver, the con- 



WILLIAM ROMAINE. 435 

tiiiuer, the increaser of them .all. O God the Holy 
Ghost, I therefore beseech Thee to water Thy graces 
every moment. Lest any hurt them, keep them, 
keep them night and day. Never leave me, nor for- 
sake me; but what thou hast graciously begun, that 
mightily carry on, in my soul. Temptations are 
strong, and I am w^eak; stand by me in the hour of 
need. And if my faith be tried with fiery tempta- 
tions, let it come out of them like gold out of the 
fire. O Thou almighty Spirit, confirm by trials, im- 
prove by experience, my trust in Thy promised help. 
Let me go on from faith to faith. Keep up the con- 
fidence of my rejoicing in my reconciled God and 
loving Father, that I may walk humbly with Him in 
sweet communion and holy fellowship in the way 
everlasting. Grant me these mercies, gracious Father, 
for Thy dear Son's sake, by the influence of the 
Eternal Spirit, three persons in one Jehovah, to whom 
be equal praise for ever and ever. Amen. 

Praise and Prayer. 

PRAISE and prayer go together. The prayer of 
faith will afford continual matter for praise. 
The one is a dependence on God for every promised 
•blessing; the other is the acknowledgment of His 
having bestowed it. Innocent man had his heart in 
this sweet work. It was his happiness. Every 
breath in paradise was praise. The redeemed man 
has more reason. His obligations are far greater 
than Adam w^as under to his God — raised from his 
fall — saved from the guilt and misery of it — chosen 



436 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHST. 

and called to this salvacion by mere grace — through 
faith a partaker of it — an heir of God, and a joint- 
heir with Christ. Oh what motives are these, to 
continual thankfulness ! And these motives are 
eifectual when the Holy Spirit discovers the things 
that are freely given to us of God. He makes us 
sensible of them and thankful for them; for He pre- 
serves in the soul a blessed poverty of spirit, an 
humble, abiding sense of wants and unworthiness; 
and thus He lays a sure foundation for thankfulness. 

Institution and Benefits of the Lord's Supper. 

LOOK well to the end of the institution. It was 
not only to remind thee of, but also to convey 
to thee, all the blessings of that one offering, which 
perfects for ever. It was to teach thee that thy 
spiritual life, and every grace and comfort of it, are 
as dependent upon Christ crucified as the life of thy 
body is upon the meat and drink of this world. Thy 
life comes from His death. Thy life is nourished by 
feeding upon Christ thy passover, who was sacrificed 
for thee. He intended by the bread to point out 
unto thee His body, and by the wine. His blood — by 
eatiug and drinking them, thy taking and living upon 
Him — by thy bodily support received from them, the 
nourishment of thy soul by eating His flesh and 
drinking His blood. He would have thee to look 
through the signs to the things signified. Thou art 
not to rest in the outward act, but to rest in the 
promise in the Word of God. Thy faith is not to be 
exercised about the Lord's Supper as a duty; but it 



WILLIAM K03IAI^E. 437 

is to be exercised upon His Word; and what He has 
therein promised to make it, that thou art to expect 
in taking it. He appointed it to be the means of 
communicating with Him, and of thy enjoying fellow- 
ship with Him in His sufferings. It is a spiritual 
believing act, in which thou art invited to partake 
of the paschal lamb. It is the Lord's passover, and 
will certainly answer every purpose for which He 
instituted it. He appointed it to be the means of 
safety from the destroyer, of deliverance from bond- 
age, of free and full forgiveness of all sins, of a happy 
passage through the Red Sea, and of the everlasting 
possession of the promised inheritance. 

The Full Vision and Enjoyment of Christ. 

MAKE haste, my Beloved, and take me to Thy- 
self: let me see Thee face to face, and enjoy 
Thee, Thou dearest Jesus, whom my soul longeth 
after. It is good to live upon Thee by faith," but 
to live with Thee is best of all. I have found one 
day in Thy courts, conversing sweetly with Thee, 
better than a thousand; but this has only whetted 
my appetite: the more communion I have with 
Thee, I hunger and thirst still for more. My 
soul panteth for nearer, still nearer communion 
with Thee. When shall I come to appear before 
the presence of God? O Thou Light of my life, 
Thou Joy of my heart, Thou knowest how I 
wish for the end of my faith, Avhen I shall no 
longer see through a glass darkly, but with open 
face behold the glory of my Lord. Thou hast 



438 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

SO endeared Thyself to me, Thou precious Im- 
manuel! by ten thousand thousand kindnesses, that 
I cannot be entirely satisfied, until I have the full 
vision and complete enjoyment of Thyself. The day 
of our espousals has been a blessed time. Oh, for 
the marriage of the Lamb, when I shall be presented 
as a chaste virgin to my heavenly Bridegroom! How 
can I but long earnestly for this full enjoyment of 
Thy everlasting love! Come, Lord Jesus; let me 
see Thee as Thou art. Come and make me like unto 
Thee. I do love Thee; I am now happy in Thy 
love; but not so as I hope to be. I am often inter- 
rupted here, and never love Thee so much as I desire; 
but these blessed spirits standing now round Thy 
throne are perfected in love. Oh! that 1 was once 
admitted to see, as they do, the glory of God in the 
face of Jesus Christ! Is not that the voice of my 
Beloved, which I hear answering, Surely I come 
quicJdy! Amen, say I, even so come; Lord Jesus. 
Make haste, my Beloved, and be Thou like to a roe, 
or to a young hart, upon the mountains of spices. 




ROBERT WALKER. 
1716-1783. 

On Peayer. 

^RAYER keeps the communication 
open between the Head and the 
members; it is the messenger that goes 
from earth to heaven, and returns with all 
necessary blessings from thence. Beware, 
then, of neglecting this necessary duty. Pray in 
faith, pray in the name of Christ, pray without 
ceasing; and beg of Christ to teach you to pray 
aright, that you may ask and receive, and then 
your joy shall be full. 

The Believing Soul's Address to Christ. 

O BLESSED Jesus! saith the soul that comes to 
Him, Thou true and living way to the Father! 
I adore Thy condescending grace in becoming a 
sacrifice and sin-offering for me: and now, encouraged 
by Thy kind invitation, I flee to Thee as my only 
city of refuge; I come to Thee 'wretched, and 
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked' — I have 
no price to offer Thee, no goodness at all to recom- 
mend me to Thy favor: ' laboring, and heavy laden,' 



440 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

I cast myself at Thy feet, and look to Thy free mercy 
alone for the removal of this burden, which, without 
Thy interposition, must sink me down to the lowest 
hell. Abhorring myself in every view I can take, I 
embrace Thee for my righteousness; sprinkled with 
Thy atoning blood, I shall not fear the destroying 
angel — justice hath already had its triumph on Thy 
Cross, and therefore I take Thy Cross for my sanctu- 
ary. This is my rest: and here will I stay, for I 
like it well. 

Nor is this my only errand to Thee, O Thou com- 
plete Saviour! I bring to Thee a dark benighted 
mind to be illuminated with savino^ knowledo;e. 
'Thou hast the words of eternal life;' 'in Thee are 
hid all the treasures of wisdom:' I therefore resign 
my understanding to Thy teaching: for 'No man 
knoweth the Father but the Son, and those to whom 
the Son shall reveal Him.' 

I likewise choose Thee for my Lord and my King; 
for ' Thou art altogether lovely,' and in every 
character necessary to my soul. Here are enemies 
whom none can vanquish but Thyself; here are cor- 
ruptions, which nothing less than all-conquering 
grace can subdue: I therefore implore Thine almighty 
aid. Do Thou possess Thy throne in my heart, and 
cast out of it whatever opposeth or offendeth Thee. 
It is Thine already by purchase; O make it Thine 
also by conquest! and perform the whole work of a 
Saviour upon it 



robekt walkkr. 442 

The Heavy Laden Invited to Christ. 

OUR Lord Himself hath declared in the most 
solemn manner, that none shall be rejected who 
come to Him for salvation. These are His words: 
' Him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out.' 
I will receive him with outstretched arms; I will 
tenderly embrace and cherish him, and so unite him 
to myself, that the combined force of earth and hell 
shall never be able to dissolve the union, or to sepa- 
rate His soul from my unchangeable love. 

Lift up thy head, then, O ' laboring and heavy 
laden' sinner! Doth the Father command you to 
believe on His Son? Doth the Lord Jesus invite, 
nay, entreat you to come to Him, and at the same 
time assure you that ' He will in no wise cast you 
out?' And shall not this multiplied security remove 
all your doubts, and bring you to Him with an 
humble, but steadfast hope of obtaining that rest 
which He offers unto you? Say not henceforth, My 
burden is so heavy, and my guilt so great, that I dare 
not go to Him; but rather say, my burden is so 
heavy that I must go to Him; for no other arm can 
remove it but His own. He offers you His help, 
because you are miserable; He invites you to come 
to Him, not because you deserve, but because you 
need His aid. Arise then, O sinners! and obey His 
call: cast your burden upon Him who is mighty to 
save; yield yourselves, without reserve, to this faithful 
Redeemer, to be justified by His blood and sanctified 
by His Spirit; ' take His yoke upon you, and learn 

of Him;' and then you shall find 7^est to your soul. 

10* 



4A2 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Grace. 

GRACE, though a small rivulet in appearance, is 
fed with an everlasting spring. Where the 
Lord Jesus begins a good work, He will carry it on 
to perfection, and never leave the objects of His 
love till He hath made them like Himself, all glori- 
ous both within and without, and presented them to 
His Father without spot and blemish. 

Kesigxatiox to the Divine Will. 

RESIGNATION to the will of God frees the 
mind from a grievous bondage, the bondage 
of earthly pursuits and expectations. Whatever 
God wills, is pleasing to the resigned soul; and when 
a Christian hath, by prayer and supplication, made 
known his requests to God, then the peace of God 
which passeth all understanding, keeps his heart and 
mind through Jesus Christ. Then only is life truly 
enjoyed, when we relish its comforts, at the same 
time that we are prepared to part with them. The 
anxieties of the worldly man torment him with the 
pangs of a thousand deaths. His soul dies within 
him as often as he conceives the apprehension of 
losing those good things which he w^ould wish always 
to enjoy. Whereas he who hath resigned his will to 
the will of God, ' eats his bread with joy, and drinks 
his wine with a merry heart.' Even the thought of 
his dying hour throws no damp on the joys of his 
mind. From the contemplation of God's goodness 
to him in life, he can pass without terror or amaze- 
ment to the thought of His protection in the dark 



ROBERT WALKER. 443 

valley and shadow of death. Even hi that gloomy 
passage he fears no evil; but commits himself to the 
Lord his Shepherd, who will make goodness and 
mercy to follow him all the days of his life, and at 
last will bring him to dwell in His house above for 
ever. 

Christ's Presence ^^^TH Believers at Death. 

WHEN they walk through the valley of the 
shadow of death. His rod and His staff com- 
fort and sustain them. He fortifies and cheers their 
departing spirits; and when the evening shadows 
gather thick around them, the Holy Ghost, the Com- 
forter, is sent to say to them, that death as well as 
life is theirs. Nay, the Good Shepherd Himself, 
who gave Hjs life for the sheep,' will say to them 
in this awful hour, ' Fear not, I am He that liveth 
and was dead; and behold, I am alive for evermore, 
and have the keys of hell and death: — I am the 
resurrection and the life: he that believeth on me, 
though he were dead, yet shall he live.' What a 
multitude of saints, who now inherit the promises, 
have in their last moments experienced the effect of 
these gracious and joyful assurances! In how many 
instances hath a lively and unexpected view of the 
promises of God, and of the great redemption, sus- 
tained and even elevated a dying saint, who from 
the infirmities of the body, or other causes, was, 
through fear of death, subject to bondage all his life! 
The sensible presence of the good Shepherd, in these 
awful moments, will support the most fearful, and 



4:44 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

the feeblest of the flock. It will enable him that 
hath no might, to triumph over death, and him that 
hath the power of death; and, even in the presence 
of the king of terrors, it will teach him this song 
of victory, 'My flesh and my heart faileth; but God 
is the strength of my heart, and my portion forever.' 
— * Thanks be unto God, which hath given me the vic- 
tory, through Jesus Christ my Lord.* — ' For I am 
persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, 
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, 
nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any 
other creature, shall be able to separate me from the 
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus, my Lord.' 




SAMUEL DAVIES, A.M. 
1724-1761. 

Excellency of the Divine Being. 

^ONSIDER the excellency of the Di- 
vine Being, the sum total, the great 
original of all perfections. How infinite- 
ly worthy is He of the adoration of all 
His creatures! how deserving of their 
most intense thoughts and most ardent affections! 
If majesty and glory can strike us with awe and 
veneration, does not Jehovah demand them, who 
is clothed with majesty and glory as with a gar- 
ment, and before whom all the inhabitants of the 
earth are as grasshoppers, as nothing, as less than 
nothing, and vanity ? If wisdom excites our pleas- 
ing wonder, here is an unfathomable depth. O the 
depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge 
of God ! If goodness, grace, and mercy attract our 
love and gratitude, here these amiable perfections 
shine in their most alluring glories. If justice strikes 
a damp to the guilty, here is justice in all its tre- 
mendous majesty. If veracity, if candor, if any or 
all of the moral virtues engage our esteem, here they 
all centre in their highest perfection. If the pres- 
ence of a king strikes a reverence ; if the eye of his 



M6 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

judge awes the criminal, and restrains him from of- 
fending, certainly we should fear before the Lord all 
the day, for we are surrounded with His omnipres- 
ence, and He is the inspector and judge of all our 
thoughts and actions. If riches excite desire, here 
are unsearchable riches: if happiness has charms that 
draw all the world after it, here is an unbounded 
ocean of happiness; here is the only complete ^Dortion 
fhv an immortal mind. Men are affected with these 
things in one another, though found in a ver}^ imper- 
fect degree. Power awes and commands; virtue and 
goodness please; beauty charms; justice strikes with 
solemnity and terror; a bright genius is admired; a 
benevolent, merciful temper is loved: thus men are 
affected with created excellences. Whence is it, then, 
they are so stupidly unaffected with the supreme 
excellences of Jehovah? 

Love of God in the Gift of His Son. 

NEYEE was there such a display of love in 
heaven or on earth. You can no more find 
love equal to this among creatures, than you can find 
among them the infinite power that formed the uni- 
verse out of nothing. This will stand upon record 
to all eternity, as the unprecedented, unparalleled, in- 
imitable love of God. And it appears the more 
illustrious when we consider that this unspeakable 
gift was given to sinners, to rebels, to enemies, that 
were so far from deserving it, that, on the other 
hand, it is a miracle of mercy that they are not all 
groaning for ever under the tremendous Aveight of 



SAMUEL DAVIES. 447 

His justice. O ! that I -could say something becom- 
ing this love; something that might do honor to it ! 
but, alas ! the language of mortals was formed for 
lower subjects. This love passes all description and 
all knowledge. 



The Saints' Happiness at the Judgment Day. 

SEE the bright and triumphant army marching up 
to their eternal home, under the conduct of the 
Captain of their salvation, where they shall ever he 
loith the Lord, 1 Thess. iv. 17, as happy as their 
nature in its highest improvement is capable of being 
made. With what shouts of joy and triumph do 
they ascend ! with what sublime hallelujahs do they 
crown their Deliverer ! with what wonder and joy, , 
with what pleasing horror, like one that has narrow- 
ly escaped some tremendous precipice, do they look 
back upon what they once were ! once mean, guilty, 
depraved, condemned sinners ! afterward imperfect, 
broken-hearted, sighing, weeping saints ! but now 
innocent, holy, happy, glorious immortals I 

' Are these the forms that mouldered in the dust? 
O the transcendent glories of the just! ' — Young. 

Now with what pleasure and rapture do they look 
forward through tlie long, long prospect of immor- 
tality, and call it their own ! the duration not only 
of their existence, but of their happiness and glory ! 
O shall any of us share in this immensely valuable 
privilege? how immensely transporting the thought? 



413 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

' Shall we. who some few years ago were less 
Than worm, or mite, or shadow can express; 
Were nothing; shall we live, when every fire 
Of every star shall languish or expire? 
"When earth's no more, shall we survive above, 
And through the shining ranks of angels move? 
Or, as before the throne of God we stand. 
See new worlds rolling from His mighty hand? — 
All that has being in full concert join. 
And celebrate the depths of love divine! ' — Young. 

The Preciousness of Cheist. 

HE is precious in Himself, as possessing all the 
fulness of the Godhead bodily, the sum total 
of all divine excellencies, and as clothed with all the 
virtues of a perfect man. In short, all moral excel- 
lency, divine and human, created and uncreated, 
centre in Him, and render Him infinitely precious 
and valuable. He is precious to His Father; His 
beloved Son, in ivhom He is well pleased; His elect, 
in whom His soul delighteth. He is precious to 
angels; Worthy is the Lamb Uiat ivas slain, is their 
eternal song. He is dear to all good men in all ages. 
To you therefore that believe He is jprecious, says St. 
Peter, 1 Peter ii. 7. How precious are His atoning 
blood and meritorious righteousness to the guilty, 
self-condemned soul ! how precious is His sanctifying 
grace to the soul heavy-laden with sin, and groaning 
under that body of death ! how precious the assist- 
ance of His almighty arm to His poor soldiers in the 
spiritual warfare ! how precious the light of His in- 
structions to the benighted, wandering mind; how 
sweet the words of His mouth; sweeter than honey 



SAMUEL DAVIES. 449 

from the honey-comb. How precious the light of 
His smiling countenance, and the sensations of His 
love to the desponding, sinking soul ! how precious 
that eternal salvation which He imparts ! and how 
precious the price He paid for it ! N^ot corruptible 
things, such as silver and gold, says St. Peter, hut. 
His oion j^recioiis hlood, 1 Peter i. 18, 19. In short, 
He is altogether lovely, altogether precious. 

Christ the Only Foundation. 

IF you have already made Him so, then be assured 
you are safe and immoveable for ever. Let 
storms of private or public calamity rise and beat 
upon you; let your fears and doubts rise to ever so 
high a deluge; let temptations make ever so severe 
attacks upon you, still the foundation on which you 
stand abides firm and unshaken. Nay, let all nature 
go to wreck, and seas and land, and heaven and earth 
be blended together, still this foundation stands firm, 
and the living temple built upon it will remain im- 
moveable for ever. You that believe need not make 
haste, you need not be struck with consternation 
upon the appearance of danger, nor fly to unlaAvful 
means of deliverance: your all is safe, and therefore 
you may be serene and calm. Is the burden of guilt 
intolerable, and are you ready to sink under it? Or 
are you sinking under a load of sorrow? Whatever 
be the burden, cast it upon the Lord, and He will 
sustain you. This foundation is able to bear you up, 
however great the pressure. Come, ye that are 
weary and heavy-laden, come, and build your hopes, 



450 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

and place your rest here. O ! what joyful tidings 
are these ! I hope they will prove a word in season 
to some soul that is weary. 

The Saviour in His Exaltation. 

LIFT up your eyes to seats above : there you may 
behold Him who tasted of death, crowned vv^ith 
glory and honor. His head, that was once crowned 
with thorns, is now adorned with a crown of glory: 
His face, that was once bruised with blows, and dis- 
graced with spitting, shines brighter than the sun in 
his meridian glory: His hands, that were once nailed 
to the cross, now sway the sceptre of the universe: 
and His feet, that were cruelly pierced, now walk 
the crystal pavement of heaven. He that was in- 
sulted by Jews and Gentiles, He at whom they wag- 
ged their heads, is now adored by all the heavenly 
hosts, who congratulate His exaltation, and cry with 
united voice, ' Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to 
receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, 
and honor, and glory, and blessing,' Rev. v. 11, 12. 
This is the voice of ten thousand times ten thousand, 
and thousands of thousands in that world where 
Jesus is best known. And shall we break the har- 
mony of the universal choir? Shall we not echo 
back their song, and reply, To Him that loved us, 
and ivashed us from our sins in His oivn blood, 
(which is more than He did for angels,) to Him he 
glory and dominion for ever and ever, Amen, Rev. 
i. 5, 6. Shall we not look to Him whose glory 
attracts the eyes of all the celestial armies, and con- 



SAJ^IUEL DA VIES. 451 

gratiilate His exaltation? We have cause indeed to 
rejoice in it; for O ! He is exalted, that He may have 
mercy upon us, Isa. xxx. 18; He has ascended the 
throne, that He may thence scatter blessings on a 
guilty world beneath Him. He retains His usual 
love, and the tenderest bowels of compassion towards 
the meanest of His people. He is now pleading 
their cause in the court of heaven, and preparing a 
place for them. From thence He exhibits Himself 
to our intellectual view, and invites us to look to 
Him. And can we slight such glory and love united? 
Are our natures capable of such infernal ingratitude? 

let us look to Him, especially since it shall not be 
in vain. 

Hope of the Righteous in Death. 

THIS righteous man has an humble hope of sup- 
port in death. He has repeatedly intrusted 
himself into the faithful hands of an almighty Sav- 
iour, for life and death, for time and eternity; and 
he humbly hopes his Saviour will not forsake him 
now — now, when he most needs His assistance. This 
was St. Paul's support, under the prospect of his 
last hour: 'I know whom I have believed, and am 
persuaded that He is able to keep that which I 
have committed unto him against that day,' 2 Tim. 
i. 12. As if he had said, finding my own Avcakness, 

1 have committed my all into another hand; and I 
have committed it to one whose ability and faithful- 
ness have been tried by thousands as well as myself: 
and, therefore, I am confident He will keep the 



452 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

sacred depositum, and never suffer it to be injured 
or lost. This was also the support of the psalmist, 
' Though I walk,' says he, ' through the valley of the 
shadow of death, I will fear no evil; for Thou art 
with me; Thy rod and Thy staff they shall comfort 
me,' Psalm xxiii. 4. Yea, it was upon this support 
St. Paul leaned, when he braved death, in that tri- 
umphant language, ' Who shall separate us from the 
love of God? Shall tribulation, or distress, or per- 
secution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? 
No; in all these things we are more than conquer- 
ors, through Him that loved us: for I am persuaded,' 
says he, ' that death ' — that separates our souls and 
bodies — that separates friend from friend — that sep- 
arates us from all our earthly comforts, and breaks 
all our connections with this world, even death 
itself, ' shall never separate us from the love of God, 
which is in Christ Jesus,' Rom. viii. 35-39. What 
a faithful Friend, what a powerful Guardian is this, 
who stands by His people, and bears them up in their 
last extremity, and makes them more than conquer- 
ors in the struggle with the all-conquering enemy of 
mankind ! How peculiar a happiness is this, to be 
able to enjoy the comfort of hope, in the wreck of 
human nature ! How sweet to lean a dying head 
upon the kind arm of an almighty Saviour ! How 
sweet to intrust a departing soul as a depositum in 
His faithful hand ! O, may you and I enjoy this 
blessed support in a dying hour ! and may we make 
it our great business in life to secure it ! In that 
gloomy hour, our friends may weep, and wring their 



SAMUEL DAVIES. 453 

bauds around our beds; but they can afford us no 
help — no hope ! But Jesus can, as thousands have 
known by experience. Then He can bear home His 
promises upon the heart; then He can communicate 
His love, which is better than life; and, by His holy 
Spirit, bear up and encourage the sinking soul ! 
Blessed Jesus I what friend can compare to Thee? — 

' Jesus can make a dying bed 

Feel soft as downy pillows are ; 
While on His breast I lean my head, 
And breathe my soul out sweetly there.' 

Hope of a Happy Immortality, 

OH, what a glorious hope is this ! This has made 
many a soul welcome death with open arms. 
This has made them ' desirous to be with Christ, 
which is far better,' Phil. i. 23. And this has sweetly 
swallowed up the sensations of bodily pain. Indeed, 
without this, immortality would be an object of ter- 
ror, and not of hope: the prospect would be insup- 
portably dreadful. For who can bear the thought 
of an immortal duration spent in an eternal banish- 
ment from God and all happiness, and in the suffer- 
ance of the most exquisite pain? But a happy im- 
mortality, wdiat can charm us more? 

Christ Precious in His Instructions. 

AS a prophet, how sweet are His instructions to 
a bewildered soul! How precious the words 
of His lips, which are the words of eternal life! How 
delightful to sit and hear Him teach the way of duty 



454 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

and happiness, revealing the Father, and the wonders 
of the invisible state! How transporting to hear 
Him declare upon what terms an offended God may 
be reconciled! a discovery beyond the searches of all 
the sages and philosophers of the heathen world. 
How reviving is it to listen to His gracious promises 
and invitations; promises and invitations to the poor, 
the weary, and heavy laden, the broken-hearted, and 
even to the chief of sinners! The word of Christ 
has been the treasure, the support and joy of be- 
lievers in all ages. ' I have esteemed the words of 
His mouth,' says Job, ' more than my necessary food.' 
Job xxxiii. 12. It is this precious word the psalmist 
so often and so highly celebrates. He celebrates it as 
* more to be desired than gold; yea, than much tine 
gold; sweeter also than honey and the honey-comb:' 
Psalm xix. 10. ' O how I love Thy law!' says he; ' it 
is my meditation all the day:' Psalm cxix. 97. ' How 
sweet are Thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter than 
honey to my mouth:' ver. 103. 'The law of Thy 
mouth is better than thousands of gold and silver:' 
ver. 72. ' Behold, I have longed after Thy precepts:' 
ver. 40. ' Thy statutes have been my song in the 
house of my pilgrimage:' ver. 54. ' In my affliction 
Thy word hath quickened me:' ver. 50. ' Unless Thy 
law had been my delights, I should then have 
perished in my affliction:' ver. 92. This is the lan- 
guage of David, in honor of this divine Prophet, near 
three thousand years ago, when Christ had not re- 
vealed the full gospel to the world, but only some 
rays of it shone through the veil of the Mosaic dis- 



SAMUEL DAVIES. 4:d5 

peiisation. And must not believers now, who live 
under the more complete and clear instructions of 
this great Prophet, entertain the same sentiments of 
Him? Yes, to such of you as believe, even in this 
age. He is most precious. 



Eternity. 

^ TpTERNITY!' We are alarmed at the sound! 
1 J Lost in the prospect! Eternity with respect 
to God, is a duration without l^eginning as well as 
without end! Eternity, as it is -the attribute of 
human nature, is a duration that had a beginning but 
shall never have an end. This is inalienal^ly entailed 
upon us poor dying worms: and let us survey our 
inheritance. Eternity! it is a dviration that excludes 
all number and computation; days and months, and 
years, yea, and ages, are lost in it, like drops in the 
ocean. Millions of millions of years, as many years 
as there are sands on the sea-shore, or particles of 
dust in the globe of the earth, and these multiplied 
to the highest reach of number, all these are nothing 
to eternity. They do not bear the least imaginable 
proportion to it; for these will come to an end, as 
certain as day; but eternity will never, never come to 
an end. It is a line without end; it is an ocean 
without a shore. Alas! what shall I say of it! It 
is an infinite unknown something, that neither human 
thought can grasp, nor human language describe. 




JOHN NEWTON. 
1725-1807. 

Trials. 

OTHING can harm us that quick- 
ens our earnestness and frequency 
in applying to a throne of grace; only 
trust the Lord and keep close to Him, 
and all that befalls you shall be for good. 
Temptations end in victory; troubles prove an in- 
crease of consolation; yea, our very falls and fail- 
ings tend to increase our spiritual wisdom, to give 
us a greater knowledge of Satan's devices, and 
make us more habitually upon our guard against 
them. Happy case of the believer in Jesus! when 
bitten by the fiery serpent he needs not go far for a 
remedy ; he has only to look to a bleeding Saviour, 
and be healed. 

Devotion to Christ. 

T SHALL not always live this poor dying life: I 
hope one day to be all ear, all heart, all tongue; 
when I shall see the Redeemer as He is, I shall be 
like Him. This will be a heaven indeed, to behold 
His glory without a veil, to rejoice in His love with- 
out a cloud, and to sing His praises, without one 



JOHN NEWTON. 457 

jarring or wandering note, for ever. In the mean 
time, may He enable us to serve Him wdth our best. 
O that every power, faculty, and talent were devoted 
to Him! He deserves all we have, and ten thousand 
times more if we had it; for He has loved us, and 
washed us from our sins in His own blood. He gave 
Himself for us. In one sense, we are well suited to 
answer His purpose; for if we were not vile and 
worthless, beyond expression, the exceeding riches 
of His grace would not have been so gloriously dis- 
played. His glory shines more in redeeming one 
sinner, than in preserving a thousand angels. 



The Believer Sate. 

BLESSED be God, we are in safe hands; the 
Lord Himself is our keeper; nothing befalls us 
but what is adjusted by His wisdom and love. 
Health is His gift, and sickness, when sanctified, is a 
token of love likcAvise. Here we may meet with 
many things which are not joyous but grievous to 
the flesh; but He will, in one way or other, sweeten 
every bitter cup, and ere long He will wipe away all 
tears from our eyes. O that joy, that crown, that 
glory which awaits the believer! Let us keep the 
prize of our high calling in view, and press forward 
in the name of Jesus the Redeemer, and He will not 
disappoint our hopes. 



20 



458 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 



Assurance. 



ASSURANCE grows by repeated conflicts, by 
our repeated experimental proof of the Lord's 
power and goodness to save: when we have been 
brought very low and helped, sorely wounded and 
healed, cast down and raised again, have given up 
all hope, and been suddenly snatched from danger, 
placed in safety, and when these things have been 
repeated*to us and in us a thousand times over, we 
begin to learn to trust simply to the word and powder 
of God, beyond and against appearances; and this 
trust, when habitual and strong, bears the name of 
assurance, for even assurance has degrees. 

The Christian Soldier. 

THE Lord has chosen, called, and armed us for 
the fight; and shall we wished to be excused? 
Shall we not rather rejoice that we have the honor 
to appear in such a cause, under such a Captain, such 
a banner, and in such company? A complete suit 
of armor is provided, weapons not to be resisted, 
and precious balm to heal us if haply w^e receive a 
wound, and precious ointment to revive us when w^e 
are in danger of fainting. Further, we are assured 
of the victory beforehand; and O what a crown is 
prepared for every conqueror, which Jesus, the 
righteous Judge, the gracious Saviour, shall place 
upon every faithful head with His own hand! Then 
let us not be weary and faint, for in due season we 
shall yeap. The time is short; yet a little while, and 



JOHN NEWTON. 459 

the struggle of indwelling sin, and the contradiction 
of surrounding sinners, shall be known no more. 

May the prospect of this blessed hope set before 
us revive our fainting spirits, and make us willing 
to endure hardships as good soldiers of Jesus Christ. 
Here we must often sow in tears, but there we shall 
reap in joy, and all tears shall be wiped from our 
eyes for ever. 

Happy State of the Believer. 

HOW happy is the state of a believer, to have a 
sure promise that all shall work together for 
good in the end, and in the mean time a sure refuge 
where to find present relief, support and protection! 
How comfortable is it, when trouble is near, to know 
that the Lord is near likewise, and to commit our- 
selves and all our cares simply to Him, believing 
that His eye is upon us and His ear open to our 
prayers. Under the conduct of such a Shepherd we 
need not fear; though we are called to pass through 
fire and water, through the valley of the shadow of 
death. He will be with us, and will show Himself 
mighty on our l^ehalf. 

Intercourse with Heaven. 

HOW little does the w^orld know of that inter- 
course which is carried on between Heaven 
and earth! what petitions are daily presented and 
what answers are received, at the throne of grace! 
O the blessed privilege of prayer! O the w^onder- 
ful love, care, attention, and power of our great 



460 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Shepherd ! His eye is alwiiys iipou us; when our 
spirits are ahiiost overwhelmed within us, He know- 
eth our path. His ear is always open to us; let who 
will overlook and disappoint us, He will not. When 
means and hope fail, when everything looks dark 
upon us, when we seem shut up on every side, when 
we are brought to the lowest ebb, still our help is 
in the name of the Lord who made heaven and earth. 
To Him all things are possible; and before the exer- 
tion of His power, when He is pleased to arise and 
work, all hinderances give way, and vanish like a 
mist before the sun. And He can so manifest Him- 
self to the soul, and cause His goodness to pass be- 
fore it, that the hour of affliction shall be the golden 
hour of the greatest consolation. He is the fountain 
of life, strength, grace, and comfort, and of His ful- 
ness His children receive according to their occasions: 
but tliis is all hidden from the Avorld; they have no 
guide in prosperity, but hurry on as they are insti- 
gated by their blinded passions, and are perpetually 
multiplying mischiefs and miseries to themselves; 
and in adversity they have no resource, but must feel 
all the evil of affliction, without inward support and 
without deriving any advantage from it. We have, 
therefore, cause for continual praise. The Lord has 
given us to know His name, as a resting place and 
a hiding place, a sun and a shield. Circumstances 
and creatures may change; but He will be an un- 
changeable friend. The way is rough, but He trod 
it before us, and is now with us in every step we 
take; and every step brings us nearer to our hea- 



JOHN NEWTOX. 461 

venly home. Our inheritance is surely reserved for 
us, and we shall be kept for it by His power through 
faith. Our present strength is small, and, without 
a fresh supply, would be quickly exhausted; but He 
has engaged to renew it from day to day; and He 
Avill soon appear to wipe all tears from our eyes; 
and then we shall appear with Him in glory. 

Prayer and Reading the Scriptures. 

SECRET prayer and the good Word, are the chief 
wells from whence Ave draw the water of salva- 
tion. These will keep the soul alive when creature- 
streams are cut off; but the richest variety of public 
means and the closest attendance upon them will leave 
us lean and pining in the midst of plenty, if we are 
remiss and formal in the other two. I think David 
never appears in. a more lively frame of mind than 
when he wrote the 42 d, 63d and 84th psalms, which 
were all penned in a dry land, and at a distance from 
the public ordinances. 

Faith's View of Christ Crucified. 

OIF we could always behold Him by faith as 
evidently crucified before our eyes, how would 
it compose our spirits as to all the sweets and bit- 
ters of this poor life! What a barrier would it 
prove against all the snares and temptations whereby 
Satan would draw us into evil; and what firm ground 
of confidence would it afford us amidst the conflicts 
we sustain from the workings of unbelief and in- 
dwelling sin! I long for more of that faith which is 



4,()2 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence 
of things not seen, that I may be preserved humble, 
thankful, watchful, and dependent. To behold the 
glory and the love of Jesus, is the only effectual way 
to participate of His image. 



The Sabbath an Earnest of Heaven. 

THE Sabbath is a blessed day indeed, an earnest 
of heaven. There they keep an everlasting 
Sabbath, and cease not night or day admiring the 
riches of redeeming love, and adoring Him who 
washed His people from their sins in His own blood. 
To have such imperfect communion with them as is 
in this state attainable in this pleasing exercise is 
what alone can make life worth the name. For this 
I sigh and long and cry to the Lord to rend the veil 
of unbelief, scatter the clouds of ignorance, and 
break down the walls which sin is daily building up 
to hide Him from my eyes. I hope I can say, my 
soul is athirst for God, and nothing less than the 
light of His countenance can satisfy me. Blessed be 
His name for the desire; it is His own gift, and He 
never gives it in vain. He will aflford us a taste of 
the water of life by the way; and ere long we shall 
drink abundantly at the fountain head, and have done 
with complaint for ever. May we be thankful for 
what we receive, and still earnestly desirous of more. 




JOHN np:wtox. • 463 

Divine Guidance. 

/ E see a highway through the wilderness, a 
powerful guard, an infallible Guide at hand 
to conduct us through; and we can discern, beyond 
the limits of the wilderness, a better land, where we 
shall be at rest and at home. What will the diffi- 
culties we meet by the way then signify? The re- 
membrance of them will only remain to heighten our 
sense of the love, care, and power of our Saviour and 
Leader. O how shall we then admire, adore, and 
praise Him, when He shall condescend to unfold to 
us the beauty, propriety, and harmony of the whole 
train of His dispensations towards us, and give us a 
clear retrospect of all the way, and all the turns of 
our pilgrimage! 

Blessed Fruits of Affliction. 

BY affliction prayer is quickened, for our prayers 
are very apt to grow languid and formal in a 
time of ease. Affliction greatly helps us to under- 
stand the Scriptures, especially the promises, most 
of which being made to times of trouble, we cannot 
so well know their fulness, sweetness, and certainty, 
as when we have been in the situation to which they 
are suited, have been enabled to trust and plead 
them, and found them fulfilled in our own case. We 
are usually indebted to affliction as the means or 
occasion of the most signal discoveries we are favored 
with of the wisdom, j)Ower, and faithfulness of the 
Lord. 
.Afflictions are dcsia'ned likewise for the mani- 



464 -DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

festation of our sincerity to ourselves and to others. 
When faith endures the fire, we know it to be of 
the right kind; and others, who see we are brought 
safe out, and lose nothing but the dross, will con- 
fess that God is with us of a truth, Dan. iii. 27, 28. 
Surely this thought should reconcile us to suffer, 
not only with patience, but with cheerfulness, if 
God may be glorified in us. This made the apostle 
rejoice in tribulation, that the power of Christ might 
be noticed, as resting upon Him, and working might- 
ily in Him. Many of our graces, likewise, cannot 
thrive or show themselves to advantasfe without 
trials, such as resignation, patience, meekness, long- 
suffering. 




THOMAS SCOTT, D. D. 
1747-1821. 

Morning Peayees for a Family. I. 

[o>^ MOST glorious and gracious God, 
whose kind providence lias protected us 
througli the night, and brought us in 
peace to meet together this morning; 
assist us, we earnestly beseech Thee, to 
present our unfeigned praises and thanksgivings, 
and to unite in fervent prayer and supplication be- 
fore Thy mercy-seat. 

But who are we, O thou high and lofty One, who 
inhabitest eternity, whose name is Holy, that we 
should venture into Thy awful presence ? Even the 
seraphim veil their faces in deep humility, when they 
present their adorations before Thy throne — And avo 
are not only immensely beneath them in our nature; 
but alas, Ave haAX been guilty of base ingratitude for 
Thy bounties, and of multiplied acts of rebellion 
against Thee, our Creator and Sovereign. ' We have 
forsaken Thee, the Fountain of living Avaters,' to seek 
happiness from the broken cisterns of earthly enjoy- 
ments and possessions ! We have proudly rejected 
Thy easy yoke, and become slaves to divers lusts and 

pleasures ! We have refused Thee that reasonable 

20" 



466 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

tribute of worship and love, wliicli it would have 
been our privilege to render; We have broken Thy 
commandments in thought, word, and deed, and have 
abused Thy gifts to the dishonor of Thy name. 

Thus we would with shame confess, we are fallen 
under condemnation and into bondage, from which 
we cannot deliver our own souls: and w^e may well 
be confounded, when we would lift up our hearts 
unto Thee. 'If Thou, Lord, shouldest mark iniqui- 
ty, O Lord, who can stand? But there is forgive- 
ness with Thee,' and plenteous redemption in Thy 
beloved Son. Through His atoning sacrifice, and 
prevailing intercession, we would approach Thy 
throne of grace; and while we smite on our breasts 
and say, ' God be merciful to us, vile sinners !' we 
would unite our penitent confessions with lively faith 
and hope, and bless Thee for these unspeakable bene- 
fits. Oh give us true repentance and living faith; 
convince us more deeply of our sinfulness; and dis- 
cover to us every thing in our hearts and lives, which 
displeases Thee : that we may approach Thee in gen- 
uine poverty of spirit, and with sincere and fervent 
lono^inors after those blessino^s which we ask with our 
lips. Enlighten our understandings, that we may 
more clearly perceive the nature and glory of Thy 
gospel: and more fully 'know Thee, the only true 
God and Jesus Christ Avhom Thou hast sent.' Tcyich 
us to count all thino^s but loss, that we may win 
Christ, and partake of His salvation. May Thy holy 
Word, which we daily stud}?-, be treasured up in our 
memories, written in our hearts, and made legible in 



TIIOaiAS SCOTT. 467 

our tempers and conduct. Oh, do Thou rectify our 
mistakes, deliver us from prejudices, 'make us to be 
of good understanding in the way of Godliness,' 
and ' uphold our goings in Thy ways, that our foot- 
steps slip not.' We beseech Thee, O Thou God of 
peace, that by fiiith in the blood of Thy beloved Son, 
we may enjoy the comfort of Thy reconciling grace, 
and sweet tranquillity in our hearts and consciences; 
and may our hope of forgiveness from Thee render 
us ready to forgive others, and form our dispositions 
to gentleness and love. Glorying in the Cross of 
Christ, may we be crucified to the world, and the 
world to us. May we be clothed with humility, 
walk before Thee Avith vigilance and circumspection, 
and serve Thee in the spirit of adoption. Enable us, 
we beseech Thee, for Thy sake, to ' do unto all men, 
as we would they should do unto us,' to live in 
peace one with another, and while we have time, to 
do ' good unto all men, but especially to them that are 
of the household of ftiith.' May Thy saving grace 
' teach us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, 
and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this 
present world:' may we be content with such things 
a? we have; accommodate ourselves to the station 
allotted us; conscientiously attend to our proper 
duties; and watch against covetousness, anger, envy, 
and all other sinful passions. Oh, may we be indeed 
the followers of the lowly Jesus: may we walk as 
He walked; act in wisdom towards all around us; 
and improve our several talents to the glory of Thy 



468 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

great iiaiiie : and thus may we ' Avait for the mercy 
of om* Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life,' 

Hear, we beseech Thee, these our prayers and 
supplications: be with us in all the employments 
and companies in which we may this day be engaged: 
may we act in them, as under Thine eye, and as it 
becomes Thy redeemed people: and may we be 
habitually prepared for death and judgment. These 
and all mercies we, unworthy sinners, humbly im- 
plore, for the sake, and through the merits and me- 
diation of Thy Son, Jesus Christ; to whom, with 
Thee, O Father, and the Holy Spirit, we would 
ascribe co-equal and eternal praise and adoration. 
Amen. 

n: 

ALMIGHTY and everlasting God, we Thy un- 
, worthy creatures desire to bless and thank 
Thee, for Thy gracious protection, and the refresh- 
ment of sleep during the past night; and the renewed 
gift of life and a measure of health this morning. 
We would gratefully acknowledge likewise tlie con- 
veniences of our dwelling and temporal provision; 
the comfort of kind friends and domestic peace, and 
all the security and tranquillity which we enjoy in 
this favored country. We confess, O Lord, that we 
are unworthy of the least of these Thy mercies: and 
we beseech Thee, enable us to show our unfeigned 
gratitude, by alacrity in every part of Thy service, 
and a proper use of all Thy benefits. 

But we are bound especially to bless and praise 



THOMAS SCOTT. 469 

Thy holy name, O most gracious Father, for the 
salvation provided for iis in Thy Son Jesus Christ 
our Lord. Without this inestimable benefit, no 
temporal peace or prosperity could have eventually 
profited us. By Thy righteous sentence we are 
doomed to die. Our present joys and sorrows, cares 
and pursuits, must soon vanish like the dreams of 
the past night; we shall shortly open our eyes amidst 
the important realities of the eternal world. And, 
Oh! if Thou shouldest, in that unchanging state, deal 
with us in strict justice according to our deserts, we 
could no more avoid final condemnation than we can 
escape the stroke of death. 

But, blessed be Thy name, O Lord, our reprieves 
from the grave may now be improved as opportuni- 
ties of seeking deliverance from the wrath to come, 
and of securing an incorruptible and eternal inheri- 
tance. Enable us, therefore, we humbly pray Thee, 
to regard with solemn attention Thy message of 
reconciliation, through the mediation of Christ, and 
by faith in His atoning blood. Enlighten our minds 
to a clear perception of the nature, glory, and ines- 
timable value of Thy great salvation; and fill us 
with an admiring sense of Thy condescending and 
compassionate love to lost sinners, in this stupendous 
method of showing them mercy, and giving them 
eternal felicity. Here may we see the harmonious 
display of Thy justice and grace. Thy holy abhor- 
rence of iniquity, and Thy tender love to condemned 
transgressors. Help us, we humljly beseech Thee, 
to discover, in some measure, that manifold wisdom, 



470 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

and all those glories, which fill the angelic hosts with 
admiring love, that we may learn on earth the wor- 
ship of heaven, and here lisp our feeble praises 'to 
Him who loved us, and washed us from our sins in 
His own blood.' Oh, enable us to give such dili- 
gence in makino^ our callino^ and election sure, that 
we may always be confident; knowing that when we 
shall be absent from the body, we shall be present 
with Thee in glory. And if any of us have hitherto 
neglected the one thing needful, resting in a form of 
godliness, or in any way deceiving ourselves; may 
we be stirred up without delay to seek first Th}^ 
kingdom and Thy righteousness, and to subordinate 
all other pursuits to this grand concern. 

Teach every one of us, O merciful God, to serve 
Thee in our difierent employments; doing all in the 
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and using our pos- 
sessions, or improving our talents, as those who duly 
consider hoAv soon it may be said, ' Give an account 
of thy stewardship, for thou ma^^est no longer be 
steward.' Enable us, we entreat Thee, so to act at 
all times and in all things, that we may joyfully an- 
ticipate the summons, and humbly hope to be receiv- 
ed by the Saviour with that w^elcome, * Well done, 
good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of 
thy Lord.' Grant us, O thou Fountain of Life, such 
consolations in communion with Thee, as may render 
us superior to the frowns and smiles of the world, 
and fix our affections on things above. 

Teach us also to profit by all Thy rebukes and 
chastisements; that every painful feeling may serve 



THOMAS SCOTT. 471 

to humble us, to wean us from earthly things, to 
embitter sin, to endear the love of our sufterino- Re- 
deemer, to soften our hearts into compassion towards 
the afflicted, and to bow our wills into submission to 
Thine appointments. And as Thou, O glorious Lord 
of all, art pleased to permit us to call Thee our 
Heavenly Father, grant, we entreat Thee, that the 
lively exercise of all filial afiections, by the sacred 
influences of the Spirit of adoption, may fully testify 
that we are indeed the children and heirs of God. 
Oh, let it be the ardent desire of our inmost souls, 
that Thy name should be hallowed, Thy kingdom 
established, and Thy will be done on earth, as it is 
by all the inhabitants of heaven. 

Enable us now, we beseech Thee, to enter on our 
several employments, in submission and obedience 
to Thy will, and dependence on Thy grace. May 
we be preserved from the snares of the world, and 
defended against the assaults of Satan: may we 
watch over our hearts, govern our passions, and 
bridle our tongues, as under the inspection of Thine 
all-seeing eye; and be helped in all things to glorif^^ 
Thy name, through Jesus Christ, Thy beloved Son, 
and our Mediator and Eedeemer. Amen. 

A Family Prayer for Saturday Evening. 

OTHOU eternal God, in whom we live, and 
move, and have our being, enable us, we 
beseech Thee, to close this week in that manner 
Avhich shall be most profitable to ourselves and most 
honorable to Thy name. 



472 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

We have no occasion, O most righteous and holy 
God, to review the years which are past, in order to 
find cause of humiliation in Thy sight: every day 
and every week suggest abundant matter for painful 
reflections, and add to our conviction, that ' we are 
all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses 
as filthy rags.' O Lord, if Thou shouldest mark 
iniquity, who could stand ? Enable us, therefore, to 
confess our sins with ingenuous and unreserved sor- 
row and shame; to own that they are more in num- 
ber than the hairs of our head, and a sore burden, 
too heavy for us to bear; and to present ourselves, 
in deep contrition at Thy throne of grace, in humble 
faith and reverent boldness, through our great and 
compassionate High Priest, that we may obtain 
mercy and find grace to help in time of need. Do 
Thou apply the atoning blood to our consciences this 
evening, to purge aAvay the guilt of the past week; 
that we may go to rest in peace, and not carry the 
guilt of any unrepented, unpardoned sin, into the 
ensuing week, to mar our comfort, or blast our en- 
deavors to glorify Thy name. O Thou Author and 
Finisher of faith, help us against all the incursions 
of unbelief: leave us not to a dead faith and pre- 
sumptuous hope; and let us not be discouraged by 
needless fears and scruples. Grant us peace and joy 
in believing; and let the love of God shed abroad 
in our hearts by the Holy Spirit, assure us that our 
hope shall never cause us to be ashamed. 

While we would thus seek forgiveness of all that is 
past, through the blood of sprinkling, enable us also 



THOMAS SCOTT. 473 

to return Thee our unfeigned tlianks for the mercies 
of the past week, and of our whole lives. 

Another week hath now been added to the season 
of Thy long-suffering; and to our season of prepa- 
ration for eternity ! through another week we have 
obtained help of God, and been in some measure 
enabled to cleave to Thee ! Accept our cordial 
thanks and praises for all Thine unnumbered mer- 
cies, and grant that our future lives may evince our 
sincerity. 

Bless to us, we beseech Thee, the means of grace 
we have this week enjoyed: and grant that, through 
Thine assistance, we may remember and be edified 
by all we have read or heard from Thy holy Word. 
Sanctify also to us the dispensations of Thy provi- 
dence: teach us to profit by all Thy chastisements; 
and to learn gratitude and confidence in Thee, by all 
Thy mercies: and may even the experience we have 
of our own weakness and folly, excite us to more 
fervent pra^^ers for wisdom, sti^ngth, and grace, ac- 
cording to Thy precious promises. 

And now,0 merciful God, we beseech Thee to pre- 
pare our hearts for the approaching day of sacred 
rest: and teach us so to arrange all our temporal con- 
cerns that our thoughts may not be occupied, our at- 
tention distracted, nor our minds rufiicd by them, 
when we would wait on Thee in Thy holy services. 
Let us not deem Thy sabbaths a weariness; but our 
delight, our privilege, and great advantage. May the 
care of our own souls, and of the souls of those who 
belong to us, sweetly occupy the hours of the day. 



474 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

By self-examination and meditation on Thy Word, may 
we obtain increasing acquaintance with ourselves, 
our spiritual estate, the progress we have made, or 
the loss we have sustained, in this important concern. 
Enable us, we beseech Thee, to humble ourselves be- 
fore Thee in true repentance, and cordially to renew 
our acceptance of Thy salvation; and while we wait 
on Thee, may our strength be repaired; may every 
grace be brought into vigorous exercise; and our 
knowledge of Thy truth and will in all respects en- 
larged. Assist us in Thy public worship, and fiivor 
us with Thy special presence and blessing. May Thy 
people, with whom we worship, be refreshed, com- 
forted, and sanctified in Thy courts; and grant Thy 
special assistance and blessing to Thy ministers in 
their work and labor of love. Oh that increasing 
numbers may be added to Thy churches, of such as 
shall be saved; and many able and faithful laborers 
sent forth into the harvest; and may the Sun of 
Righteousness diffuse His healing influence, wherever 
the sun in the firmament enlightens the nations with 
his beams. Hear us, O merciful Father, in these our 
supplications; take us under Tiiy protection this 
night; fit us, both in body and soul, for the duties 
of the ensuing day, and by them prepare us for Thy 
eternal Sabbath, for the sake of Jesus Christ Thy 
Son our Lord, to whom, with Thee and the Holy 
Spirit, One God in three persons, even the God of 
our salvation, be glory and honor from all creatures, 
now and for evermore. Amen. 




JOHN LOGAN, F. R. S. 

1748-1788. 
The Message which Jesus Beings. 

HE message Avliich he brouglit, was life 
and immortality. From the Star of 



Jacob, light shone even upon the shades 
of death. As a proof of immortality, He 
called back the departed spirit from the 
world unknown; as an earnest of the resurrection 
to a future life. He Himself arose from the dead. 
When we contemplate the tomb of nature, we cry 
out 'Can these dry bones live?' When we con- 
template the tomb of Jesus, we say, 'Yes, they 
can live!' As He arose, we shall in like manner 
arise. In the tomb of nature, you see man return 
to the dust from whence he was taken ; in the 
tomb of Jesus you see man restored to life again. 
In the tomb of nature you see the shades of death 
fall on the weary traveller, and the darkness of the 
long night close over his head ; in the tomb of Jesus, 
you see light arise upon the shades of death, and 
the morning dawn upon the long night of the grave. 
On the tomb of nature, it is written, 'Behold thy 
end, O man! Dust thou art, and uuto dust thou 
shalt return. Thou, who now callest thyself the 



476 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

son of heaven, shall become one of the clods of the 
valley;' on the tomb of Christ is written, 'Thou 
diest, O man, but to live again. When dust returns 
to dust, the spirit shall return to God who gave it. 
I am the resurrection and the life; he that belie veth 
in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live.' From 
the tomb of nature, you hear a voice, ' Forever silent 
is the land of forgetfulness ! From the slumbers of 
the o^rave shall we awake no more! Like the flowers 
of the field, shall we be as though we had never 
been !' from the tomb of Jesus, you hear, ' Blessed 
are the dead that die in the Lord, thus saith the 
Spirit, for they rest from their labors, and pass into 
glory. Li my Father's house there are many man- 
sions; if it were not so, I would have told you. I 
go to prepare a place for you, and if I go awa}^, I 
will come again, and take you unto myself, that 
where I am, there ye may be also.' 

Will not this assurance of a happy immortality 
and a blessed resurrection, in a great measure, remove 
the terror and the sting of death? May we not walk 
without dismay through the dark valley, -.when we 
are conducted by a beam from heaven? May we 
not endure the tossings of one stormy night, when 
it carries us to the shore that we long for? What 
cause have we to dread the messenger who brings us 
to our Father's house? Should not our fears about 
futurity abate, when we hear God addressing us with 
respect to death, as He did the patriarch of old, upon 
going to Egypt, ' Fear not to go down to the grave; 



JOHN LOGAN. 477 

I will go down with tliee, and will bring thee up 
again?' 

The Christian's Victory over Death. 

THIS, O Christian ! the death of thy Redeemer, 
is thy strong consolation; thy effectual remedy 
ao^ainst the fear of death. What evil can come nioh 
to him for whom Jesus died? Does the law wliich 
thou hast broken, denounce vengeance against thee? 
Behold that law fulfilled in the meritorious life of 
thy Redeemer. Does the sentence of wrath pro- 
nounced against the posterity of Adam sound in 
thine ears? Behold that sentence blotted out, that 
liandiDriting ^ as the apostle calls it, cancelled, nailed 
to thy Saviour's cross, and left there as a trophy of 
His victory. Art thou afraid that the cry of thy 
offences may rise to heaven, and reach the ears of 
justice? . There is no place for it there; in room of 
it ascends the voice of that blood which speaketh 
better things than the blood of Abel. Does the 
enemy of mankind accuse thee at the judgment-seat? 
He is put to silence by thy Advocate and Intercessor 
' at the right hand of tliy Father. Does death appear 
to thee in a form of terror, and hold out his sting 
to alarm thy mind? His terror is removed, and his 
sting was pulled out by that hand, which, on Mount 
Calvary, was fixed to the accursed tree. 

Well then may ye join in the triumphant song of 
the apostle, ' O death, where is thy sting? O grave, 
where is thy victory?' 

Jesus Christ gives u« victory over death, by yield- 



478 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

iiio* US consolation and relief under the fears that 
arise in the mind upon the awful transition from this 
world to the next. Who ever left the precincts of 
mortality w^ithout casting a wishful look on what he 
left behind,* and a trembling eye on the scene that is 
before him? Being formed by our Creator for en- 
joyments even in this life, we are endowed w^ith a 
sensibility to the objects around us. We have affec- 
tions, and we delight to indulge them: we have 
hearts, and we want to bestoAv them. Bad as the 
world is, we find in it objects of affection and attach- 
ment. Even in this waste and howling wilderness, 
there are spots of verdure and of beauty, of power 
to charm the mind and make us cry out, ' It is good 
for us to be here.' When, after the observation and 
experience of years, we have found out the objects 
of the soul, and met with minds congenial to our 
own, what pangs must it give to the heart to think 
of parting forever? We even contract an attachment 
to inanimate objects. The tree under whose shadow 
we have often sat; the fields where we have fre- 
quently strayed; the hill, the scene of contemplation, 
or the haunt of friendship, become objects of passion* 
to the mind, and upon our leaving them, excite a 
temporary sorrow and regret. If these things can 

* This sentiment is evidently borrowed from these inimitable 
lines of Gray : — 

For who. to dumb forgetfulness a prey, 
This pleasing, anxious being e'er resigned ; 

Left the warm precinct's of the cheerful day, 
Nor cast one longing, lingering look behind. 



JOHN LOGAN. 479 

affect us with uneasiness, how great must be the 
affliction, when stretched on that bed from which we 
shall rise no more, and looking about for the last 
time on the sad circle of our weeping friends ! How 
great must be the affliction, to dissolve at once all 
the attachments of life; to bid an eternal adieu to 
the friends whom we long have loved, and to part 
forever with all that is dear below the sun ! But let 
not the Christian be disconsolate. He parts with the 
objects of his affection, to meet them again; to meet 
them in. a better world, where change never enters, 
and from whose blissful mansions sorrow flies away. 
At the resurrection of the just; in the great assembly 
of the sons of God, when all the family of heaven 
are gathered together, not one person shall be miss- 
ing that was worthy of thy affection or esteem. And 
if among imperfect creatures, and in a troubled 
world, the kind, the tender, and the generous affec- 
tions have such power to charm the heart, that even 
the tears which they occasion delight us, what joy 
unspeakable and glorious will they produce, when 
they exist in perfect minds, and are improved by the 
purity of the heavens ! 

Jesus, thy Saviour, has the keys of death; the 
abodes of the dead are part of His kingdom. He 
lay in the grave, and hallowed it for the repose of 
the just. Before our Lord ascended up on high, He 
said to His disciples, ' I go to my Father and to 
your Father, to my God and to your God;' and 
when the time of your departure is at hand, you go 



480 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

to your Fatliei' and His Father, to your God and His 
God. 

Enlightened by these discoveries, trusting to the 
merits of his Redeemer, and animated with the hope 
which is set before him, the Christian will depart 
with tranquillity and joy. To him the bed of death 
will not be a scene of terror, nor the last hour an 
hour of despair. There is a majesty in the death 
of the Christian. He partakes of the spirit of that 
world to which he is advancing, and he meets his 
hitter end with a face that looks to the heavens. 



E 



Passing Away. 

j^VERY thing that you behold around you bears 
the marks of mortality and the symptoms of 
decay. He only who is, and was, and is to come, 
is without any variableness or shadow of turning. 
Every thing passes away. A great and mighty river, 
for ages and centuries, has been rolling on, and 
sweeping away all that ever lived, to the vast abyss 
of eternity. On that darkness light does not rise. 
From that unknown country none return. -. On that 
devouring deep, which has swallowed up every thing, 
no vestige appears of the things that were. 




TIMOTHY DWIGHT, D. D., LL. D. 
1752-1827. 

The Blessings to which the Saviour Inyites Us. 

HESE blessings are noble, exquisite, 
and enduring, beyond the conception 
of finite minds. Tliey extend alike to the 
soul and to the body ; they fill time ; they 
spread through eternity. In this world, 
they are formed of unceasing protection, guidance, 
support, consolation, holiness, peace which passeth 
all understanding, hope which is an anchor to 
the soul in the stormy sea of life and joy which 
the world can neither give nor take away. They 
include the best provision for our wants, the best 
conduct of our lives, and the perfect security of 
our well-being. They commence with our sancti- 
fication, they attend us through life, they accom- 
pany us in death, they follow us beyond the grave. 
In the future world they assume a still brighter 
aspect. There our vile bodies will be refashioned 
like unto Christ's glorious body, according to that 
mysterious working, whereby He is able to subdue 
all things unto Himself. Adorned and invigorated 

21 



482 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

with youth, strength, beauty and immortality, they 
will be reunited to our minds, made perfectly holy 
and excellent. In the highest heavens, the house 
of God, we shall dwell in His presence, be made 
members and brethren of His family; advance for 
ever in knowledge and virtue, in wisdom and loveli- 
ness, in peace and joy; meet the smiles of infinite 
complacency; commence a pure and perpetual friend- 
ship with the world of sanctified minds; become sons, 
and kings, and priests to God the Father, and joint 
heirs with the Redeemer to His immortal inheritance; 
shall be with Him where He is, and shall behold and 
receive the glory w^hich He had wath the Father be- 
fore ever the world was. Are not these blessings 
ffreat enouo^h to fill the wishes even of an immortal 
mind? Could an angel ask more? Can we hope 
for the one half of these? Can we realize, can we 
believe that they will be given to such beings as we 
are? Yet these, and far more than human language 
can express, or human imaginations can conceive, He 
possessed from everlasting, and these He has of His 
own accord, unasked, undesired, profiered to our 
acceptance, declaring that all things in the universe, 
in time and through eternity, shall w^ork together 
for good -to them that love God. 

Without an Interest in Christ. 

WITHOUT the love, the atonement, and the in- 
tercession of Christ, how will you disarm 
death and triumph over the grave? Who will guide 
your lonely and anxious steps through the uuknowai 



TIMOTHY DWIGIIT. 483 

\vorld, — sustain your hearts before the last tribunal, 
acquit you of your immeasurable guilt, and redeem 
you from endless darkness and despair? 

Who will conduct you to heaven? Who will pro- 
vide for you immortal good: support you with 
self-approbation and peace; adorn you with beauty 
and excellency; inspire you with love; improve and 
refine you with wisdom; instamp on you the glorious 
image of God; and bring you to the general assem- 
bly of the first-born as their eternal friend and com- 
panion? Who wdll unlock for you the springs of 
life? Who will feed you with living bread? Who 
will clothe you with unfading robes of righteousness? 
Who will fix you in mansions of everlasting joy? 
Who, in a word, will be your light, your portion, 
and your friend for ever. 

The Love of Christ. 

THE love of Christ is immeasurably great. ' The 
love of Christ,' says St. Paul, ' which passeth 
knowledge.' It is a love which has proved itself to 
be stronger than death — a love which affliction could 
not quench, which sorrow could not drown. This is 
evident, with a lustre irresistible, in the things which 
He has done, which He is doing, and which He will 
do hereafter. It is unnecessary for me to recall on 
this occasion the things which Christ has already 
done. I need not exhibit Him to you on the cross, 
pouring out His blood for the salvation of men, nor 
present Him agonizing in the garden of Gethsemane, 
nor follow Him to the tomb. What must have been 



4:84 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

the intenseness of that benevolence which could bring 
the Son of God from the throne of heaven to shame 
and agony, to the cross and to the grave? 

Less striking, I acknowledge, but scarcely less 
affecting, are the proofs of the same love in what He 
is now doing. There is something inexpressibly glo- 
rious to Him, and beyond measure interesting to us, 
in beholding the Saviour of mankind, who 'has 
ascended far above all heavens, that He might fill 
all things,' looking down, nay descending from this 
stupendous greatness to the miserable world which 
we inhabit, to blot out the transgressions and wash 
away the stains of a wretched sinner; to renew a 
polluted soul; to shed upon it peace passing all un- 
derstanding; to reunite it to the favor of God; to 
chase away its fears of future woe; to pour the bal- 
sam of life into its wounds; to illumine it with the 
beams of hope; to conduct it safely through the trials 
and dangers of this melancholy pilgrimage; to bar 
the gates of perdition against its entrance; and to 
open for its reception the door of endless life. 

The Saviour's Goodness to the Believer. 

HE will in no wise cast you out. He will never 
leave you or forsake you. His eye, before 
which the night shineth as the day, will watch over 
you with unceasing care; and His hand, which no- 
thing can resist or escape, guard you with infinite 
tenderness. In every sorrow He will comfort; in 
every danger He will deliver. The bed of death He 
will spread with down; the passage into eternity He 



TIMOTHY DWIGIIT. 485 

will illumine with the light of His own countenance. 
In the judgment He will acquit you of all 3^our guilt; 
and in His own house, the mansion of eternal light, 
and peace, and joy, he will present you to His Father 
as trophies of His cross and monuments of his bound- 
less love. 

The Sinner Invited to Return to God. 

IS it not then infinitely desirable to know that you 
have a home to which you may go; plenty to 
which 3^ou may betake yourselves; friends from whom 
you may derive kindness and consolation; and a 
Father yet remaining, who, though so long forsaken, 
is still willing to acknowledge this relation to you? 
In His tenderness you may find an asylum; to His 
arms you may be welcomed? in His house you may 
find an everlasting residence. There all good things 
abound, are treasured up, and bestowed with un- 
wearied as well as unlimited bounty. 

Behold that Father advancing to meet you on 
your way! Hear Him calling to you with infinite 
compassion, Ho! thou starving, perishing prodigal. 
Return to me and to mine. Art thou hungry? I 
will feed thee with living bread. Aft thou thirsty? 
I will lead thee to fountains of living waters. Art 
thou naked? I will clothe thee with the robe 
of righteousness. Art thou weary? I will guide 
thee to eternal rest. Art thou friendless? I will be 
to thee a Father, and an everlasting friend. Dead? 
thou shalt live airain. Lost? I will restore thee to 
a universe of joy. Come; all things are ready. See, 



486 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

heaven is opened! Behold angels, and the spirits 
of just men made ^^erfect, waiting for Thy arrival! 
See, the golden sceptre of forgiveness extended be- 
fore thee! Approach, and touch and live for ever. 

Advantages of Afflictions. 

AFFLICTIONS, of course, if wisely improved 
and sanctified by God, yield the peaceable 
fruits of righteousness. If wisely improved by us, 
there is good reason to hope that they will be thus 
sanctified. Great multitudes of mankind are hope- 
fully brought out of darkness into marvelous light 
during seasons of severe afi^iiction. Then the first 
views begin, the first afiections are cherished, the 
first resolutions are formed, which introduce all the 
succeeding happy train of conduct and character of 
the sanctified man. Eternal life is very often to be 
dated from the dying bed of our friends. Religion 
there sits kindly and constantly to persuade us to 
admit her as a future friend, a future and eternal 
inmate of our bosoms. Christ there solemnly and 
afiectingly calls on us, as we dread death, to dread 
sin, the cause of death, and to be alarmed with the 
thought of dying for ever; to be reconciled to God, 
then waiting to receive us to His arms, and to believe 
in Himself, the resurrection and the life, that He may 
raise us up at the last day. Salvation here dawns 
like the day-star, rising out of a night of gloom and 
tempest, and anticipating a perfect and glorious day. 
The soul, here under a load of hopeless sorrow, find- 
ing no earthly friend or comforter able and willing 



TIMOTHY DWIGHT. 4^7 

to relieve its distresses, bows before its divine Re- 
deemer, and turns to the Spirit of grace for heavenly 
and immortal consolation. 

Consolation for the Afflicted. 

TO the poor afflicted race of men religion is a 
heavenly messenger, who, like the angels sent 
to the Bethlehem shepherds to announce the birth 
of the Saviour, while she proclaims unceasingly, 
' Glory to God in the highest,' sings also, 'Peace on 
earth, and good-will towards men.' Towards every 
sufierer, laboring under heavy sorrows, and in the 
midst of despondency casting around his eyes in vain 
to find consolation and relief, she approaches with 
her own serene and benevolent smile, and proffers 
herself as a comfort to mourners. In lier hand she 
carries the word of God, and opening the wonderful 
book, points to lines Avritten with the divine finger, 
and dictated by the voice of infinite compassion. 
'Behold,' she cries, ' the testimonies of the Lord are 
the heritage of the afflicted for ever. They are the 
rejoicing of the broken heart.' In this sacred Volume 
read, and find all the relief which your sorrows need. 
Here the infinitely blessed Jehovah has portra3'ecl 
Himself in characters of light, as the Father of 
all mercies and the God of all grace and consolation. 
Here He has disclosed Himself as the common, kind, 
and compassionate parent of men, and has taught 
them that all His chastisements arc inflicted only for 
the good of the sufferers, that it is their frowardness 
which requires them, and their frowardness only 



488 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

which prevents them from being the choicest bless- 
ings. To cure your melancholy diseases, to over- 
come your dangerous and deadly passions, they have 
descended on you, that you may be a partaker of His 
holiness and live for ever. The boundless love Avhich 
contrived the deliverance of this world from sin and 
ruin is here seen to watch with infinite tenderness 
over you. Hear the afiectionate language in which 
is disclosed to you the glorious and benevolent 
character of Him who made you, ' The Lord is my 
shepherd, I shall not want. He maketh me to lie 
down in green pastures; He leadeth me beside the 
still waters. He restoreth my soul; He leadeth me 
in the paths of righteousness for His name's sake. 
Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow 
of death, I will fear no evil, for Thou art with me; 
Thy rod and Thy staif they comfort me. Thou pre- 
parest a table before me in the presence of mine ene- 
mies; Thou anointest my head with oil; my cup 
runneth over. Surely goodness and mercy shall fol- 
low me all the days of my life: and I will dwell in 
the house of the Lord for ever. 

The Desire of Isimortality. 

IMMORTALITY is necessarily the object of earn- 
est desire to every intelligent, and would be, if 
he could form the thought, to every percipient being. 
It was the actual and glorious lot of our first parents. 
It may be the lot of every one of us. A short period, 
a limited life, is the only period during which we 
can obtain it. This very consideration demands of 



TIMOTHY DAVIGIIT. 489 

US the utmost anxiety and diligence. The death, 
also, which we must all undergo enforces strongly, 
with its painful and distressing circumstances, this 
powerful argument. Like a beacon lighted up v^ith 
an eternal fire, on a height visible to all the nations 
of men, it solemnly warns us of the evils to which 
we are exposed, and of which to all the impenitent 
it is itself the beginning. We need then to be warn- 
ed. If Ave are wise we shall welcome the alarm, and, 
beholding the Sun of life hastening through the 
heavens, shall do, while the day lasts, whatsoever 
our hand findeth to do, with our might, and, to 
quicken our diligence, shall cast a constant and ap- 
prehensive eye toward the rapid approach of that 
night in which no man can work. Instead of wish- 
ing to live longer, we shall labor to live better. In- 
stead of vainly panting for immortal being in a world 
of sin and sorrow, where we, together with others, 
should only sin and suffer, we should lend all our 
efforts to find it in that glorious world where it can 
be actually found, and where its ages roll on in the 
fullness of joyand pleasures for evermore. 

Blessings of Prayer. 

PRAYEK will make you daily better, wiser, and 
lovelier in God's sight, by cherishing in you 
those views and emotions which constitute the cha- 
racter of a good man. It will soothe every tumult 
of your bosoms, allay your fears, comfort your sor- 
rows, invigorate your hopes, give you peace in hand, 

and anticipate glory to come. It will restrain you 

21* 



490 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

from sin, strengthen you against temptation, recall 
you from wandering, give life and serenity to your 
consciences, furnish you with clearer views concern- 
ing your duty, alarm you concerning your danger, 
and inspire you with ardor, confidence, and delight 
in the Christian course. 

In prayer God will meet you, and commune with 
you face to face, as a man with his friend. He will 
' lift upon you the light of His reconciled counte- 
nance;' will 'put joy and gladness in your hearts;' 
and will awaken in you the spirit of ' thanksgiving 
and the voice of melody.' ' When you pass through 
the waters He will be with you; and through the 
rivers, they shall not overflow you; when you walk 
through the fire, you shall not be burned, neither 
shall the flame kindle on you: for He is the Lord 
your God, the holy one of Israel, your Saviour.' 
' In an acceptable time He will hear you, and in a 
day of salvation will He help you.' ' The mountains 
will indeed depart, and the hills be removed; but' 
(if 3^ou seek Him faithfully) ' His kindness shall not 
depart from you, nor His covenant of peac42 be re- 
moved.' ' Seek, then, the Lord, while He may be 
found: call ye upon Him, while He is near.' ' When 
you call He will answer; and when you cry unto 
Him, He will say, Here I am.' 

On Peayee foe Eevivals of Religion. 

NO good descends from heaven to this world, 
except as an answer to prayer. 'Ask, and ye 
shall receive' is the irreat law accordino- to which 



TIMOTHY DWIGHT. 491 

all blessings are given. Pray always with all prayer 
and supplicatioli of the Spirit, therefore, for the re- 
storation of mankind to the favor and the service of 
God. For this glorious end let the secret aspirations 
of the closet rise unceasingly to the throne of mercy. 
These let the morning and evening oblation of the 
household accompany every day to the presence of 
God, and call down the life-£^ivin<y influence of the 
Spirit of grace upon this world of death and ruin. 
Finally, for the same delightful end, let the sweet 
incense of the sanctuary ascend in one vast cloud to 
heaven, from Sabbath to Sabbath, as the united and 
acceptable ofiering of all who love the Lord Jesus 
Christ, to Him who has not said to the house of 
Jacob, ' Seek ye my face in vain.' Thus shall the 
millions of your fellow-men, ' ransomed of the Lord, 
return and come to Zion with sono^s and everlastins: 
joy upon their heads. They shall obtain joy and 
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.' 

Heaven Our Home. 

HEAVEN is your proper home. Point your 
course to that glorious and happy world; and 
let every step which you take here advance you to- 
wards immortal life. Let angels behold your pro- 
gress, and rejoice over your repentance, and the 
spirits of the just prepare to welcome you to their 
divine assembly. 



4:92 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

Heaven in View. 

C1AN Christians fail to look often to that delight- 
) fal world where their Saviour dwells, and 
where they are all finally to be assembled in His 
presence? Will not the remembrance of the fullness 
of joy, the pleasures which flow for ever in this re- 
gion of immortality, awaken in the most ardent man- 
ner, their admiration, their love, their gratitude, and 
their praise to Him, who formed it in the beginning; 
who stored it with glory, life, and joy; who ascended 
the cross that He might open its everlasting doors 
for their admission to its infinite blessings. 

Our Father's House. 

^ XN His Father's house,' Christ has told us, ' are 
JL many mansions.' To that happy residence ' He 
has gone before, to prepare a place for us,' nay, He 
has declared that He will ' create new heavens and 
a new earth,' for the reception of those who trust in 
Him and 'love His appearing.' In this new world, 
He has assured us, ' there shall be no more death, 
nor sorrow, nor crying, nor any more pain:, for all 
these former evil things shall then have passed away.' 
In this happy region, the ' righteousness,' which the 
paradise below the sun was destined to reward, ' will 
dwell for ever.' There the tree of life blossoms, and 
bears anew; and there immortality flows again in 
' the pure river of the water of life.' There ' the sun 
no more goes down; neither does the moon withdraw 
itself;' for Jehovah is ' the everlasting light' of His 
children, and 'their God their glory.' From that 



TIJMOTHY DWIGIIT. 493 

delightful world the Redeemer cries, 'Behold, I 
come quickly, and my reward is with me.' Oh that 
every heart may answer, ' Even so, come Lord Jesus.' 

T 

Amen. 

Heaven and Earth Compared. 

HERE also all things will live. Death and sor- 
row, disease and pain, crying and tears, will 
have fled for ever. There will be nothing to de- 
stroy, nothing to impair, nothing to lament. Every- 
thing will live; and not merely live, but grow, and 
flourish, and bloom, without interruption. Life, in 
a sublime and superior sense, life vernal and immor- 
tal, will impregnate the streams and trees, the leaves 
and fruits, and animate the bodies and minds of the 
firstborn. 

As all things in heaven will be informed with life, 
so they will become iiniversally means of joy. The 
present world is justly styled ' a vale of tears.' Dis- 
tress awaits us here in a thousand forms. Within ns 
it dwells, without it assails. We are sinners, are the 
subjects of ungratified desire, disappointment, dis- 
content, reproaches of conscience, and distressing 
apprehensions concerning the anger of God. At the 
same time our frail bodies are subjected to the evils 
of hunger and thirst, of cold and heat, of weariness 
and languor, of sickness and pain, of decay and death. 
Our friends and families are in want, pain, and sor- 
row; they sicken and die; their sins disgrace them 
and wound us; and awaken excruciating apprehen- 
sions concerning their destiny beyond the grave. 



494: DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

War also frequently spreads wide the miseries of 
dismay, plmider, slaughter and devastation. To 
beino;s habituated to a state of existence so exten- 
sively formed of these distressing materials, how 
Avelcome must be the change which transports them 
from this world to heaven! When 'the ransomed 
of the Lord shall return, and come to' the celestial 
'Zion with songs, everlasting joy shall be upon their 
heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sor- 
row and sighing shall flee away.' Heaven is created 
to be the residence of happiness. Every thing which 
it contains will be beauty, grandeur and glory to the 
eye, harmony to the ear, and rapture to the heartj 
rapture which admits no mixture, and knows no ter- 
mination. 

Christ the Light of Heaven. 

CHRIST is the light of heaven, as well as of 
earth. Li this divine Person the Godhead will 
shine without a cloud, and be seen face to face. The 
splendor will be all intelligence and enjoyment, and 
the warmth, life and love. The happy millions will 
bask for ever in the benevolent beams; and, with 
the eagle's eye fixed on the divine luminary, will rise 
on eagle's wings with a perpetually invigorated 
flight, nearer and nearer to the Sun of Righteousness 
for ever. 




ANDREW FULLER. 
1754-1815. 

Life of Faith. 

[RE AT and wonderful is the consolation 
that such a life affords. In all the vicis- 
situdes of life and horrors of death, noth- 
ing can cheer and fortify the mind like 
this. By faith in an unseen world we 
can endure injuries without revenge, afflictions 
without fainting, and losses without despair. Let 
the nations of the earth dash, like potsherds, one 
against another; yea, let nature herself approach 
towards her final dissolution; let her groan as 
being ready to expire, and sink into her primitive 
nothing; still the believer lives! His all is not on 
board that vessel! His chief inheritance lies in 
another soil ! 

' His hand the good man fastens on the skies, 
And bids earth roll, nor feels her idle whirl." 

It will make vision the sweeter. It affords a great 
pleasure, when we make a venture of any kind, to 
find ourselves at last not disappointed. If a con- 
siderate man embark his all on board a vessel, and 
himself with it, he may have a thousand fears, before 



4:96 ' DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

he reaches the end of his voyage; yet should he, 
after numberless dangers, safely arrive, and find it 
not only answer, but far exceed his expectations, his 
joy will then be greater than if he had run no hazard 
at all. What he has gained will seem much sweeter 
than if it had fallen to liim in a way that had cost 
him nothing. Thus believers venture their all in the 
hands of Christ, persuaded that He is able to keep 
that which they have committed to Him against that 
day. To find at last that they have not confided in 
Him in vain — yea, that their expectations are not 
only answered, but infinitely outdone — will surely 
enhance the bliss of heaven. The remembrance of 
our dangers, fears, and sorrows will enable us to 
enjoy the heavenly state with a degree of happiness 
impossible to have been felt, if those dangers, fears, 
and sorrows had never existed. 

Christ Crucified. 

C CHRIST crucified is the central point, in which 
) all the lines of evangelical truth meet and are 
united. There is not a doctrine in the Scriptures 
but what bears an important relation to it. Would 
we understand the glory of the Divine character and 
government? It is seen in perfection in the face of 
Jesus Christ. Would we learn the evil of sin, and 
our perishing condition as sinners? EacJi is mani- 
fested in His sufferings. All the blessings of grace 
and glory are given us in Him, and for His sake. 
Practical religion finds its most powerful motives in 
His dying love. That doctrine of which Christ is not 



ANDREW FULLER. 497 

the sum and substance is not the gospel; and that 
morality which has no relation to Him, and which is 
not enforced on evangelical principles, is not Chris- 
tian, but heathen. 

Progressive Character of Heavenly Bliss. 

RY the manner in which some have spoken and 
written of the heavenly state, it would seem 
not only as if all would possess an equal measure of 
blessedness, but that this measure would be com- 
pleted at once; if not on the soul's having left the 
body, yet immediately on its reunion with it at the 
resurrection. But such ideas appear to me to have 
no foundation in the Holy Scriptures. There is no 
doubt that salvation is altogether of grace, and that 
everv crown will be cast at the feet of Christ; but it 
does not follow that they shall be in all respects 
alike. Paul's crown of rejoicing, for instance, will 
greatly consist in the salvation of those among whom 
he labored; but this cannot be the case with every 
other inhabitant of heaven. And with respect to the 
completion of the bliss, there certainly will be no 
such imperfection attending it as to be a source of 
sorrow, but rather of joy, as affording matter for an 
endless progression of knowledge, and consequently 
of love, and joy, and praise. There is no sorrow in 
the minds of angels in their present state; yet they 
are described as looking with intenseness and delight 
into the doctrine of the Cross; which clearly indicates 
a progressiveness in knowledge and happiness. God 
is i^erfect, and immutably the same; but it is as He 



498 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

is revealed or manifested to us that we enjoy Him as 
our portion. If, therefore, He be gradually mani- 
festing Himself through time, and thereby causing 
the tide of celestial bliss to rise higher and higher, it 
may be the same to eternity. Nay more, if heavenly 
bliss consist in knowing the love of Christ, and that 
love, when all is said and done, ' passeth knowledge,' 
it must be so; there must either come a period when 
the finite mind shall have perfectly comprehended 
the infinite, and therefore can have nothing more to 
learn, or knowledge and happiness must be eternally 
progressive. 

Blessedness of Heaven. 

IN what sense could Christ be said to ' prepare a 
place ' for His followers, if His presence did not 
greatly tend to augment the blessedness of that 
world whither He went, and render it a sweet resort 
to them Avhen they should have passed their days 
of tribulation? If heavenly bliss consist much in 
social enjoyment, the arrival of any interesting char- 
acter must be somewhat of an acquisition. If our 
present conceptions, however, be any rule of judging, 
the being introduced to certain dear friends who 
have gone before us will be. a source of pleasure in- 
expressible. In this point of view every one who 
goes before contributes in some degree to prepare a 
place for those fhat follow after; and as things con- 
tinually move on in the same direction, the sum 
total of heavenly ei\joyment must be continually 
accumulatinoj. But if such be the influence arisins: 



AXI RKW FULLER. 499 

from the accession of creatures, what must that have 
been which followed His entrance who is Life itself ! 
His presence would render those blest abodes ten 
thousand times more blessed. Hence the grand 
motive to heavenly-mindedness in the New Testament 
is drawn from the consideration of Christ's being in 
heaven. 'If/ said Paul, 'ye be risen with Christ] 
seek those things which are above, lohere Christ sit- 
teth on the right hand of God. And what the apostle 
recommended to others was exemplified in himself; 
for he had ' a desire to depart, and to be with Christy 
which is far better.' 




ROBERT HALL, A. M. 

1764-1831. 

Eeunion of Good Men in Heaven. 

F the mere conception of the reunion 
of good men, in a future state, infused a 
momentary rapture into the mind of TuUj ; 
if an airy speculation, for there is reason 
to fear it had little hold on his convictions, 
could inspire him with such delight, what may we 
be expected to feel, who are assured of such an 
event by the true sayings of God ! How should we 
rejoice in the prospect, the certainty, rather, of 
spending a blissful eternity with those whom we 
loved on earth ; of seeing them emerge from the 
ruins of the tomb, and the deeper ruins of the fall, 
not only uninjured, but refined and perfected, ' with 
every tear wiped from their eyes,' standing before 
. the throne of God and the Lamb, * in white robes, 
and palms in their hands, crying with a loud 
voice. Salvation to God, that sitteth upon the 
throne and to the Lamb for ever and ever.' What 
delight will it afford to renew the sweet counsel 
we have taken together, to recount the toils of 
combat, and the labor of the way, and to approach 
not the house, but the throne of God, in company. 



ROBEUT HALL. 501 

in order to join in the symphonies of heavenly voices, 
and lose ourselves amidst the splendors and fruitions 
of the beatific vision! 

FRiENDsrap Founded on Religion. 

FRIENDSHIP, founded on the principles of 
worldly morality, recognized by virtuous heath- 
ens, such as that which subsisted between Atticus 
and Cicero, which the last of these illustrious men 
has rendered immortal, is fitted to survive through 
all the vicissitudes of life, but it belongs only to a 
union founded on religion, to continue through an 
endless duration. The former of these stood the 
shock of conflicting opinions, and of a revolution that 
shook the world; the latter is destined to survive 
when the heavens are no more, and to spring fresh 
from the ashes of the universe. The former pos- 
sessed all the stability which is possible to sublunary 
things; the latter partakes of the eternity of God. 
Friendship founded on worldly principles is natural, 
and though composed of the best elements of nature, 
is not exempt from its mutability and frailty; the 
latter is spiritual, and therefore unchanging and im- 
perishable. The friendship which is founded on 
kindred tastes and congenial habits, apart from piety, 
is permitted by the benignity of Providence to em- 
bellish a world, which, with all its magnificence and 
beauty, Avill shortly pass away; that which has reli- 
gion for its basis, will ere long be transplanted, in 
order to adorn the paradise of God. 



502 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

How A Minister Should Preach. 

DISPLAY the sufferings of Christ like one who 
was an eye-witness of those sufferings, and hold 
up the blood, the precious blood of atonement, as 
issuing warm from the cross. It is a peculiar ex- 
cellence of the gospel, 'that in its wonderful adapta- 
tion to the state and condition of mankind as fallen 
creatures, it bears intrinsic marks of its divinity, and 
is supported not less by internal than by external 
evidence. By a powerful apJ3eal to the conscience, 
by a fiiithful delineation of man in his grandeur and 
in his weakness, in his original capacity for happiness 
and his present misery and guilt, present this branch 
of its evidence in all its force. Seize on every occa- 
sion those features of Christianity which render it 
interesting, and by awakening the fears, and exciting 
the hopes, of your hearers, endeavor to annihilate 
every other object, and make it appear what it really 
is, the pearl of great price, the sovereign balm, the 
cure of every ill, the antidote of death, the precursor 
of immortality- In such a ministry, fear not to give 
loose to all the ardor of your soul, to call into action 
every emotion and every faculty which can exalt or 
adorn it. 

The Pursuit of Salvation. 

THE pursuit of salvation is the only enterprise, 
in which no one fails from weakness, none from 
an invincible ignorance of futurity, none from the 
sudden vicissitudes of fortune, against which there 
exists no effectual security, none from those occa- 



T^ORETIT HALL. 503 

sional eclipses of knowledge and fits of inadvertence, 
to which the most acute and wakeful intellect is ex- 
posed. How suitable is it to the character of the 
Being who reveals Himself by the name of Love, to 
render the object which is alone worthy of being 
aspired to with ardor, the only one to which all may, 
without presumption, aspire; and while He conceals 
thrones and sceptres in the shadow of His hand, and 
bestows them Avhere He pleases, with a mysterious 
and uncontrollable sovereignty, on * opening the 
springs of eternal felicity, to proclaim to the utmost 
bounds of the earth, ' Let him that is athirst, come; 
and whosoever will, let him partake of the water of 
life freely.' 



Funeral Obsequies of a Lost Soul. 

WHAT, my brethren, if it be lawful to indulge 
such a thought, what would be the funeral 
obsequies of a lost soul? Where shall Ave find the 
tears fit to be wept at such a spectacle; or could we 
realize the calamity in all its extent, what tokens of 
commiseration and concern would be deemed equal 
to the occasion? Would it suffice for the sun to veil 
his light, and the moon her brightness; to cover the 
ocean Avith mourning, and the heavens with sack- 
cloth; or were the Avhole fabric of nature to become 
animated and vocal, would it be possible for her to 
utter a groan too deep, or a cry too piercing, to ex- 
press the magnitude and extent of such a catastrophe? 



504 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

A Penitent on His Knees. 
rriHE sight of a penitent on his knees, is a spectacle 
J- which moves Heaven; and the compassionate 
Redeemer, who, when He beheld Saul in that situa- 
tion, exclaimed, 'Behold he prayeth,' will not be 
slow or reluctant to strengthen you by His might, 
and console you by His Spirit. When a ' new and 
living way ' is opened ' into the holiest of all,' by the 
blood of Jesi\s, not to avail ourselves of it, not to 
arise and go to our Father, but to prefer remaining 
at a guilty distance, encompassed with famine, to the 
rich and everlasting provisions of His house, will be 
a source of insupportable anguish, when we shall see 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob enter into the kingdom 
of God, and ourselves shut out. 

Peepaeation foe Judgment and Eteenity. 
^ A FTER death is the judgment.' What is to 
JtSl, shield you in judgment from the stroke of 
vengeance? Have you been hearing the calls of the 
gospel Avithout regarding them? Have you not ap- 
plied the truth to yourselves? O, retreat now from 
the snares of the world ; shut your eyes upon the 
scenes of time, on which they must soon be closed 
for ever. Converse with the world to come; en- 
deavor to yield to the power of it ; look at ' the 
things which are not seen;' walk, as it were, upon 
the borders of the ocean of eternity, and listen to 
the .sound of its waters till 3'ou arc deaf to every 
sound besides. 

The blessed Saviour, who, when He was upon earth, 



ROBERT HALL. 505 

raised the dead and healed all manner of diseases, 

is able to heal your spiritual maladies, and to raise 

you from the dead. He is exalted for this purpose: 

the ' river of life' flows from His side; He invites 

you to partake of it ; ' the Spirit and the bride say, 

Come. And let him that heareth say. Come. And 

whosoever will, let him come and take of the water 

of life freely,' Rev. xxii. 17. In the blessed Saviour 

are all the springs of pardon, grace and everlasting 

consolation: He will guide you through every scene, 

give you victory over death, admit you through the 

gates into the city, and there He will ' wipe away all 

tears from your eyes,' Rev. xxi. 4. He will dwell 

with you, and you with Him; and you shall be ' kings 

and priests unto God ' for ever. 

The Lamb of God. 

AS our salvation from the efiects of sin is a de- 
liverance from a far worse than Egyptian cap- 
tivity and misery, so its accomplishment required a 
far greater exertion of Deity than was required to 
arrest the billows of the Red Sea. Never did ' the 
mighty God ' more fully displa}^ the greatness of 
His power, than when He showed Himself ' mighty 
to save, even to the uttermost.' He fixed the foun- 
dation on which w^e may build our hope of immor- 
tality, and find it to be 'a hope that maketh not 
ashamed,' founded on the Rock of Ages. He went 
into the shadow of death, into ' the lowest parts of 
the earth,' that He might lay deej> the basis of that 
edifice ivhich was to rise as high as the throne of God ! 

22 



506 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

' He bore our sins in His own body on the tree/ thai 
we might become partakers of His own divine na- 
ture. This, my brethren, is a view of ' the Lamb of 
God,' of the last importance to be taken by us all. 
If you see Him not in this character, you see nothing 
to any valuable purpose. You have takeii hold of 
nothing, you have grasped only shadoivs, if you have 
not taken hold of Christ, your Life. Flee to Him : 
cleave to Him : say of Him in the sincerity of your 
heart, ' This is all my salvation and all my desire.' 

The Eye of Faith. 
TT^O the eye of Christian faith, which looks at what 
I is seen and temporal by the light of what is 
unseen and eternal, the darkest clouds of present 
sufferings appear, as it were, irradiated with a reflec- 
tion of that glory which will ere long break forth 
from their o'loom, to shine and briohten throuo-h an 
endless day. One glimpse of that glory, we feel 
assured, would put out all these little clouds from 
our view or remembrance! Let us aim to walk by 
faith, and not by sight ; and in our trials, to realize 
the well grounded conviction, ' these sufferings of 
time are not worthy to be compared w^ith the glory 
that shall be revealed ' when time shall be lost in 
eternitv. 

The Divine Promises. 

WE should be much in meditation on the Divine 
promises. We should be mindful, indeed, 
of the threatenings of God; we should not be inat- 



EOBEPtT HALL. 507 

tentive to the prophecies contained in His Word: but 
it is peculiarly the duty, as well as the privilege of 
Christians, to meditate upon His promises. If you 
would enter into the vital reality of religion, you 
must enter into these promises; into their pure and 
sanctifying consolations. Taste of the love of God ! 
Keview the riches of your inheritance! Look to the 
Saviour as the source of all fullness ! Endeavor to 
let 3^our mind be saturated with these promises ! Oh, 
let us not be satisfied with a cold, a formal, legal 
obedience to the commandments: let us learn to feed 
upon the sweetness of the promises ! And we shall 
need their support ere long: time is hastening from 
us all ; man is but breath, but dust ! soon you will 
be here no more. He that shall come, will come ere 
long ! Happy they that hope and wait for His 
coming ! Every day, if you are a Christian, you are 
nearer to heaven; less of toil and trial remains. And 
death, as well as life, is yours; to die is your exceed- 
ing gain. ' I heard a voice from heaven saying, 
Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord ; for they 
rest from their labors, and their works follow them.' 

Continual Virtue of Christ's Blood. 

HIS blood, so to speak, is just as warm and 
fresh as when it was first shed : it has an un- 
decaying virtue. The Lamb forever appears as 
newly slain, though millions have been already saved, 
and millions more remain to be saved. He was 
oflTered once for all ; He is an eternal, unchangeable 
High Priest ; for God's law has been once for all 



508 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

fully satisfied by Him. No generation can ai'ise that 
will not equally want this Saviour, and none that 
will not equally find Him sufficient; for all the ful- 
ness of God dwells in Him, and He ever lives to 
make intercession for us ! 

Importance of the Christian Ministry. 

VANITY is inscribed on every earthly pursuit, 
on all sublunary labor; its materials, its instru- 
ments, and its objects will alike perish. An incurable 
taint of mortality has seized upon, and will consume 
them ere long. The acquisitions derived from reli- 
gion, the graces of a renovated mind, are alone per- 
manent. This is the mystic inclosure, rescued from 
the empire of change and death; this is the field 
which the Lord has blessed; and this word of the 
kingdom, the seed which alone produces immortal 
fruit, the very bread of life, with which, under a 
higher economy, the Lamb in the midst of the throne 
will feed His flock and replenish His elect, through 
eternal ages. How high and awful a function is 
that which proposes to establish in the soul an in- 
terior dominion — to illuminate its powers by a celes- 
tial light — and introduce it to an intimate, ineflfable, 
and unchanging alliance with the Father of spirits. 
What an honor to be employed as the instrument of 
conducting that mysterious process by which men 
are born of God; to expel from the heart the venom 
of the old serpent; to purge the conscience from in- 
visible stains of guilt; to release the passions from 
the bondage of corruption, and invite them to soar 



ROBERT HALL. 509 

aloft into the regions of uncreated light and beauty; 
' to say to the prisoners, go forth, to them that are 
in darkness, show yourselves!' These are the fruits 
which arise from the successful discharge of the 
Christian ministry; these the effects of the gospel, 
wherever it becomes the power of God unto salva- 
tion; and the interests which they create, the joys 
which they diffuse, are felt in other worlds. 

Salvation to the Uttermost. 

^T^HE blood of Jesus Christ is a deluge that drowns 
JL all the mountains of transgression; that pure 
ocean washes away all stains of guilt. It is a sacri- 
fice whose odor fills all worlds! a satisfaction that 
extends to all the principles of the divine govern- 
ment. The apostle seems almost to single out him- 
self as a selected and designed monument of the 
unlimited extent of Christ's atonement. ' This is a 
faithful saying, that Jesus Christ came into the world 
to save sinners, of whom I am chief. Howbeit for 
this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first, Jesus 
Christ might show forth all long-suffering, for a pat- 
tern to them that should hereafter believe unto life 
everlasting.' Some may think they have wandered 
too long in ways of sin, stifled too many successive 
convictions, and sinned away the virtue of Christ's 
blood. However long you may have sinned, yet if 
you will now repent, though at the eleventh hour, 
you shall be saved. Among the redeemed multitude, 
there will be found sinners of every extent and con- 
dition: some that early sought the Lord, and walked 



510 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

loii«" with Him in orace; but others, also, called iu 
their hoary hairs, after many years of rebellion. 



Gratitude to the Saviour. 

WHAT gratitude is due from us, to this dear 
Saviour! What shall we render to Him for 
all that He has suffered, in order that He might pro- 
cure such benefits for us! What can be so shocking 
as that we should alienate ourselves from Him who 
bouo-ht us with His blood, lifted us up from the 
abj'ss of despair, beautified us with salvation, made 
us to sit with Himself in hea^venly places! By what 
strict and tender ties are we bound to Him! espe- 
cially when the faculties which we give to Him are 
disrnified: and we receive ourselves back, as it were, 
purified and ennobled! 

It should be our constant desire to gratify and 
honor Him; the uppermost feeling in our hearts 
should be, ' What can I do for Christ? How shall 
I make it appear that I have been with Him, that 
I have learned of Him?' If we are influenced by 
this spirit, He wdll come and make His abode with 
us; He will manifest Himself to us. 'Behold, w^hat 
manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, 
that we should be galled the sons of God!' Let 
every saint esteem all beside but loss, in comparison 
with the possession of His love! Let us live on Him 
as the bread of life, and live to Him as the Lord of 
conscience. Let His love be the commanding prin- 
ciple in all our hearts. 



iiobert hall. 511 

Come to the Saviour Now. 

SEEK now an interest in 'the common salvation!' 
Now is the accepted time; now is the convenient 
season. While all around is mutable, unstable, and 
we can fix on nothing that does not escape from our 
eager grasp, lay hold on Jesus Christ, the Rock of 
Ages! While all beside is carried away by the irre- 
sistible tide of vanity and corruption, secure that in- 
estimable deposit which will exist forever in the 
hands of Him who is able to keep it against the day 
of his appearance and glory! Come to the Saviour 
just as you are; if you were to wait to all eternity, 
you would be no better prepared, by any efforts of 
your own, for His acceptance. All power is given 
to Him; He is able to save to the uttermost all who 
come to God by Him: whosoever will, let him come 
to Christ; and thus be prepared, by His grace and 
power, to exchange the light afiiiction, which is for 
a moment, for an exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory! 

A Prayee. 
^ /^ THOU, who art the Fountain of all good! we 
V^ would approach Thee with that humility and 
reverence which become us in all our addresses to 
Thine infinite Majesty. Before the mountains were 
brought forth, or ever the earth and the world were 
created, from everlasting to everlasting Thou art 
God. As from Thee we have derived our existence, 
so on Thee we depend for every moment of its con- 
tinuance: in Thee Ave live, and move, and have our 



512 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

being. Thou hast been the refuge of Thy people in 
all ircnerations; our fathers trusted in Thee, and 
were holpen; they looked unto Thee, and were 
lio-htened, and their faces were not ashamed. As for 
man, his days are as grass; l)Ut the mercy of the 
Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them 
that fear Him. We bless Thee that we are permitted 
once more to appear in Thy presence, the spared 
monuments of Thy providential goodness. We be- 
seech Thee to assist us in these sacred exercises; in 
singing Thy praises, and hearing Thy holy word. 
We serve Thee only with Thine own; and what we 
have received in mercies and blessings, we would 
render back to Thee in gratitude and love. Enable 
us to consider the operations of Thy hand in all 
things around, and all things within us; in the work- 
ings of Thy providence abroad, and of Thy Spirit 
upon ourselves. Let us make Thee the Omega as 
well as the Alpha, the end as well as the beginning, 
of all our undertakings; let all our works be begun, 
continued, and ended in Thee. May we put on the 
whole armor of God, be strong in the Lord, and in 
the power of His might; and, seeing that we are 
encompassed with so great a cloud of witnesses, may 
we lay aside every weight, and run ^^\t\\ patience the 
race set before us, looking unto Jesus, the Author 
and Finisher of our faith. Since our adversary, the 
devil, walketh about, seeking w^hom he may devour, 
him may we resist, steadfast in the faith. May we 
rejoice as if we rejoiced not; weep as if we wept 
not; and, knowing that the end of all things is at 



ROBERT HALL. 513 

hand, may we let our moderation be known unto all 
men. O Lord, hear us in these our supplications, 
and pardon and accept us, and wash us and our 
services in the precious blood of the dear and ador- 
able Redeemer; for whom we bless Thee, as Thine 
unspeakable gift; and with whom, to Thyself and 
Holy Spirit, be undivided and everlasting praises.' 
Amen.* 

* This beautiful prayer was offered immediately before Mr. Hall 
delivered his last sacramental lecture, and only a short time before 
his death. It was transcribed by the Rev. T. Grinfield, Avho says: 

'It is a remarkable circumstance that, on this last opportunity 
alone, as though impelled by a prophetic sympathy, I preserved, at 
the same time, the following fragments of the prayer which pre- 
ceded this farcAvell address. Simple, and almost purely Scriptural, 
as are the sentiments and expressions, they may be deemed inter- 
esting here, as they present, I believe, the only recorded relic of 
those prayers, in which, scarcely less than in his preaching, Mr. 
Hall excelled; and this so near to his death. I give it verbatim, as 
noted at the time : in all his prayers the impression was much en- 
hanced by the utterance, which was eminently that of one ' praying 
in the Holy Spirit,' and ' clothed with humility.' 



22* 




JOHN M. MASON, D. D. 

1770-1829. 

Kedemption Theough the Blood of Christ. 

^° HAT tlie atonement of Jesus is, in 
itself, and wliat His Fatlier lias ex- 
pressly declared it to be, millions of sin- 
ners have found it to their eternal joj. 
All the spirits of just men made perfect, 
and all the believers at this hour upon earth, have 
loashed their robes, and made them tuhite in the blood, 
of the Lamb. Search the records of the saved, and 
you will see names of the most atrocious offenders 
who were pardoned, and sanctified, and are now 
with God. Ask them how they escaped the wrath 
to come, and entered the everlasting rest?. AVith 
oue voice they will exclaim. He loved us, and luashed 
us from our sins in His oion blood! Ask all the fam- 
ily of grace, who shall speedily join the celestial 
throng, how they obtained deliverance from the 
curse, and access to that terrible God? With 
equal unanimity they will reply. We are accepted in 
the Beloved ! There is, therefore, redemption through 
His blood. 

Let the doubting, disconsolate sinner throw him- 
self, with all his guilt and vileness, into the arms of 



JOHN M. MA80X. 515 

this forgiving mercy. It never yet repulsed any 
who came in the faith of the Mediator's blood, and 
it will not begin its repulses with thee. Go without 
delay; go with all boldness in this blood; and thou 
shalt find as cordial a welcome as o-nice can s^ive thee. 

Death to a Child of God. 

DEATH brings no j>en7 to a child of God; and 
ought to be no more an object of his fear than 
the approach of sleep at the close of day. I speak 
not of the physical pangs of dying, which relate to 
our animal perceptions, and to which our animal 
part never can nor should be reconciled. I speak 
of death as affecting our moral being. In this view 
he is rightly named the ' Mng of terrors f because, to 
ungodly men he is the wages of sin. It is from guilt 
that he draws his terrifying power. He announces 
to the Avicked the end of their respite; the filling up 
of their cup; a certain fearful looking for of judg- 
ment and fiery indignation w1iil\ shall devour tlie 
adversaries; and if they be not alarmed, if their 
faces gather not blackness, and their bosoms horror, 
it is because they are hardened by the deceitfulness 
of sin. Their stupidity will only heighten the sur- 
prise and consternation of the eternal world. But 
Jesus, having delivered His people from the Avrath 
to come, delivered them by the blood of His cross, 
has for them stripped death of his terrors, and given 
them authority to cry, as he hands them over the 
threshold of life, Death, where is thy sting? the 
sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the 



516 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

laiv; but thanks he to God who giveth us the victory 
through our Lord Jesus Christ/ In such a case death 
deserves not the name. It is but a sleep; sleep in 
its most heavenly form; sleep in Jesus. 

Blessed Effects of the Gospel. 
^ T" HAVE seen this gospel hush into a calm the 
1 tempest raised in the bosom by conscious guilt. 
I have seen it melt down the most obdurate into 
tenderness and contrition. I have seen it cheer up 
the broken-hearted, and bring the tear of gladness 
into eyes swollen with grief. I have seen it produce 
and maintain serenity under evils, which drive the 
worldlinof mad. I have seen it reconcile the sufferer 
to his cross, and send the song of praise from lips 
quivering with agony. I have seen it enable the 
most affectionate relatives to part in death; not with- 
out emotion, but without repining; and with a cor- 
dial surrender of all that they held most dear, to the 
disposal of their heavenly Father. I have seen the 
fading eye brighten at the promise of Jesus, Where 
I am, there shall my servant be also. I have' seen the 
faithful spirit released from its clay, now mildly, 
now triumphantly, to enter into the joy of its Lord.' 

Forgiveness of Sins Final. 

THE forgiveness of sins is final. In the justifica- 
tion of a sinner, God, the gracious One, pardons 
once for all — pardons forever ! Pardon would be 
of no use to us, were it not irreversible: it would 
no sooner be gained than lost. The Lord doth not 



JOHN M. MASON. 517 

SO deal with His parclonecl ones; give them just to 
taste the sweetness of His mercy, that their own sin- 
fiihiess may the next moment fill their mouths with 
the bitterness, and their hearts with the horrors of 
the curse. His bomity is of another order altogether. 
His gifts and His calling are without repentance, i. e. 
nn<;hangeable. His love is everlasting, and so is the 
life which He bestow^s upon them. They are united 
with His dear Son; their lives entwine with His life. 
Whatever reaches them to destroy them, must first 
Idll their Redeemer. Because I live^ is His gracious 
promise, ye shall live also. They are kept by the 
power of God through faith unto salvation; there- 
fore they shall never perish. There is, there can be, 
no condemnation for them — tliey shall have everlast- 
ing life. 

Contemplation of the Love of Christ. 

DRAW nigh, and contemplate the love of Christ; 
a love without parallel, and beyond compre- 
hension. Though He ivas in the form of God^ and 
thought it not robbery to be equal with God^ yet He 
made Himself of no repntation and took upon Him the 
fonn of a servant, and teas made tn the likeness of 
men. Source of eternal wonder ! Lo ' the Creator 
of the ends of the earth ' descends into a tabernacle 
of flesh, and sojourns among men ! And whence, 
blessed Lord, whence this condescension? It was 
for ' the good of His chosen.' He assumed their 
nature that He might occupy their place; might take 
their guilt; might become a curse for them that they 



518 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

might he made the righteousness of God in Him. Yes, 
dear Christian, He put His soul in thy soul's stead; 
He drank for thee the cup of trembling: it was thy 
guilt which nailed Him to the ignominious tree; thy 
guilt which rolled the billows of wrath in upon His 
sinless soul. It was in bearing thine iniquity that 
hell's blackest midnight thickened upon His spirit, 
and wrung from Him that agonizing cry. My God, 
My God, why hast Thou forsaken me? Hath He 
passed through the fires of the pit to save thee? and 
doth He ' stake all the glories of His crown to Iceej) 
thee?' and wilt thou, canst thou, darest thou be back- 
ward in promoting the frequent commemoration of 
His love? O Saviour, if we forget Thee, let our 
right hand forget her cunning ! 

Our Duty and Happiness. 

THE sum of our duty and happiness, O believer! 
is comprised in this precept — As ye have re- 
ceived Christ Jesus the Lord^ so walk ye in him. 
The blood of sprinkling, kept by faith in the con- 
science, is the sure preservative from guilt; the holy 
secret of a comfortable and familiar walk with God. 
In this privilege let us go from strength to strength, 
lifting up our eyes to the hills from ivhence cometh 
our help; showing forth the righteousness and the 
salvation of Jehovah all the day long: and waiting 
for that great consummation, when, all the sorrows 
of earth's pilgrimage ended, and all its defilements 
washed away, 

' Heaven lifts her everlasting portals high, 
And bids the pure in heart behold their God." 




THOMAS CHALMERS, D. D., LL. D. 

1780-1847. . 

Choose Christ. 

'HOOSE Christ, then, my brethren, 
choose Him as the Captain of your 
salvation. Let Him enter into your 
hearts by faith, and let Him dwell con- 
tinually there. Cultivate a daily inter- 
course and a growing acquaintance with Him. Oh, 
you are in safe company indeed, when your fellow- 
ship is ^yit]l Him ! The shield of His protecting 
mediatorship is ever between you and the justice 
of God ; and out of His fullness there goeth a con- 
stant stream to nourish and to animate, and to 
strengthen every believer. Why should the shift- 
ing of human instruments so oppress and so dis- 
courage you, when He is your willing Friend ; when 
He is ever present, and is at all times in readiness; 
when He, the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever, 
is to be met with in every place ; and while His dis- 
ciples here, giving w^ay to the power of sight, are 
sorrowful and in great heaviness, because they are to 
move at a distance from one another. He, my breth- 
ren, He has His eye upon all neighborhoods and all 
countries, and will at length gather His disciples 



520 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

into one eternal family! Witli such a Master, let us 
quit ourselves like men. With the magnificence of 
eternity before us, let time, with all its fluctua- 
tions, dwindle into its own littleness. 

Human Life Peeishable. 

WHERE are the men who a few years ago gave 
motion and activity to this busy theatre? 
where those husbandmen who lived on the ground 
that you now occupy? where those laboring poor 
who dwelt in your houses and villao-es? where those 
ministers who preached the lessons of piety, and 
talked of the vanity of this world? where those j)eo- 
ple who, on the Sabbaths of other times, assembled 
at the sound of the church-bell, and filled the house 
in which you are now sitting? Their habitation is 
the cold grave, the land of forgetfulness. * * * 
And we are the children of these fathers, and heirs 
to the same awful and stupendous destiny'. Ours is 
one of the many generations who pass in rapid suc- 
cession through this region of life and of sensibility. 
The time in which I live is but a small moment of this 
world's history. When we rise in contemplation to 
the roll of ages that are past, the momentary being 
of an individual shrinks into nothino^. It is the 
flight of a shadow; it is a dream of vanity; it is the 
rapid glance of a meteor; it is a flower which every 
breath of heaven can wither into decay; it is a tale 
which as a remembrance vanisheth; it is a day which 
the silence of a long night will darken and over- 
sliadow. In a few years our heads will be laid in 



THOMAS CIIAOIEP.S. 5'2l 

the cold grave, and the green turf will cover us. 
The children who come after us will tread upon our 
graves; they will weep for us a few days; they will 
talk of us a few months; they will remember us a 
few years; when our memory shall disappear from 
the face of the earth, and not a tongue shall be found 
to recall it. * * * How perishable is human life, 
yet no man laj^s it to heart. 

Hope of Immortality. 

HOLD it firm and fast even unto the end; and 
the bed of death will be to you a scene of 
triumph — the last messenger will be a messenger of 
joy; and those bright images of peace and rapture 
and elevation, which, out of Christ, are the mere fab- 
rication of the fancy, will, in Christ, be found to have 
a reality and a fulfilment, which shall bear you up in 
the midst of your dying agonies, with a joy unspeak- 
able and full of glory. It- is no longer an idle dec- 
lamation now. There is many a minister of Christ 
who could give you experience for it. He can take 
you to the house of mourning — to the mansion of 
pain and of sickness — to the chamber of the dying man. 
He can draAv aside the curtain which covers the last 
hours of the good man's existence, and show you how 
a Christian can die. He can ask you to bend jonr 
ear, and to catch the faltering accents of praise and 
of piety. What meaneth that joy in the midst of 
suffering — that hope in the midst of breathlessness 
and pain — ^that elevation in the midst of crudest 
agonies? It is not his own merit Avhich sustains him. — 



522 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

It is the merit of a benevolent Saviour. It is not a 
sense of his own righteousness which gives intre- 
piclit}^ to his expiring bosom. It is the righteousness 
of Christ. It is the hope of being found in Him, and 
a sense of the grace and forgiveness which he has 
received througli His hands. In a word, it is Christ 
who resolves the mystery. It is His presence which 
throws tranquillity and joy around the scene of dis- 
tress. It is He who administers vigour to the dying 
man; and, while despair sits on every countenance, 
and relatives are weeping around him. He enables 
him to leave them all with this exulting testimony — 
O death, where is thy sting — O grave, where is thy 
victory ! 

Come to Christ. 

AVAIL yourselves, then, of the precious mo- 
ment that is now passing over you. Christ is 
ofiered to you. Salvation is at your choice. For- 
giveness, through the blood of a satisfying atone- 
ment, is yours if you will. God does not want to 
magnify the power of His anger — He wants to mag- 
nify the power of His grace upon you. Try to ap- 
proach Him in your own righteousness, and you will 
find yourselves toiling at an impracticable distance 
away from Him. But come with the righteousness 
of Christ as 3^our plea, and you will indeed be per- 
mitted to draw nigh. God will rejoice over j^ou for 
the sake of Him in whom He is well pleased; and 
you may freely, and with all your heart, rejoice in 
God, through Him, by whom ye have received the 



THOMAS CHALMERS. 523 

atonement. Could we ytate the thing more plamly, 
we would. We want to bring you into the condition 
of a simple receiver of God's pardon — a snuple hold- 
er on the truth of His promises. It is on this foot- 
ing, and on this alone, that you will ever be clothed 
in the garments of acceptance; or stand firmly and 
surely on the ground of reconciliation before Him. 
O turn then into this peaceful haven ; and, in the act 
of so turning, God will pour out His Spirit upon 
you. As the fruit of your faith, you will become a 
new creature,* and, in stepping over to that region 
of sunshine, where all is gladness, you will be sure 
to experience also that all is grace — that the peace 
and purity of the gospel are ever in alliance — They 
who walk before God without fear, being they who 
walk before Him In righteousness and in holiness all 
the days of their life. 

Death will Come. 

I BESEECH you to think how certainly death 
will, and how speedily it may, come upon the 
likeliest of you all. The very youngest among you 
know very well that, if not cut off previously — 
which is a very possible thing — then manhood will 
come, and old age will come, and the dying bed will 
come, and the very last look you shall ever cast on 
your acquaintances will come, and the agony of the 
parting breath will come, and the time when jou are 
stretched a lifeless corpse before the eyes of weep- 
ing relatives will come, and the coffin that is to in- 
close you will come, and that hour when th^ com- 



524 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

pany assemble to cany you to the cliiirchyard will 
come, and that minute when you are put into the 
grave will come, and the throwing in of the loose 
earth into the narrow house where you are laid, and 
the spreading of the green sod over it — all, all will 
come on every living creature who now hears me; 
and in a few little years the minister who now speaks, 
and the people who now listen, will be carried to 
their long homes, and make room for another gene- 
ration. 

A Christian's Love for the Sabbath. 

EVEEY Sabbath image, and every Sabbath circum- 
stance is dear to him. He loves the quietness of 
that hallowed morn. He loves the church-bell sound, 
which summons him to the house of prayer. He 
loves to join the chorus of devotion, and to sit and 
listen to that voice of persuasion which is lifted in 
the hcarino- of an assembled multitude. He loves 
the retirement of this day from the din of worldly 
])usiness, and the inroads of worldly men. He loves 
the leisure it brinofs alono- with it — and sweet to his 
soul is the exercise of that hallowed hour, when 
there is no eye to witness him but the eye of Heaven 
— and when in solemn audience with the Father, 
who seeth him in secret; he can, on the wings of 
celestial contemplation, leave all the cares, and all 
the vexations, and all the sccularities of an alienated 
world behind him. 



thomas ciial^hers. 525 

Our Great High Priest. 

(CONSIDER Him who is the High Priest of youi 
J profession. I call upon you ever and anon to 
think of this sacrifice — and to ward oiT the legality 
of nature from 3^our spirits, by a constant habit of re- 
currence, upon your part, to the atonement that He 
hath made, and to the everlasting righteousness that 
He hath brought in. Without this, the mind is ever 
lapsing anon into alienation and distrust — and the ha- 
bitual jealousy of guilt, when not met, at all times, by 
a sense of that blood which w\ashes it away, will throw 
us back again to our wonted distance from God — and 
instead of breathing the free air of confidence in Him, 
or rejoicing in the sunshine of His reconciled counte- 
nance, there will be a flaw of suspicion m all our 
intercourse, and instead of loving Him as a friend, 
we shall still stand in dread of Him as an accuser. 
There may be the occasional recognition of Christ, 
and, perhaps, along with it a gleam of light and of 
liberty. Bat the general state will be, that of a 
mind which is overcast. And, therefore, to keep all 
clear, and habitually clear, w^ould I advise a regular 
forth-going of your believing thoughts, to the great 
decease that was accomplished at Jerusalem. I would 
have you to look unto Jesus Christ, and unto Him cru- 
cified, and be lightened thereby. Forget not that 
for guilt there has been an appropriate remedy pro- 
vided in the gospel — and the way for you to stand 
delivered from all your fears of its vengeance and 
its agony, is to think of the vengeance that has 
ali'eady been poured out, and of the agony that has 



526 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

already been endured for it. Be very sure, that 
when justice is satisfied, then mercy, set at large 
from this obstruction, is free to rejoice over you. 
And justice is satisfied. The sufferings of the Gar- 
den and the Cross, have absorbed it all — nor after 
Christ hath poured out His soul unto the death for 
you, will it seek, in the horrors of your condemned 
eternity, for a double redress, and a double vindica- 
tion. O, come out then, from the prison house of 
despondency — and, w^hen you think of your sins, 
think also of the ransom which has been paid for 
them. On the strength of this, do make your reso- 
lute stand against the spirit of bondage — and looking, 
and looking hourly unto the Victim who has already 
bled a full expiation, do uphold yourself in the con- 
fidence, that sin is made an end of, that transgression 
is finished, that reconciliation for iniquity is made, 
and that now the believer, released from captivity, 
may walk before God in the security and the triumph 
of an everlasting righteousness. 

Omnipresence of God. 

HIS eye is upon every hour of my existence. 
His Spirit is intimately present with every 
thought of my heart. His inspiration gives birth to 
every purpose within me. His hand impresses a 
direction on every footstep of my goings. Every 
breath I cnhale, is drawn by an energy which God 
deals out to me. This body, which, upon the slight- 
est derangement, would become the prey of death, 
or of woful sufFerinir, is now at case, because He at 



THOMAS CIIALMElfS. 527 

this moment is warding off from me a thousand 
dangers, and upholding the thousand movements of 
its complex and delicate machinery. His presiding 
influence keeps by me through the whole current of 
my restless and ever changing history. When I walk 
l)y the w^ay side, He is along with me. When I enter 
into company, amid all my forgetfulness of Him, He 
never forgets me. In the silent watches of the 
night, when my eyelids have closed, and my spirit 
has sunk into unconsciousness, the observant eye of 
Him who never slumbers, is upon me. I cannot fly 
from His presence. Go where I will, He tends me, 
and watches me, and cares for me; and the same 
Beinor ^yho is now at work in the remotest domains 
of nature and of providence, is also at my right 
hand to eke out to me every moment of my being, 
and to uphold me in the exercise of all my feelings, 
and of all my faculties. 

Prayers. I. 

OGOD, make me to live to Thy glory. May I be 
clothed with the armor of religion; may I grow 
more and more in the right principles and practice 
of Thy Son's gospel ; and, as years roll over me, 
may I withdraw my affections from time, and feel 
that in moving through the world I am moving 
toward eternity. 



o 



528 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

II. 

God, may I number my clays so as to apply my 
heart to wisdom. Grant me the guidance of 
Thy Spirit, and the joys of Thy salvation. May my 
delight, O Lord, be in Thy law, and may eternity 
be ever present to my recollection and my feelings. 
Time is short ; and as years revolve over me, may T 
learn to prize as the truest of all wisdom, the wis- 
dom of the gospel. I am in Thy hand, O God. If 
Thou pleasest to add another year to my pilgrimage 
below, may it witness my progress in the faith and 
charity of the New Testament. Make me to feel a 
clear union with Thee in Christ. May I taste the 
joys of Thy chosen, and rejoice in the contemplation 
of that everlasting crown which is laid up for all 
who love the Lord Jesus in sincerity and in truth. 
May I be faithful in the duties of my calling, and 
may the care of the souls of my people engross more 
of my time and prayers and strenuous application. 
All I ask is for the sake of Him to whom, with Thee 
and the Holy Spirit, I give all the praise and all the 
glory. Amen. 




REGINALD HEBER, D. D. 
1783-1826. 

Life Like a Kiver. 

IFE bears us on like the stream of 
a mighty river. Our boat at first goes 
down the mighty channel — through the 
playful murmuring of the little brook, 
and the willows upon its grassy borders. 
The trees shed their blossoms over our young 
heads, the flowers on the brink seem to offer them- 
selves to our young hands; we are happy in hope, 
and grasp eagerly at the beauties around us; the 
stream hurries on, and still our hands are empty. 
Our course in youth and in manhood is along a 
wider, deeper flood, and amid objects more striking 
and magnificent. We are animated by the moving 
picture of enjoyment and industry passing us; we 
are excited by our short-lived enjoyments. The 
stream bears us on, and joys and griefs are left be- 
hind us. We may be shipwrecked, but we cannot 
be delayed ; for, rough or smooth, the river hastens 
towards its home, till the roar of the ocean is in our 
ears, and the waves beneatli our feet, and the fioods 
are lifted up around us, and we take our leave of 

23 



530 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

earth and its inhabitants, until of our further voy- 
age there is no witness save the Infinite and Eternal. 

Earth and Heaven. 

T PRAISED the sun^ whose chariot rolled 
-^ On wheels of amber and of gold ; 

I praised the moon, whose softer eye 

Gleamed sweetly through the summer sky; 

And moon and sun in answer said, 

•' Our days of light are numbered.' 

God! good beyond compare! 

If thus Thy meaner works are fair, 

If thus Thy bounties gild the span 

Of ruined earth and sinful man, 

How glorious must the mansion be, 

Where Thy redeemed shall dwell with Thee. 

Christ is Ours. 

HE lived as well as died for us; His prayers are 
ours; ours are His blameless innocence and 
purity; it was our nature which fasted with Him 
in the desert; it was our nature which was trans- 
figured in the mount with Him; it was our nature in 
which, united with His person, and inseparable from 
Him for ever, the Almighty Father declared Himself 
well pleased! In Him we are the sons of God once 
more, and the heaven, whither He is gone to prepare 
a place for us, is henceforward not only His but our 
inheritance! 



O 



Fear of Death Removed. 

H, Saviour of the faithful dead, 
With whom Thy servants dwell. 

Though cold and green the turf is spread 
Above their narrow cell, — 



REGINALD HEBETT. 531 



No more we cling to mortal clay, 
We doubt and fear no more ; 

Nor shrink to tread the darksome way, 
Which Thou hast trod before. 



Our Salvation of Grace. 

OUR salvation is of grace alone, inasmuch as our 
first admission into the covenant of peace is 
without any previous probation of virtue, and, in the 
case of adult converts, in spite of many previous 
sins. It is of grace inasmuch as the services which 
are afterwards required from us have no aptitude in 
themselves to call down reward from the Most High; 
and are, on the other hand, exclusively calculated to 
promote our own happiness and the happiness of 
those around us. It is of grace, since to the per- 
formance of these very services the strength is fur- 
nished from above, by Him who not only calls on us 
to hope, but bestows on us the spiritual gifts by which 
that hope is scaled and perfected. It is of free grace, 
above all, and as it respects the consummation of 
our Christian warfare, because we are not only first 
freely called and afterwards freely strengthened to 
perform the obligations of our calling; but, even 
where we have neglected and transgressed our duty, 
the repentance and the faith which were, at first, our 
only passports to Christianity, are still sufiered to 
attend us and plead for us, and by the same merits 
of the Redeemer through which we were justified 
and sanctified we are accepted at length and glorified. 



5:]2 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 



Hymn Before the Sacrament. 

T3READ of the world, in mercy broken! 
-^ Wine of the soul, in mercy shed; 

By Avhom the words of life were spoken, 
And in whose death our sins are dead! 

Look on the heart by sorrow broken, 
Look on the tears by sinners shed, 

And be Thy feast to us the token 
That by Thy grace our souls are fed! 



EDWARD BICKERSTETH. 
1786-1850. 

Meditations and Peayees on the Loed's Suppee. I. 



Pv»EAVENLY Father! grant tliat Thy 
' ^ Holy Spirit may bring to my remem- 




brance all that which Christ did for me, 
whenever I go to His table; so that by 
the eye of faith, I too may see the suffer- 
ing and Glorified Redeemer. Blessed Redeemer! 
I desire to call to mind Thy glory before the world 
was. Thy love in undertaking the work of our re- 
demption, Thy birth of a lowly virgin, Thy life of 
sorrow, Thy shame and contempt. Thy rejection by 
man. Thy bloody sweat and agony, Thy crown of 
thorns. Thy stripes, the nails in Thy hands and 
Thy feet, Thy cross and all Tliy passion, Thy pain- 
ful death, and Thy burial in the tomb, and the sin 
of man as the cause of these Thy humiliations and 
sufferings. O how unmeasurable is Thy love! It 
is strong as death — many loaters cannot quench it. It 
was not the nails that fastened Thee to the cross, 
but something more firm and binding; Thy love 
fixed Thee and kept Thee there, till Thou gavest up 
the ghost; otherwise every fetter that man could 
have devised would have been utterly unavailing. 



534 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

I call to mind yet farther, Thy glorious resurrection 
and ascension, Thy leading captivity captive, and re- 
ceiving gifts for men, Thy sitting at the right hand 
of the Father, Thy meditation, the future judgment, 
and the glory yet to come; and recalling these things 
to mind, may I afresh learn to hate and flee from 
every sin, to trust in Thee, and prepare to meet Thee. 
Thus may my hope of being with Thee for ever, be 
enlivened and established, and thus may my affec- 
tions towards Thee and man be afresh enkindled and 
enlarged. 

n. 

G1 OD has graciously promised, Ask, and ye shall 
\ have. I believe His promise, and while wait- 
ing on Him at His table, would now implore His 
grace. 

Lord ! I wait for the increase of faith. Lord, 
help me more clearly to apprehend divine truths, 
and to be more distinct and firm in my assurance of 
them. I desire to attend at Thy table with a lively 
faith in the merits of^my Redeemer. I would look 
up to Jesus, and trust in Him with entire and full 
confidence, as having ransomed me from sin and 
death, and procured for me life and salvation with- 
His own precious blood. O give me faith to trust 
solely in Thy mercy through Christ for acceptance, 
and earnestly to look for the aid of the Spirit, to 
teach and to purify me. 

Lord, I wait to receive strength to overcome my 
spiritual enemies, I know myself to be weak, help- 



EDWARD BICKEKSTETH. 535 

less, and insufficient for any good work. But if I 
abide in Christ, He has said that I shall bear much 
fruit. Through this ordinance let me be drawn near 
to Him, and led to abide more in Him, so that my 
affections to the world maybe deadened, and- my 
whole soul may be refreshed and strengthened. 

Lord, I wait hungering and thirsting for Thy sal- 
vation, in all its grace and fullness. O that the blood 
of Christ may speak peace to my troubled heart ! 
O that the gladdening light of Thy countenance may 
shine on me, and the sense of Thy peculiar presence 
be felt in my heart ! O that here I may clearly see 
that Christ is mine and I am His — that the Holy 
Spirit may be largely given unto me, and I may 
have a full assurance of hope that my sins are par- 
doned and my soul is saved. 

Lord, I wait for the spirit of adoption. I would 
come to Thy table as a cliild goes to an affectionate 
and tender parent, feeling that Thou hast a father's 
love to me. and having the tempers and disposition 
of a loving child towards Thee. O give me a filial, 
even a confiding, reverential, loving and obedient 
spirit. Let me look up to Thee, my Heavenly 
Father, for the bread of life, in full assurance that 
Thou wilt not send me away empty. 

Now Lord, truly my ho^e is in Theeiox the supply 
of all my spiritual wants. Give me that which Thou 
seest w^ould be good for me: and thus shall I bo 
blessed not only now, but all my life long, and in 
death, and through eternity. 



530 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

III. 

HOW full of love, even to the end, was cm 
adorable Lord ! The last words sounding ir 
the ears of His disciples was a blessing. He as 
cended to heaven blessing them, and is still the same 
yesterday, to-day, and for ever. O ascended Saviour, 
may my heart rise whither Thou art gone; and now 
Christ is gone to heaven, may my affections be set 
on things above. / hioiv that my Redeemer liveth. 
This is a blessed confidence that can support the soul 
in the severest trials. He makes Himself known too 
in the breaking of bread. I would not then only 
remember His death; but looking at His ascension, 
see the power given to Him, mark the gifts which 
He has received, dwell upon the work which He is 
now carrying on, and daily come to Him, and hold 
communion with Him. 

Remember, too, O my soul, this same Jesus which 
was thus taken up into heaven^ shall so come in like 
manner as He was seen going into heaven. Now at 
His table, I profess my expectation of His coming 
again. O may I be always ready for that day. The 
Lord in mercy grant that this sacred Institution may 
raise my heart to my ascended Saviour, and lead me 
to look, and diligently prepare for. His second com- 
ing. 

IV. 

LORD Jesus, help Thou me to take up my cross 
and follow Thee; all blessings come in faith 
and self-sacrifice; all evils come in self-confidence and 



EDWAKD BICKEHSTETH. 537 

self-indulgence. My Saviour, then grant me Thy 
grace, for the residue of my days; be it many years, 
be it one year, or be it but the present day, to deny 
myself, and live to Ilim who has redeemed me with 
His blood, feeling my own weakness, and not looking 
to a season of rest below ^ but above; not calculatinor 
on a time of enjoyment on earth, but preparing for 
it in heaven. 

Help me also to maintain to the end of the conflict; 
looking forward to that crown of life which Thou 
hast promised to Thy faithful soldiers. 

I turn to Thee, Thou blessed Eedeemer. I turn 
from myself where all is polluted and wretched, to 
that gracious Saviour, where all is compassion, and 
love, and tenderness; wdiere is a full atonement for 
enemies and rebels, a rich provision of mercy for the 
sinful, a complete salvation for the lost. O Jesus, 
pity, save, and bless my sonl. Strengthen me for 
every dut3^ that lies before me. In nothing can I 
claim blessings, but in Thy free promises and Thy 
full redemption. May I then delight in Thee, and 
walk closely with Thee every day. Draw me, and 
I will run after Thee. 

V. 

WHERE can I fly, O Jesus ! where, but to Thee? 
In Thy wounds I hide me. At Thy cross I 
shelter me. There iniquity is pardoned ; there the 
transgression of the remnant of Thy heritage is 
passed by. 

But now, O God, my Saviour, I entreat Thee, suh- 

23* 



538 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

due my iniquities. Only Thine almighty arm can 
vanquish them. I look to Thee for victory. Fight 
for me, fight in me; that I may be more than con- 
queror, through Him that loved me. 

VI. 

OLORD, I wouldnow, in the fullness of my heart, 
earnestly pray for the hallowing of Thy name, 
the coming of Thy kingdom, and the doing of Thy 
will on earth as it is in heaven. And O grant that, 
till the Lord come, His table ma}^ be crowded with 
believing and joyful guests. O when shall all the 
ends of the earth look to Jesus and be saved I Has- 
ten it in Thy good pleasure, O Lord ; that Christ 
Jesus may be known, loved, and obeyed, in every 
land, and the Lord's name be praised from the 
rising of the sun to the going down of the same. 
Thus glorify Thy great name, fulfill Thy gracious 
promises, and let Thy kingdom be fully established 
through Jesus Christ, our only Redeemer. Amen. 




WILLIAM NEVmS, D. D. 
1797-1835. 

Heaven. 

REST remaineth to tlie people of 
God. The meanest saint shall enjoy it. 
The moment he shall put off this robe of 
mortality, the mantle of Elijah's God 
shall descend and cover him. 
This world is to heaven, what the inn upon the 
road is to the home at the end of it. 

God is everywhere, but not so manifestly in all 
places as He is in some select places. He is every- 
where, but His Shekinah is not everywhere. He 
does not reveal Himself ever^^ where. The glory of 
the Lord filled the ancient temple, but it dwelt 
peculiarly and visibly above the mercy-seat, in- the 
most holy place. The glory of God fills the earth, 
but there are localities in the universe where it shines 
forth with peculiar splendor. God is everywhere, 
but His ' presence, where there is fullness of joy,' is 
not everywhere. Heaven is not merely a state. 

Grace is the inftincy of glory — glory the maturity 
of grace. Grace is the head of glory — glory the 
ripe fruit of grace. 



540 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

How glorious and happy a place heaven must be, 
into which there shall nothing enter that defileth. 
There we shall never, never sin. Oh! it is the grand 
recommendation of heaven, that there there is no 
siu. The cause not being there, none of the effects 
will be there — no natural evil, because no moral 
evil; no debility, deformity, disease, ache, pain, per- 
turbation, fear, anguish, nor sadness. No tear shall 
fall, no blood be spilt, no separation occur, no be- 
reavement be felt, no disappointment, no satiety, no 
death. 

Heaven's Attractions. 

I HAVE been thinking of the attractions of hea- 
ven — what there is in heaven to draw souls to it. 
I thought of the jplace. Heaven has place. Christ 
says to His disciples, ' I go to prepare a jplace for 
you.' It is a part of the consolation with which He 
comforts them, that heaven is a place, and not a 
mere state. What a place it must be ! Selected out 
of all the locations of the universe — the chosen spot 
of space. We see, even on earth, places of great 
beauty, and we can conceive of spots far more 
delightful than any we see. But what comparison 
can these bear to heaven, where every thing exceeds 
whatever eye has seen, or imagination conceived ? 
The earthly paradise must have been a charming 
spot. But what that to the heavenly ? What the 
paradise assigned to the first Adam, who was of the 
earth, earthy, compared with that purchased by the 
second Adam, who is the Lord from heaven ? It is 



WILLIAM NEVINS. 541 

a 'purchased possession.' The price it cost the 
purchaser, every one knows. Now, having pur- 
chased it, He has gone to prepare it — to set it in 
order — to la}^ out His skilLupon it. O what a place 
Jesus will make, has already made heaven ! The 
place should attract us. 

Then I thought of the freedom of the place from 
the evils of earth. Not only what is in heaven, 
should attract us to it, but what is not there. And 
what is not there ? There is no nigf/d there. Who 
does not want to go where no night is ? No night, 
no natural night — none of its darkness, its damps, 
its dreariness ; and no moral night — no ignorance — 
no error — no misery — no sin. These all belong to 
the night : and there is no ni^rht in heaven. And 
why no night there ? What shines there so per- 
petually ? It is not any natural luminary. It is a 
moral radiance that lights up heaven. ' The glory 
of God doth lighten it, and the Lamb is the light 
thereof.' No need have they there of other light. 
This shines everywhere, and on all. All light is 
sweet, but no light is like this. 

And not only no night there, but ' no more ciirseJ 
Christ redeemed them from the curse of the law, 
beinfy made a curse for them. And ' no more death.'' 
The last enemy is overcome at last. Each, as he 
enters the place, shouts victoriously, ' O death, O 
grave ! ' ' Neither sori'ow.' It is Jiere. O yes it is 
here — around, within. We hear it ; w^e see it ; and 
at length we feel it. But it is not there. 'Nor 
crying^ — no expression of grief. 'Neither shall 



542 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

there be any more pain; for the former things are 
passed away.' And what becomes of tears 9 Are 
they left to dry up ? Nay, God ivipes them away. 
And this is a sure sign they will never return. — 
What shall cause weeping when He wipes away 
tears ? 

I have not said that there is no sin in heaven. I 
have not thought that necessary. If sin was there, 
niofht would be there, and the curse and death and 
all the other evils — the train of sin. These are not 
there ; therefore sin is not. No, * we shall be like 
Him ; for we shall see Him as He is.' 

What is there, then, since these are not ? Day is 
there ; and there is the blessing that maketh rich ; 
and there is life, immortality ; and since no sorrow, 
joy — 'fullness of joy — joy unspeakable,' and smiles 
where tears were : and there they rest^ not from 
their labors only, but from cares and doubts and 
fears. And glory i^ there, an ' exceeding and eternal 
weight.' 

Then I thought of the society. It is composed of 
the elite of the universe. The various orders of 
angels who kept their first estate — as humble as they 
are high — not ashamed of men. Why should they 
be, when the Lord of angels is not ashamed to call 
us brethren ? The excellent of the earth also — all the 
choice spirits of every age and nation; the first man; 
the first martyr; the translated patriarch; the survivor 
of the deluge; the friend of God, and his juniors, Isaac 
and Israel ; Moses the lawgiver, and Joshua the 
leader of the host ; the pious kings ; the prophets j 



WILLIAM KEVINS. 543 

the evangelists and apostles, Paul, John ; the mar- 
tyrs ; the reformers ; the Puritan fathers ; the mis- 
sionaries SAvartz, Brainercl, Martyn — Carey and Mor- 
rison have just gone up ; and the young brothers 
who ascended from Sumatra — and another connected 
with missions, Wisner, has been suddenly sent for to 
heaven. 

Is that all ? Where is he who used to lisp, ' fa- 
ther, mother ' — thy child ? Passing out of your 
hands, passed he not into those of Jesus ? Yes, you 
suffered him. If any other than Jesus had said, 
' Suffer them to come to me,' you would have said. 
No. Death does not quench those recently struck 
sparks of intelligence. Jesus is not going to lose 
one of those little brilliants. All shall be in His 
crown. 

Perhaps thou hast a brother or a sister there ; that 
should draw you towards heaven. Perhaps a mother 
— she whose eye wept while it watched over thee, 
until at length it grew dim, and closed. Took she 
not in her cold hand thine, while yet her heart was 
warm, and said she not, ' I am going to Jesus. Fol- 
low me there ? ' Perhaps one nearer, dearer than 
child, than brother, than mother — the nearest, dearest 
is there. Shall I say who ? Christian female, thy 
husband. Christian father, the young mother of thy 
babes. He is not — she is not ; for God took them. 
Has heaven no attractions ? 

Heaven is gaining in attractions every day. True, 
the principal attractions continue the same. But the 
lesser ones multiply. Some . have attractions there 



544 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

now, which they had not but a few months ago. — 
Earth is losing. How fast it has been losing of late. 
But earth's losses are heaven's gains. They who 
have left so many dwelling-places of earth desolate, 
have o-one to their Father's house in heaven. What 
if they shall not return to us, we shall go to them. 
That is better. 

But the principal attractions I have not yet men- 
tioned. There is our Father, our heavenly Father, 
whom we have so often addressed as such in prayer : 
He that nourished and brought us up, and has borne 
us on; He that has watched over us with an eye that 
never sleeps, and provided for us with a hand that 
never tires ; and who can pity too. We have never 
seen our Heavenly Father. But there He reveals Hmi- 
sclf There He smiles; and the nations of the saved 
walk in the lisrht of His countenance. 

And there is He, to depart and be with whom 
Paul desired, as being ' far better' than to live. 
Tlicre is His glorified humanity. If not having seen, 
\vc love Him ; and in Him, though now wx see Him 
not, yet believing, we rejoice with joy unspeakable 
and full of glory, what will be the love and the joy 
Avhen ' we shall see Him as He is V There is He. 

Heaven lias attractions, many and strong — and yet 
Avho would think it ? How few feel and obey the 
heavenly attraction ! Hoav much more powerfully 
earth acts upon us! How unwilling we are to leave 
it even for heaven. 



william nevins. 545 

The Saint Near to Heaven. 

THERE shall be but a step between him and it. 
Some are as near as all that to heaven. It is 
not a day's journey there. It is but to take a step, 
and, follower of Jesus, thou art where no night is, 
and no sound of moaning is heard, and every tear is 
wiped away. So near to heaven! How frequent 
then and fond should be your thoughts of it. All 
so near ! Then ' what manner of persons ought we 
to be in all holy conversation and godliness!' How 
carefully and circumspectly ought they to W' alk w^hose 
path lies along such a brink ! 

And since the end of all our opportunities is as 
near as death, whatever our minds meditate, or our 
hands find to do, for our own souls, for the good of 
others, or for the glory of God, let us do it with our 
mischt. 

CD 

Christ's Love and that of the Christian. 

OHOW different Christ's love to us, from ours to 
Him! We have not to ask Him if He loves us. 
If any one should ever ask that question of Jesus, 
He would say, ' Behold my hands and my feet.' He 
bears on His very body the marks of His love to us. 
But what have we to point to as proofs of our love 
to Him? What has it done for Him; what suffered? 
O, the contrast! His love so strong, ours so wxak; 
His so ardent, ours so cold; His so constant, ours so 
fickle; His so active, ours so indolent. So fngh, so 
deep, so long, so broad His love, its dimensions can- 



546 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

not be comprehended, it passeth knowledge; while 
ours is so limited and so minute, it eludes research. 

'■ Dear Lord, and shall we ever live 
At this poor dying rate ; 
Our love so faint, so cold to Thee, 
And Thine to us so great?' 

Sympathy of Cheist for the Believee. 

O THINK that He, in all thy sorrows, pities thee. 
Yes, thy God feels for thee. Thy sufferings 
go to His heart. There is One in heaven who, from 
that exaltation, looks down upon thee; and the eye 
that watches over you wept for you once, and would, 
if it had tears, weep for you again. He knoweth 
your frame. He remembereth that you are dust. 
He will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the 
smoking flax. It was He who, when His disciples 
had nothing to say for themselves, made that kind 
apology for them, ' The spirit is willing but the 
flesh is weak.' He can be touched with the feeling 
of all your infirmities. You may cast all your cares 
on Him, for He careth for you. All through this 
vale of tears, you may rest assured of His sympathy, 
and Av^hen the vale of tears declines into the vallev 
of the shadow of death, not His sympathy only will 
you have, but His inspiriting presence and His timely 
succor. And after that, what will not his bounty be 
whose pity has been so great? When there is no 
longer any occasion for pity — when misery is no 
more, and sighing has ceased, and God's hand has 
for the last time passed across your weeping eyes, 
and wiped away the final tear, what then will be the 
riches of His munificence? 




WILLIAM JAY. 
1769-1853. 

The Bible. 

OYE and study the Scriptures. He 
that avoids reading a j)ortion of them 
daily, forsakes his own mercy ; and is so 
far regardless of his safety, welfare, and 
comfort. Therefore 'bind them contin- 
ually upon thine heart, and tie them about thy 
neck. When thou goest, it shall lead thee; when 
thou sleej)est, it shall keep thee ; and when thou 
awakest, it shall talk with thee. For the command- 
ment is a lamp ; and the law is light ; and reproofs 
of instruction are the way of life.' 

Precious Bible! like thy blessed Author, our 
sun and our shield, thou giver of grace and glory, 
thou conductor through all this gloomy vale to our 
everlasting home, how many advantages have we 
already derived from thee ! Thou hast often solved 
our doubts, and wiped away our tears. Thou hast 
been sweeter to our taste than honey and the honey- 
comb. Thou hast been better to us, in our dis- 
tresses, than thousands of gold and silver. Unless 
thou hadst been our dehght, we should have per- 
ished in our affliction. 



548 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

No wonder Job 'esteemed thee more than his 
necessary food.' No wonder David chose thee as 
his heritage forever, and found thee to be the rejoic- 
ing of his heart. No wonder the noble army of 
martyrs parted with their estates and with their 
blood, rather than with thee. May we value thee 
as our richest jewel; may we love thee as our dear- 
est good; may we consult thee as our surest coun- 
sel! oi*; may we follow thee as our safest rule 1 

Death of Christian Friends. 

LET us remember that when no longer visible to 
us, they are not lost. They have reached their 
Father's house. They are disposed of infinitely to 
their advantaire. And this should subdue the selfish- 
ness of our grief If we love them, we ought to 
rejoice in their promotion. 

We have no distinct assurance that they are ac- 
quainted with our circumstances, or can employ 
themselves for our welfare — ^^^et for us they languish, 
and for us they die. We may improve their removal; 
it should draw us away from earth, and attach us the 
more to heaven. And thus their going away will be 
for our welfare. When we lose the lives of our 
friends, we should be careful not to lose their deaths 
too. 

They will not come to receive us to themselves; 
but they will welcome us when we enter their ever- 
lasting habitations. The separation is temporary. 
A time of re-union will come. We shall see their 
faces, and hear their voices again in the flesh. O 



WILLIAM JAY. 549 

cheerful consolation ! how suitable, and how sure ! 
' I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, 
concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow 
not, even as others which have no hope, For if we 
believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them 
also w^hich sleep in Jesus will God bring with Him. 
For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, 
that we which are alive and remain unto the comins: 
of the Lord shall not prevent them which are asleep. 
For the Lord Himself shall descend from heaven 
with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and 
with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall 
rise first: then we which are alive and remain shall 
be caught up together with them in the clouds, to 
meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be 
with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with 
these words.' 

On Pkayer. 
T3RAYER is the breathing of the desire towards 
JL God. Words are not essential to the perform- 
ance of it. As words may be used without prayer, 
so prayer may be used without words; He that search- 
eth the heart ' knoweth what is the mind of the 
Spirit;' and when we cannot command language like 
some of our fellow-christians, it is well to be able to 
say, ' Lord, all my desire is before Thee, and my 
groaning is not hid from Thee.' 

The expediency, the necessity of prayer, results 
from our indigent and dependent state. We have 
enemies to overcome — and liow are wo to conquer 



550 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

them? we have trials to endure — and how are we to 
bear them? We have duties to accomplish — and 
how are we to perform them? We need mercy and 
grace to help us — and how are we to obtain them? 
God has determined and revealed the method in 
which He will communicate the blessings He has prom- 
ised. ' For all these things will I be enquired of by 
the house of Israel. Draw nigh to God, and He will 
draw nigh to you. Ask, and it shall be given to you; 
seek, and ye shall find.' And, as He is a Sovereign, 
and under no obligation to favor us at all, He has 
surely a right to appoint the way in w^hich He will 
be gracious; but, in this appointment. His wisdom 
appears as conspicuous as His sovereignty; and His 
goodness as clearly as His wisdom. Nothing can be 
so beneficial to us as prayer is, not only by the relief 
it obtains, but by the influence it exerts; not only by 
its answers, but by its energy. Beyond every thing 
else that is instrumental in religion, it improves our 
characters, it strengthens our graces, it softens and 
refines our tempers, it contributes to our spirituality, 
and promotes our holiness. The more we have to 
do with God, the more we shall resemble Him. ' It 
is therefore good for us to draw near to Him.' 

A Fajviily Peayer for the Morning. 

OLORD I Thou art good, and Thou doest good. 
Thou hast revealed Thyself as nigh unto all 
that call upon Thee — to all that call upon Thee in 
truth. May we who now address Thee be found 
the heirs of this promise; nor suffer us to incur the 



WILLIAM JAY. 551 

reproach of drawing near to Thee with the mouth, 
and honoring Thee with our lips, while our hearts 
are far from Thee. Unite our hearts to fear Thy 
name; and grant that we may worship Thee in the 
Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no con- 
fidence in the flesh. We remember that we are sin- 
ners, and acknowledge the multitude and aggrava- 
tions of our ofiences. Conscious not only of the 
reality, but the greatness of our guilt, w^e could 
indulge no hope, hadst not Thou exhibited Thine 
infinite benevolence, and revealed a Mediator, in 
whom Thou art reconciling the world unto Thyself, 
not imputing their trespasses unto them. 

Thou hast not left Thyself without witness, in that 
Thou hast been doing us good, and giving us rain 
from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts 
with food and gladness. But herein is love; not 
that we loved God, but that He loved us, and sent 
His Son to be the propitiation for our sins. Blessed 
be Thy name, we have all the certainty we could 
desire, that with Thee there is mercy. That mercy 
the publican sought, and — found : that mercy — has 
never disappointed any that trusted in it : that mercy 
— at this very moment cries to us. Ask and it shall 
be given you^ seek and ye shall find. O Lord, we 
avail ourselves of Thine invitation, and plead Thy 
promise ! According to the multitude of Thy ten- 
der mercies blot out our transgressions. Create in us 
also a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within us. 

We hope we arc convinced that while many things 
are desirable and some useful, one thing is needful; 



552 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

and that instead of the inquiry, What shall I eat, 
and what shall I drink, and wherewithal shall I be 
clothed? the supreme anxiousness of our soul is, 
What must I do to be saved ? O visit us with Thy 
salvation, in the illumination of the mind, and the 
sanctification of the life; in all the comforts of the 
Holy Ghost, and in all the fruits of the Spirit. May 
we willingly obey all Thy commands, and cheerfully 
submit to all Thy appointments. In the annihilation 
of self-will, and in the temper of implicit devote d- 
ness, may we as to every duty say: Lord, what wilt 
Thou have me to do ? And as to every event: Here 
I am, let Him do what seemeth Him good. Grant 
us piety and wisdom to accommodate ourselves to 
the allotments of life; and enable us to maintain a 
Christian temper and behavior in all the changing 
scenes of providence, that all things may work to- 
gether, if not for our gratification, yet for our good. 

May we disengage ourselves from the present evil 
Avorld, and be received and acknowledged as the sons 
and daughters of the Lord Almighty. May the 
righteous be our attraction and delight; and though 
few in number, and despised by the foolish and 
wicked, may we go with them, because God is with 
them; and, like Moses, may we choose rather to 
suffer affliction with the people of God than enjoy 
the pleasures of sin for a season. 

May we w^alk by faith, and not by sight. May 
we weigh both worlds, and may the future and the 
eternal preponderate. May this be our growing 
experience as well as profession — As for me, I will 



WILLIA.^i JAY. 553 

behold Thy face in righteousness; I shall be satisfied 
when I awake with Thy likeness. 

By Thy mercies we renew this morning the conse- 
cration of ourselves to Thy service. Go forth with 
us into the concerns of the day. Keep us in all our 
ways. Innumerable are our dangers; but the great- 
est of all is sin. Uphold our goings therefore in 
Thy word, and let no iniquity have dominion over 
us. May we abstain from all appearance of evil : 
and the very God of peace sanctify us wholly : and 
may our whole spirit, and soul, and body be pre- 
served blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

And to God only wise, the Father, the Son, and 
the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all honor and praise for 
ever and ever. Amen. 

A Family Praier for the Evening. 

OGOD ! Thy greatness is unsearchable. Thy 
name is most excellent in all the earth. Thou 
hast set Thy glory above the heavens. Thousands 
minister unto Thee, and ten thousand times ten thou- 
sand stand before Thee. We feel ourselves in Thine 
awful presence to be nothing, less than nothing, and 
vanity : nor do Ave presume to approach Thee because 
we are deserving of Thy notice — for we have sinned — 
we have incurred Thy righteous displeasure — we 
acknowledge that Thou art justified when Thou 
speakest, and clear when Thou judgest. 

But our necessities compel us; and Thy promises 
encourao'c us. Thou art nioh unto them that are of 

24 " 



554 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

a broken heart, and savest such as be of a contrite 
spirit. Thou hast provided and revealed a Mediator, 
who has not only obeyed, but magnified the law and 
made it honorable; and Thou hast made us accepted 
in the Beloved. And we behold an innumerable 
multitude returning from Thy throne successful, 
rejoicing and encouraging us to go forward. They 
were not, though all guilt and indigence, refused 
nor upbraided; but freely obtained pardon and holi- 
ness and righteousness and strength, and w^ere blessed 
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in 
Christ. 

O look Thou upon us, and be merciful unto us, as 
Thou usest to do unto those that love Thy name ! 
Convince us of sin both in its penalty and in its pol- 
lution; and may we mourn over it with a godly sor- 
row. Give us that faith by which we shall be ena- 
bled to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ; and, believ- 
ing, may we have life through His name. 

And may we not only have life, but have it more 
abundantly. We often question the reality of our 
grace; but the imperfections of our religion are too 
obvious not to be acknowledijed, and too ao^o;ravated 
not to be deplored. Our souls cleave unto the dust; 
quicken Thou us according to Thy word. Strengthen 
in us the things that are ready to die. May we not 
only live in the Spirit, but walk in the Spirit. By 
holy resemblances, may we put on the Lord Jesus 
Christ. May the same mind be in us which was also 
in Him; and may we feel it to be our dignity and 
dcli<yht to o^o about doins: <>:oocl. 



"SVILLTAJM JAY. 555 

And as He suffered for us, leaving us an example 
that we should tread in His steps, may we learn to 
suffer like Him. When reviled, may we revile not 
again, but commit ourselves to Him that judgeth 
righteously. Whoever may be the instrument of 
our grief, may we never lose sight of an over-ruling 
agency in preparing and presenting it; but be able 
to say, The cup which my Father giveth me shall I 
not drink it ? In patience ma}^ we possess our souls. 
May we be calm to inquire, wherefore Thou contend- 
est with us. Let not weeping hinder sowing; nor 
sorrow, dut}^ 

We live in a world of changes, and have here no 
continuing city — may we seek one to come; and have 
our minds kept in perfect peace, being stayed upon 
God. Be with us to the end of our journey; and 
after honoring Thee by the life we have lived, may 
we glorify Thee by the death we shall die. When 
heart and flesh fiiil, be Thou the strength of our 
heart and our portion for ever; at death may we fall 
asleep in Jesus; and in the morning of the resurrec- 
tion, may He change our vile body, that it may be 
fashioned like His own glorious body; and so may we 
be for ever with the Lord. 

Who can understand his errors ? Forgive, O God, 
the sins of the past day, in thought, word, and deed, 
against Thy divine Majesty. We ])lcss Thee for our 
preservation in our going out and our coming in, and 
in all our ways : and avc bless Thee for all the sup- 
plies and indulgences which Thy good providence 
has afforded us. 



556 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

And now, O Thou keeper of Israel, wo commil 
our souls and our bodies to Thy all-sufficient care. 
Suffer no evil to befall our persons, and no plague to 
come nigh our dwelling. May our sleep be sweet; 
or if Thou boldest our eyes waking, may w^e remem- 
ber Thee upon our bed, and meditate on Thee in the 
night-watches. 

And with the innumerable company who never 
slumber nor sleep, and wdio rest not day and night, 
we would join in ascribing blessing and honor and 
glory and power unto Him that sitteth upon the throne 
and unto the Lamb, for ever and ever. Amen. 

A Family Pkayer for Sabbath Morning. 

OCOME, let us worship and fall down; let us 
kneel before the Lord our Maker, for He is 
our God, and we are the people of His pasture and 
the sheep of His hand. 

Yes, O Lord, we are Thine; and Thee ,we are 
bound to serve. We grieve to think how many of 
our fellow-creatures live without Thee in the world; 
and confess, with shame, that other lords have had 
dominion over us; but henceforth by Thee only will 
we make mention of Thy name. We hope Thou 
hast subdued the insensibility and indifference to- 
wards Thyself, so awfully natural to us; and awak- 
ened in us the inquiry: Where is God, my Maker, 
that giveth songs in the night ? We hope we are 
disposed to acknowledge Thee in all our Avays; but 
we feel our need of the exercises of devotion. We 
trust we hold communion with Thee every day; but 



WILLIAM JAY. 557 

we find Aveek-days to be worldly days; and our 
allowed intercourse w^ith secular concerns tends to 
reduce our heavenly impressions, and to make us 
forgetful of our work, and our rest. We therefore 
bless Thee for the return of a day sacred to our souls 
and eternity; a time of refreshing from the presence 
of the Lord; in which, by waiting upon Thee, our 
hearts are enlarged, and our strength is renewed; so 
that we can mount up with wings as eagles, run and 
not be weary, and walk and not faint. 

This is the day which the Lord hath made; we 
will rejoice and be glad in it. O let our minds be 
withdrawn from the world, as well as our bodies. 
Let our retirement be devout. Let our meditation 
be sweet. Let our conversation be edifying. Let 
our reading be pious. Let our hearing be profitable 
— and on Thee may we Avait all the day ! 

Afford us the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. 
None can need Thy succors more than we. Thou 
knowest our infirmities; let Thy strength be made 
perfect in our w^eakness. Our duties are far above 
our own power — let Th}^ grace be suflicient for us. 
Our dangers are numberless, and we are utterly una- 
ble to keep ourselves from foiling; hold Thou us up, 
and w^e shall be safe. The burdens we feel w^ould press 
our lives down to the ground : lay underneath us Thine 
everlasting arms. Fears alarm us; cares corrode us; 
losses impoverish us; our very affections are the 
sources of our afilictions; surely, man walketh in a 
vain show; surely, we are disquieted in vain — all, 
all is vanity and vexation of spirit; while in the 



558 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

world we have tribulation, in Thee may we have 
peace; and in the multitude of our thoughts within 
us, may Thy comforts delight our souls ! 

Yet, O Lord, we Avould remember, that gratitude 
becomes us much more than complaint. Our afflic- 
tions have been light compared with our guilt; and 
few compared with the sufferings of others. They 
have all been attended with numberless alleviations; 
they have all been needful; all founded in a regard 
to our welfare; all designed to work together for 
our good. We bless Thee for what is past; and 
trust Thee for what is future; and cast all our care 
upon Thee, knowing that Thou carest for us. 

Thou hast commanded us to pray for all men, that 
we may be bound by our very devotions, as we have 
opportunity, to do good unto all men, especially 
unto them that are of the household of faith. May 
we always cherish and display benevolent disposi- 
tions toward our dependents; forgiving dispositions 
towards our enemies; peaceable dispositions towards 
our neighbors; and candid dispositions towards our 
fellow-christians. May we be able to say with our 
Lord and Saviour, W7iosoever shall do the will of 
my Father that is in heaven, the same is my brother, 
and sister, and mother; and pray with Paul, Grace 
l)e with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in 
sincerity ! 

May the goings of our God and King be seen this 
day in every Christian sanctuary. Go Avith us to Thy 
house, and give testimony to the word of Thy grace. 
May it have free course, and be glorified in the hearts 



WILLIAM JAY. 559 

and lives of those that shall hear it. May it en- 
lighten the ignorant; awaken the careless; reclaim 
the wandering; establish the weak; comfort the 
feeble-minded; and make ready a people prepared 
for the Lord ! 

Remember those who are this day denied our 
advantages. Be a little sanctuary to them in the 
midst of their privations; and let them know that 
Thou art not confined to temples made with hands. 
And O forget not those who never enjoyed our privi- 
leges; never smiled when a Sabbath appeared; never 
heard of the name of a Saviour — and let Thy way 
be known on earth, Thy saving health among all 
nations ! Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed 
be Thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be 
done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day 
our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as 
we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead 
us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil : for 
Thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, 
for ever and ever. Amen. 

A Family Peayer for Sabbath Evening. 

IT is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, 
and to sing praises unto Thy name, O Most 
High; to show forth Thy loving-kindness in the 
morning, and Thy faithfulness every night. 

We have this evening to acknowledge the bless- 
ings, not only of another day, but of another Sab- 
bath. We bless Thee that the Sabbath Avas made 
for man, and that Thou hast hallowed such a portion 



560 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

of our time, for purposes the most importaut, but 
which, ahis ! we are prone to neglect. Thus Thou 
art aifordlng us opportunities to retire, and compare 
the objects which court our attention; to learn, 
among all the cares of life, that one thing is need- 
ful; and to hear the inquiry — 'What is a nian pro- 
fited, if he should gain the whole world and lose his 
own soul ?' Thus we have moments of abstraction 
and leisure in which we can more fully investigate 
our character, examine our condition, and ask for 
Avhat purpose we entered this mortal stage, and what 
will become of us when the scene closes. 

We thank Thee that the lines are fallen to us in 
pleasant places, and that we have a goodly heritage; 
so that we can add to private meditation and devo- 
tion the public ordinances of religion, and can sit 
under our own vine and fig-tree, none daring to make 
us afraid. We bless Thee that we have not only the 
Scriptures, but the ministry of the gospel; and have 
this day not only read, but heard the words of eter- 
.nal life. We hope we have seen Thy pow^er and 
Thy glory in the sanctuary, and have found the house 
of God to be the gate of heaven. 

But, O God, the eflects we experience while wait- 
ing upon Thee, though delightful, are as often transi- 
tory, and prove like the morning cloud and early 
dew. Before the lapse of a single day we are com- 
pelled to complain. My soul cleaveth unto the dust; 
and to pray, Quicken Thou me according to Thy 
word. Render therefore the impressions made upon 
us deep and durable; keep these things forever in 



AVILLIAM JAY. 561 

the imagintitioii of the hearts of Thy people; and 
let Thy word dwell in us richly in all icisdom. 

May the instructions we receive attend us in every 
part of our ordinary life, and regulate and excite us 
in the discharge of all our relative duties, so that 
whether we are husbands or wives, parents or chil- 
dren, masters or servants, we may adorn the doctrine 
of God our Saviour in all things. May we be satis- 
fied with no knowledge, no belief, no professions, no 
feelings in religion, while our hearts are void of 
Thy love, and we are strangers to that grace which 
bringeth salvation, and teacheth us to deny ungodli- 
ness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, right- 
eously, and godly in the present world. 
* We take shame to ourselves, not only for our open 
violations of Thy law, but for our secret faults, our 
omissions of duty, our unprofitable attendances on 
the means of grace, our carnality in worshiping 
Thee, and all the sins of our holy things. Our ini- 
quities are increased over our head, and our trespass 
is gone up into the very heavens, and there He is 
gone also, who is our advocate with the Father and 
the propitiation for our sins. Behold His hands and His 
feet; and hear, O hear the voice of the blood of sprink- 
ling that speaketh better things than that of Abel. 

Pity those who have this day been deprived of 
the public means of grace by sickness or infirmity. 
Let them know that Thou art not confined to tem- 
ples made with hands; be with them in trouble; and 
give them their vineyards from thence, and the val- 
ley of Achor for a door of hope. 



562 DEVOTIONAL THOUGHTS. 

And remember the millions who were never 
favored with the advantages we enjoy, and would 
be o-rateful for the crumbs that Ml from our table. 
But they never smiled when a Sabbath appeared ; 
they never heard of the name of Jesus; they feel 
o-uilt, but know nothino; of the blood that cleaiiseth 
from all sin; they feel depravity, but know nothing 
of the renewing of the Holy Ghost; they are bleed- 
ing to death of their spiritual wounds, but no one 
proclaims among them the balm of Gilead and the 
Physician there ! O send out Thy light and Thy 
truth ! Let Thy way be known on earth, Thy sav- 
ins: health amono; all nations. 

We now commit ourselves with all our connections 
into Thy hands. Guard us through the defenceless 
hours of sleep from every evil to which we are ex- 
posed. If, as life is always uncertain, it should please 
Thee to call us hence this night, may we awake in 
glory and be for ever with the Lord; or if Thou 
shouldst continue us in being, ma}^ we rise in health 
and comfort, to pay Thee the homage of a grateful 
heart in a course of cheerful obedience. 

In Thy favor is life — Do 27iou bless us, and we 
shall be blessed — safe from every evil, and assured 
of every good. 

And prepare us, at length, for the rest that remains 
for Thy people; in wdiich we shall join the general 
assembly and church of the first-born, in ascribing 
l)lessing and honor, and glory and power to Him 
that sitteth upon the throne, and to the Lamb, for 
ever and ever. Amen. 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 



Advice to the afflicted page 405 

Affections, on religious 411 

Afflictions 463 

" advantages of 486 

" blessed fruits of 463 

' ' consolation in 302 

Assurance 247, 458 

Backsliding, recovery from 203 

Believer's possessions, the 388 

Believer, happy state of the 457 

" the, safe --459 

Bible, the 359, 347 

Blessed, no pain among the 380 

Blessings to which the Saviour in- 
vites us 481 

Bliss, perpetuity of 213 

Blood of Christ, redemption 

through the 514 

Blood of the cross, efficiency of - - 225 

Celestial city, the 59 

' ' glory, visions of 192 

Choose Christ 519 

Christ, beholding of, a transform- 
ing sight 89 

" beholding the glory of 199 

•• communion with 133 

" crucified- 496 

" crucified, faith's view of - - 461 

«' coming to God by 282 

" devotion to 456 

" filled with Spirit 267 

" vision and enjoyment of - - 437 

fullness of 198 

" glory of, at the last day - - - 135 

" grace of 280 

" giving glory to 283 

'* is ours 530 

" imitation of 300 

" incarnation of 305 

" love to, as our advocate- - - 262 

" made sin for us 281 

•' meditations on the glory of 251 

" our acceptance in 272 

" our advocate 254 

" prayer to, in seasons of dis- 
tress 189 

♦• precious in His instruc- 
tions 453 



Christ presenting the memorials 

of His death -- 257 

" resurrection of 295,307 

" second coming of 158, 428 

" sympathy of, for the be- 

Uever 546 

" the beheving soul's ad- 
dress to--- 439 

" the believer's joy at the 

revelation of - 134 

" the heavy laden invited to 441 

" the light of the Christian- - 140 

the love of - 483 

" the only foundation- 449 

" the preciousness of 448 

thestudyof 228 

" ^\'ithout an interest in 482 

Chi-ist's blood, virtue of 507 

" intercession 282 

" intercession, comfort in - - 283 

" intercession, efficacy of - - 261 
" intercession, perpetuity of 259 

" invitations 413 

" love, and the Christian's - 545 
" love, as manifested in His 

death 271 

" love, constancy of 248 

" love manifested from the 

cross 235 

" presence with believers at 

death 443 

Christian's trials, end of the 350 

joys - 328 

Christian hope 317 

- " ministry, importance of 508 

Church fellowship 284 

Come to Christ 522 

" to the Saviour now 511 

Comfort in distress 90 

" in the death of pious 

friends 333 

" against death 276 

Communion of believers in heav- 
enly worship - 190 

" table, thoughts at the 44 

•' table, thoughts after 

the 47 

Consolation 121 

for the afflicted 487 

Covert fi'om the tempest 197 



5^4: 



INDEX. 



Death and heaven 211 

" but a sleep 51 

" comfort in the hour of 100 

" fear of, removed 530 

" hope of the righteous in - - - 451 

•' meditation on 32 

•' of pious friends 212 

" of a pious youth 385 

" of Christian friends 548 

" of Christian relations 385 

" spiritual desire of 138 

" the Christian's vtctory over 477 

" the Christian in his 55 

" the night of 63 

" the soul's triumph over 360 

" to the beUever 404 

« to the child of God 515 

" wiU come 523 

Devotion for the evening, a model 

of 408 

" the Christian in his 54 

Devout meditation 398 

Divine Being, excellency of 445 

" care - 230 

" guidance - 463 

" knowledge 361 

" love 83 

" mercy, the ocean of 245 

" promises -- 506 

Do this in remembrance of me - - - 46 

Earth and heaven 530 

Earthly and heavenly joys 294 

" enjoyments, inconstancy of 329 

Ejaculations, pious 359 

Eternal glory -- 136 

" happiness 291 

Eternity 59, 455 

End of time 380 

Faith, the eye of 506 

language and power of 156 

life of 495 

life by 177 

steadfastness in the 135 

triumphant in death 198 

walking by 426 

Fly to the mercy seat - - - 372 

Forgiveness of sins final 516 

Glorified Redeemer, the 263 

Glory of Christ, manifestation of 

the 251 

God, a life of communion with- - - 360 

" aU-sufficiency of 390 

" awake to 373 

" behold as really present 42 

" contemplation of 178 

" grace of 237 

" infinite compassion of 268 

" infinite goodness of 181 

" love of 1G4, 265 

" love in the gift of His Son - - 446 

' ' manifested in the flesh 70 

*' om'aiprescnce of 52G 



God, our access to 265 

" our i^ortion 98 

" our refuge 96 

" pleasures of communion with 355 

" restin-- 66, 233 

" thoughts of, in the devout 

person -- 43 

" the saint's delight in 321 

" the saint's love to 412 

" sinner invited to return to - - 486 

" spared not His Son 271 

" walking with ■ 153, 233 

" the Word of 163, 195 

" visions of, in glory 2'28 

God's mercy 123 

" unchangeableuess, faith in - 232 

Gospel, the - 275 

" blessed effects of the 516 

" substance of the 264 

Grace 86, 285, 442 

" and sanctification, the work 

of 332 

" free 126, 236 

" maturity of 249 

" opposing sin 331 

Great Physician 30C 

Happy immortality, hope of a 453 

Happiness of the life to come 140 

Heaven 539 

and earth compared 493 

anticipation of the joys of- 312 

blessedness of 4' 8 

Christ the hght of 494 

everlasting joys of 165 

foretastes of- 241 

in view 492 

intercourse with 459 

love to saints in - - - 175 

mutual joy of Christ and 

behevers in 406 

no night in - 381 

no sorrow in 376 

oiir journey towards 423 

our home - - 402, 491 

on the joys of 337 

reunion of good men i-u - - 500 

the Christian hidden life in 383 

the felicity of 68, 429 

the glory of 75 

the Sabbath an earnest of- 462 

the saint near to 545 

Heaven's attractions 540 

Heavenly aspirations 185 

and earthly things 57 

bhss, progressive char- 
acter of 497 

conversation 209 

hope 331 

joys 63, 208 

rest 3'31, 375 

rest, meditation on the- 357 

manna, the 66 

mindcdness 72 

things, excellency of - - - 296 



INDEX. 



565 



Heavenly things, meditating on - - 319 

" recognition 73, 173 

Hiding place from tlie wind 1 96 

Holy breathings 369 

" fortitude 370 

" Ghost, joy in the 239 

" joy and praise, exercise of - - - 356 

" Spirit, our guide 87 

Home, the happy return 67 

" the Christian's 56 

Honey from the rock 64 

How to die comfortably - - 204 

" a minister should preach - - - 502 

Human life perishable 520 

Humility 58, 314 

Hymn before the sacrament 532 

ImmortaUty, the desire of 488 

" hope of 521 

Jesus, safe in - --- 405 

Judgment and eternity, prepara- 
tion for 504 

" day, the saint's happi- 
ness at the 447 

Lamb of God 505 

Life a pilgrimage 81 

" everlasting, the 310 

•' fountain of .- 227 

'• how to live a pleasant 167 

" hke a river 529 

" the water of 397 

" uncertainty of 372 

Live with eternity in view 327 

Longing soul's reflection, the 243 

Jjord, ever with the 214 

" praising the 396 

Lord's supper 379 

Lord's sujjper, institution and ben- 
efits of the 436 

Lord's supper, meditations and 

prayers on the 533, 534, 536, 537, 538 
Lord's supper, meditations on the 

341, 342, 343 

Love of Christ, contemplation of 

the 517 

Lost and found - - 245 

" soul, funeral obsequies of - - - 503 

Meditations on the eighth Psalm - 137 

Mercy for the vilest --- 48 

Message which Jesus brings 475 

My Father's house 402 

New song in glory 289 

Now or never -- 187 

On the length of the way 82 

Our duty and happiness 518 

" Father's house 492 

" great High Priest 525 

" great Intercessor 399 

" our Life 303 

" pious departed friends 377 



Paradise 77 

Pardon of sin 329 

' ' for the most guilty 38 

" for the most heinous sins- 237 

" greatest sinner 418 

Pardoning mercy 90 

Passing away 480 

Penitent on his knees, a 504 

Pious friends, loss of 176 

Pilgrims, aU are 50 

" entering the celestial city 285 

Poor in spirit, the 430 

Praising God 93 

Prayer 52, 129 

" advantages of 119 

" and praise 91, 435 

" and reading the Scriptures 461 

" before a journey 113 

" blessings of 489 

" for one in affliction 338 

" for one in trouble 111 

" for one in sickness 112 

" for gospel blessings, a 401 

" for spiritualized affections- 46 

" for the penitent - - 186 

" in the hour of Aeath 155 

" on committing the soul to 

Jesus 404 

" on, for revivals of religion - 49o 

" on 117, 279, 439, 549 

" privileges of 431 

" the man of 492 

" a, for Saturday evening - - 451 
" a, for Sabbath morning - - - 556 

" a, for Sabbath evening 559 

" a, for the morning 550 

" a, for the evening 553 

" a, for faith and trust in God 349 
" a, for God's gracious pres- 
ence 351 

" a, for increase of grace 350 

" a, for siibmission of spirit ■ 364 

" a morning 344, 365 

" an evening 346, 367 

" on going abroad 348 

" on preparation for death - - 352 

Prayers, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108 

109, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148 

149, 151, 216, 218, 220, 223, 393 

394, 395, 432, 433, 511, 527, 528 

" morning, for a family-465, 468 

evening-; 109, 110 

" for pardon of sins 115, 116 

" on receiving the sacra- 
ment 114, 115 

Reconciliation, God to be praised 

in -- 277 

Redeemed, joy of the •■ 246 

" in glory, the 171 

Redemption 53 

" near 427 

" admiration of angels- 127 

" the divine mercy m- - 36 

" the covenant of ■-" 266 



mQ 



INDEX. 



Reflection of a growing Christian - 244 
Iteligiou, friendship founded on - - 501 

" in the heart 425 

Repenting sinner, the 124 

Resignation to the Divine wiil 442 

Resurrection, joy at the 383 

Righteous eternally secure 340 

" flourishing of the 200 

" glorified bodies of the - 293 
safe 120 

" willing to die- 315 

Sabbath, a Christian's love for the 524 

Sacramental petition 362 

Saint's joy 161 

Saint's rest .193 

Salvation 125 

" blessedness of 31 

" near 409 

" of grace 531 

" the pursuit of 502 

" to the uttermost 509 

Saving grace 200 

Saviour, attractions in the 420 

" come to the 139 

" gratitude to the 510 

" in Grethsemane 27 

" in His exultation 450 

" on the love of the 337 

*' received up into glory - - - 71 



Saviour's agony 47, 2G9 

" ascension and glorifica- 
tion 308 

" condescension and love- 1S3 
" goodness to the believer 484 

" patience- - 364 

" suff'erings and glories - - 76 

Scriptures, the 128 

Soldier, the Christian 4P8 

Solitude ■- 180 

Soul, peace to the : 238 

" repose of the 166 

" the departing 205 

Spiritual decays in the Christian - 202 

" desertion 97 

Ught - 416 

Standfast, Mr., last words of 287 

Thanksgiving and praise 169 

duty of 298 

Trials - 456 

True Christian happy 60 

" penitence - 48 

•' pleasures 207 

" rest 131 

Unchangeable duration 79 

Warfare, the Christian 131 

World, crucified to the 187 



Date Due 


^f',^ 








*-■ ^ 


"i-- 






MM^-«^ 


^ 






^^^|J".J IIHlj 


ife 






f^ 
















































































































<|) 









Princeton 



Jn7ln^J"' Seminary-Spe 



"> "^012 01004 1707 



