Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



i 



n 



t 



CIRCULATION 



▲wo 



CHARACTER 






THE VOLUMES 



OP THK 



[r^ AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 



FOR THS SOOIXTT'S OOLPORTXT7R8. 



V PRIIITED BT THE 

AMERIOAN TRACT SOCIETY. 



1848. 



I -. 



/ 



218421B 



<i 



CIRCULATION 



OP 



THE VOLUMES 



OP TBI 



AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 



At the time of the formation of this Society, in 1825, 
the sale of standard, practical, eTangelical works in our 
country was small, and their circulation quite limifcpd. 
After the Society had issued about two hundred Tracts, 
attention was given, in 1827, to the publication of one or 
more volumes, as the providence of God might direct; 
and the way to issue the first was made clear by the 
donation of two hundred dollars each from four venerable 
men, thie late Hon. Stephen Van Rensselaer, Col. Richard 
Varick, CoL Henry Rutgers, and Nicholas Brown, Esq., 
to stereotjrpe and perpetuate Doddridge's Rise and Prog- 
^ ress. The demand for this work, and its evident adapta- 
M tion to be useful to the souls of men, led to the contribu- 
tion of an equal sum to stereotype and perpetuate Baxter's 
^ Saints' Rest ; then to the issuing of Pike's Persuasives to 
^} Early Piety, a duplicate cast of the stereotype plates of 
g which was presented to the Society by an " EngUsh Bap- 



4 CIRCULATION OF THE VOLUBIES. 

tist ;" then to the issuing of Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, 
and Baxter's Call to the Unconverted ; and the addition, 
from year to year, of the various evangelical works now 
published by this institution. 



The fact that the members of five evangelical denomi- 
nations united in the Publishing Committee were equally 
cordial in adopting entire the three prominent works, 
Baxter's Saints' Rest, Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, and 
Doddridge's Rise and Progress, filled their hearts with 
gratitude to God, and seemed a new testimony that he 
had called them to unite in this service. In their Annual 
Report for 1830, they say, 

" The Committee believe that a faithful and prayerful 
examination of the publications of the Society cannot 
fail to result in a firm conviction of the kindness and 
mercy to a lost world, of that dispensation of Providence 
which brought it into operation in Us present form, and 
has united in it the hearts and efibrts of so many devout 
friends of Zion from different evangelical denominations. 
The members of the Publishing Committee, though from 
as many different Christian denominations as there are 
members, are united, not speculatively only, but as the 
Committee believe in heart, in those great fundamental 
truths and doctrines of the Bible which the Society is 
engaged in diffusing. The unanimous desire of all is, 
that those truths may be circulated which God shall ren- 
der effectual in breaking the stubborn hearts of men, and 
bringing them into a sweet allegiance to Jesus Christ 
They wish to be the instruments of extenninating vice 
in all its hideous forms, and promoting a sound morality 



OBCULATION OF THE VOLUMES. 5 

throaghcmt liie community; but they hope to do this 
mainly by showing the ruin of man by sin, and the way 
of escape and salvation through the atoning blood of 
Christ and the converting and sanctifying influences of 
the Holy Spirit They find in the constitution of the 
Society and of the Publishing Committee, no obstacle 
whatever to the inculcation, in their most impressive 
forms, of all those great soul-humbling and God-exalting 
truths which constitute the sum of the Gospel ; and in- 
deed, they know of no other publications in any language, 
exclusive of the Bible, in which these great truths are 
inculcated in a manner more forcible and heart-searching. 

" The Committee have found, as they believe, in their 
own hearts, the blessedness of thus engaging with their 
fellow-laborers, of different names, in mutual endeavors 
to destroy the kingdom of Satan and advance the kingdom 
of Christ They find another argument for such a union 
in the present state of our country, especiaUy aU those 
parts of it which are settled by emigrants from different 
religious denominations and different parts of the world. 
And in the cordial and general approbation of the publi- 
cations of the Society, manifested by the evangelical 
community, and above all, in the tokens of the approba- 
tion of €rod in rendering them effectual in the conversion 
of souls to himself, the Committee find almost the only 
remaining evidence they could desire, that the seal of 
Heaven rests upon the Society, and that God has ordained 
it to be the means of unspeakable good. 

" It is a delightful fact," they add, " that as the institu- 
tion is sustained by the united efibrts of Christians of 
diflbrent names, so the accessions made to the church of 
Christ, by the divine blessing on its publications, are 



VoLCir. 



1* 



6 CIBCnLATION OF THE VOLUMES. 

througn all the various evangelical denominations. The 
ohject of the Tract is to direct the sinner, not to one de- 
nomination of Christians or another, but to the Bible and 
the Saviour — ^to pluck his soul as a brand from the burn- 
ing, and save him from the perdition of the ungodly. 
Churches who have done little in promotion of this So- 
ciety, have received accessions through its instrumen- 
tality ; and but for the fulfilment of the promise, that it is 
more blessed to give than to receive, may have been 
more richly blessed than many of those by whose alms 
and efforts the Society has been sustained." 

After five years' additional experience of the divine 
blessing on their labors, they say again, 

" While the Committee believe that the ready access 
gained to multitudes is occasioned in no small degree by 
tiie union in the Society of evangelical Christians of 
different denominations, they feel constrained to add 
their conviction, that this union, in the sight of God, 
precludes their publishing no great practical and funda- 
mental truth of the GospeL A few points pertaining to 
the ordinances and government of the church they agree 
to pass in silence ; but in reference to the plan of salva- 
tion, and the way of the sinner's acceptance with Crod, 
they are of one heart and mind. Man's utter ruin by 
sin ; the full salvation provided through the death and 
righteousness of Christ ; the solemn obligation devolving 
on all immediately to accept of this salvation by repent- 
ance and faith in Him, as the first, great, and only duty 
in which the sinner can be acceptable to God, and that 
this is done solely through the renewing of the Holy 
Spirit, are truths which the Committee desire to urge 
;with all the solemnity and force of which language is 



PECULATION OF THE VOLUMES. 7 

Bosceptible, or which the minds of writers can conceive, 
or the human heart feel. 

** Of this they believe mfctny of the Society's Tracts and 
volumes bear the surest confirmation. If the solemn 
appeals of Baxter and Alleine ; of Doddridge, Flavel, 
Richmond, and Pike; of Edwards, Brainerd, Payson, 
and other American authors, living and dead, issued by 
the Society, axe not of this description, the Committee 
look in vain to find such among all the writings of unin- 
spired men." 



In May, 1833, or about five years after the stereotyping 
of Doddridge's Rise and Progress, the total circulation 
of that work amounted to about 12,000, and of that and 
the other volumes then issued, to nearly 40,000 copies. 
The promise of usefulness from this department of be- 
nevolent exertion arrested the attention of intelligent 
Christians who were not immediately connected with the 
labors of the Society. They saw the hand of God in it ; 
its adaptation permanently to bless the souls of men and 
advance the interests of the Redeemer's kingdom ; and 
in various ways encouraged the Society to proceed in its 
prosecution. 

The Rev. Archibald Alexander, D. D., at this time 
cheered the Committee by communicating to them the 
following views of this subject 

" I rejoice to learn, that the Committee of the Ameri- 
can Tract Society are turning their attention specially to 
the preparation and circulation of small bound volumes. 
These are as really Trads (treatises) as any of the pam- 



8 CnCDUkTION OF TBS YOUTMESL 

phlets or sheets which are sent forth from the institutioa 
The Society's Tracts are now hoond for sach as pfrefer 
them in that fonn. And let other treatises be selected 
for publication, for which purpose there are many excel- 
lently adapted. I have attentively read over the list of 
books which the Committee have already put into circu- 
lation, and the selection meets with my cordial approba- 
tion. Works of a nK>re evangelical and spiritual kind do 
not exist ; and I am gratified to see that they are printed 
and bound in a neat and handsome style. I am deeply 
persuaded that great public benefit will arise from the 
appropriation of a pcntion of your funds in this way ; and 
that the event will prove, that however expensive it may 
be in the commencement, it will be wise ecomHny in the 
end. When I consider how many copies of ' Doddridge's 
Rise and Progress,' ' Baxter's Call to the Unconverted,' 
' Alleine's Alarm,' ' Edwards on the Afiections,' and such 
like works, will be circulated through the whole length 
and breadth of this land, I am filled with pleasing antici- 
pations of the good which your Society wHl be the means 
of accomplishing. 

**I do sincerely hope that the Committee will persevere 
in the prosecution of this object, and as their circum- 
stances may permit, increase the number of their publica- 
tions of this descriptioiL The success which has already 
attended your effixrts in this way, is calculated to inspire 
you with confidence to go cm in the name of the Lord." 

Again he says, five years afterwards, ** I reflect on no 
part of my life with more satisfaction than any little 
agency I have had in encouraging and promoting the 
fle ci e iy' B vdame circulatioiL I do consider the success 

as inthnately connected with the pros- 




CIRCULATION OF THE VOLUMEa 9 

perity of vital . Scriptural piety in our land ; not in any 
one church, but in all evangelical churches, and beyond 
them b3}. by conveying a sound and practical knowledge 
of the Crospel to multitudes who enjoy no public means 
of grace, or have not attended on theuL If I could do 
ai^ thing more to urge on this blessed work which has 
been so auspiciously commenced, I would cordially lend 
my aid." 

Again he says, under a later date, " The success of 
the volume circulation gladdens my heart every time I 
think of it ; and I sincerely wish that, instead of twenty 
volumes, you had a hundred in circulation." 



In Febroaiy, 1834, the Rev. William S. Plumer, D. D., 
Ihen at Petersburg, Virginia, issued a circular letter to 
clergymen and laymen of different evangelical denominsr 
tions, in the southern States, requesting an expression of 
their judgment of the desirableness of attempting to sup- 
ply the families of those States with one or more of jthe 
Society's volumes. The replies to that circular (which 
are contained in the American Tract Magazine for July, 
1834,) were unanimously expressive of a deep sense of 
the importance of the object 

In March of that year, a large meeting of clergymen 
and laymen was convened at Petersburg, Va., at which 
the Rev. George A. Baxter, D, D., presided, when it was 
onanimously resolved, " That the plan of enlarging the 
operations of the American Tract Socie^ in the Southern 
coontiy, by placing in each family one of the bound 
Tolmnes of said Society, meets the cordial approbation of 



; 



10 OSCULATION OF THE YOLUMSa 

this meeting, and is earnestly recommended to the adop- 
tion of the American Tract Society." 

Among the deeply interesting facts and statements 
presented at that meeting, was the following narrative 
of 

The InpMence of Atteine^s Moarmy related by the Reo. 

mUiam HiU, D. D. 

"I," said the venerable father, ^have abmidant cause for 
interest in this plan of circulating good and pious books. 
I lost my sainted mother when I was a youth, but not 
before the instructions which I received from her beloved 
lips had made a deep impression on my mind, an impres- 
sion which I carried with me into a college (Hampden 
Sydney) where there was then not one pious studenL 
There I often reflected, when surrounded with young 
men who scofied at religion, upon the instructions of my 
mother; and my conscience wajs frequently sore dis- 
tressed. I had no Bible, and dreaded getting one, lest it 
should be found in my possession. At last I could stand 
it no longer, and therefore requested a particular friend, 
a youth whose parents lived near, and who often went 
home, to ask his pious and excellent mother to send me 
Bome religious book. She sent me JUUin^s AHarmy aa 
old black book, which looked as if it might have been 
handled by successive generations for 100 years. 

** When I got it I locked my room, and lay on my bed 
reading it, when a student knocked at the door. And 
although I gave him no answer, dreading to be found 
reading such a book, he continued to knock and beat the 
door until I bad to open it He came in, and seeing the 
book lying on the bed, he seiied it, and examining itB 



CmCULATION OF THE VOLUMES. 11 

said, 'Why, Hill, do yoa read sach books? I 
ated, but God enabled me to be decided, and to 
er him boldly, but with much emotion, ' Yes, I do.' 
young man said, with deep agitation, < O, Hill, I 
you. You may obtain religion, but /never can. I 
! here a professor of religion, but, through fear, I dis- 
ced, and have been carried along with the wicked, 
I fear there is no hope for me.' 
le told me there were two others who, he believed, 
somewhat serious. We agreed to take up the sub- 
of religion in earnest, and seek it together. We 
id the other two, and held a prayer-meeting in my 
on the next Saturday afternoon. And O, what a 
jr-meeting! We tried to pray, but such prayer I 
• heard the like of. We knew not how to pray, but 
to do it It was the first prayer-meeting I had ever 
I of. We tried to sing, but it was in a most sup- 
ed manner, for we feared the other students. But 
found it out, and gathered round the door, and made 
a noise that dome of the officers had to come and 
rse them. And so serious was the disturbance that 
'resident, the late excellent Rev. Dr. John Blair 
I, had to investigate the matter at prayers, that even- 
n the prayer hall. When he demanded the reason 
i riot, a ringleader in wickedness got up and stated, 
t was occasioned by three or four of the boys hold- 
prayer-meeting, and they were determined to have 
ch doings there. 

he good President heard the statement with deep 
on, and looking at the youths charged with the sin 
lying, with tears in his eyes he said, < O, is there 
a state of things in this college ? Then God has 



IS CIRCULATION OF THE VOLUMES. ' 

come near to us. My dear young friends, you Bhiall be 
protected. You shall hold your next meeting in my 
parlor, and I will be one of your number.' Sure enough 
we had our next meeting in his parlor, and half the col- 
lege were there. And there began a glorious revival of 
religion, which pervaded the college, and spread into the 
country around. 

"Many of those students became ministers of the 
Gospel. The youth who brought me AUeine's Alarm 
from his mother, was my friend the Rev. Wm. Calhoun, 
still preaching in this State ; and he who interrupted me 
in reading the work, is my venerable and worthy friend, 
the Rev. Dr. Bljrthe, now President of a college in Indi- 
ana. Another was Rev. Clement Read, of this State ; 
and a fifth, the late Rev. Carey Allen, of Kentucky. 
Truly," said Dr. Hill, "I have good reason to feel a deep 
interest in the proposed work. May God grant it suc- 
cess!" 



At a meeting of the Society's Executive Committee, to 
adopt the Annual Report for May, 1834, Dr. Plumer was 
present, and conununicated the result of the correspond- 
ence and the meeting at Petersburg, above referred to ; 
and at the anniversaiy the following preamble and resolu- 
tion were offered by the Rev. James Milnor, D. D., chair- 
man of the Conmiittee, and unanimously adopted; viz. 

" Conmiunications having been received from highly 
respectable clerg3rmen and laymen of different denomi- 
nations, and some of this Society's important Auxiliaries, 
in the southern States, urging increased activity in circu- 
lating its publications, and giving assxu'ance of their 
cooperation, should the Society endeavor to supply eveiy 



CIRCULATION OF THE VOLUMES. 13 

accessible family in those States with one or more of its 
bound volmnes, which have been found peculiarly accept- 
able and useful, Therefore, 

** Resolved, That this Society, without relaxing in any 
degree its efforts for pagan lands, and for other portions 
of our own country, do cordially respond to the call of 
our brethren in the southern States; and relying upon 
the blessing of God, and the zealous cooperation of the 
South, will endeavor, with the least possible delay, be- 
sides the continued circulation of Tracts, to place one or 
more of the Society's bound volumes in every family 
wiUiog to receive the same, in the States of Maryland, 
Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, and 
the Territory of Florida." 



In the year ending May, 1835, the Executive Commit- 
tee issued a circular letter to prominent clergymen and 
laymen in different parts of the United States, requesting 
an expression of their opinion on the subject of the 
general circulation of the Society's volumes throughout 
the country; the replies to which circular (inserted in the 
Tract Magazine extra for August, 1835,) encouraged the 
Society unanimously to resolve, "That, in accordance 
with suggestions of Auxiliary Societies, public meetings, 
and respected individuals in various parts of the country, 
this Society will endeavor, as soon as practicable, to svjh 
jhf vnJOi its standard evangelical volumes ike entire accessible 
popvUatUm of (he Untied States.^ 



From the replies to the circular letter just noticed, and 
other correspondence at the time, the following selections 

TaLCir. 2 



14 CmClJLATION OF THE VOLUMES. 

are made, sa containing thoughts of permanent, practical 
value, in the prosecution of this department of labor. 



Hints on the Origin^ Charader, and Ustfrdness of (k 
Sodehfs Volumes. Fumitked by a Clergyman. 

<^ Their origin, at least in most cases, was remarkable. 
The Rise and Progress was the work of long labor, and 
was carefully reviewed and corrected by Watts and some 
of the best men of the day, before it was published. 
Both Baxter^s Call and Saints' Rest were written * quite 
on the verge of heaven.' At least two of these books 
were written, or much improved, in the cold dunge<»is 
prepared by bitter persecutors, who, like Paul's perse- 
cutors, knew not that thus they would furnish edification 
to the church in all coming ages. 

" The CHARACTER of tho volumes themselves is excel- 
lent On this subject I must refer you to Dr. Alexander's 
letter, and Dr. Porter's remarks on the character of the 
Saints' Rest, [see below,] Chahners' Introductory Essay to 
the Call, and indeed the preface to ahnost every old 
edition of the works themselves. 

" The USEFULNESS of these works may be learned in 
part from their extensive circulation. In three years 
from the first publication of AUeine's Alarm, there were 
sold no less than seventy thousand copies. Baxter's Call 
lias undoubtedly had a still more extended circulation, 
being translated into more languages. The Saints' Rest 
has also held on its steady course. The Pilgrim's Prog- 
ress, and Rise and Progress, have not been a whit be- 
hind. I have thought that if pious men at the time when 
these books were written, and especially, if the authon 



CIRCULATION OP VOLUMES. 15 

•of them could have availed themselves of the agency of 
such an institution as the American Tract Society for 
giving them circulation, how they would have rejoiced in 
it. Of the pious Alleine, his biographer says, that ' after 
he was unable to walk, he was carried to visit the schools, 
almshpuses, and the godly poor, especially the widows ; 
to whom he would give money, and with whom he would 
converse and pray, huying quantities of catechisms and 
other smaU hooks to he distiibtUed among them,* O for an 
army of such Tract distributers ! Baxter was distinguished 
alike for his zeal in the work of preparing and distribut- 
ing good books. He gave in one year a hundred pounds 
to buy Bibles for the poor." 

So large a portion of the churches, adds this clergy- 
man, have been converted by reading, and it must supply 
to so great an extent the deficiency of the preached word, 
that it is a wonder more has not been done to circulate 
good books. 



Ihnn the Preface to a new edition of Owen im SpiriJbwl- 
ndndedness, hy Rev, E, Porter, D. D, 

" In the little library of my father was Baxter's Saints' 
Rest, the reading of which, on account of its simplicity, 
itp rhetorical vivacity, its Christian fervor and pungency, 
made an indelible impression on my mind. This im- 
pression probably had more efficacy in the formation of 
my subsequent intellectual and moral habits, than any 
other means, except parental influence. It is doubtless 
owing to these circumstances, in part, that I have alwa3r8 
felt so high a regard for Baxter and his writings ; and 
also that the period when he lived, especially as it is 



16 CIBCULATION OF VOLUMES. 

described in his autobiography, [contained substai 
in the Society's I^fk i^ Baxter^ has been more inter 
to me tiian any other in the whole compass of hi 
But valuable as the SaitUa* Rest has been to me i 
multitudes df others, its influence must have beei 
limited, had it remained in its ori^nal tbnn, a < 
volume of nioce than 800 pages. For all the bene 
this work, readers in general have been indebted 1 
Fawcetfs abridgmenL'* 



Books ike wuans ofBarkrs Concfrsiofu 

He was awakened by reading Bunnys Resoli 
\&A to his father by a poor man; Dr. Sibb*s B 
Reed, brought to his Others door by a pedlar, gave 
lively appr^ension of the mystery of redemption : 
little {Hece of Perkii»' worit on Repentance, The ^ 
living and Dying Well, and Government of the To 
lent him by a servant, were blessed in condrmiz 
laith. *^ TToiSy^ he says, "^ vHkovi any vmru but 
MOf €SodpUaatd to nsotre wtefir kiauel/r and they 
brought to him by a laborer, a pedlar, and his 6 



/Vm tkft Ar. mOiam Mtmk. D. D^ Bi^p of the 
aUnd I^pistopoi Ckwrdk, Firginku 

'^l bate ever hi^^y esteemed the American 
Societf , and wsh well to all its enterprises, and 
Ihift JOB BVf tngge^ an cfiectnal method of inore 
lip §ni UhaBDe. Ab to all of those questions ir 

the duMia blcneBB of circulating 
gswt need of them, the b€ 




CIRCULATION OP VOLUBIBS. 17 

)f such benevolent eflforts, but one answer can be given, 
^ould to God such large Tracts could be showered 
lown upon the South and West" 



Fhnn Rev, M, P. Parks j of the Methodist Episcopal Church, 
Professor in Randolph Macon CoUegCj Vcu 

" In regard to the publications of the American Tract 
Society, so far as I have had opportunity to become ac- 
[juainted with them, I do most cordially approve of them, 
Bind consider them as eminently suited, by their circula- 
tion, to supply the lack of living teachers. If circulated, 
they cannot fail to be read; and when read, they ^i^ll 
produce, probably, not much less frequently than the 
word preached, some saving impressions. What little 
experience I have had has convinced me that the pastor 
of a congregation can hardly avail himself of a more 
certain means of usefulness, than the loaning of useful 
books to the members of his congregation, or indeed 
placing them in their hands by any other means; and 
scarcely less happy results would follow the distribution 
of them by a judicious agent of the Tract Society. The 
immediate effect of reading such books would, in many 
cases, be the least benefit that would result: the hdbU of 
reading, the method, industry, enlightened principle, and 
active benevolevice, which would, in many cases, be pro- 
duced, should be taken into the account" 



Prom Rev, J. B, Taylor, of the Baptist Church, Rich- 
mond, Vcu 

" I consider it an object of superlative importance to 
give free circulation to such books as have been pub- 
Tot Cir. 2 



18 CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 

ILshed by tihe American Tract Society. It is not antf 
important that men be awakened to think of eternal 
things, but that their views of divine truth be intelligent 
and scriptural ; and I know of no works so well fitted to 
inform, as well as to awaken, as those of the Society. 
The only question, then, which arises, is — ^Is the plan of 
universal distribution among our southern States practi- 
cable ? / believe U isP 



From Rev. John H, Ckurch, D. />., of (he Congregatiand 

Church, JVew Hampshire, 

^ I feel much interested in the communication of your 
Executive Board, on circulating your standard volumes. 
It is a good, a noble design, to spread divine truth, by 
such means, through our whole land. I hope it will be 
executed with all practicable speed. Such volumes are 
exceedingly needed, and may be blessed to the salvation 
of many in the present and future generations. The 
progress of error must be checked by disseminating evan- 
gelical truth, and the method you have adopted is well 
fitted for this purpose. Only agents and means are now 
wanted to carry forward the work, and, by the blessing 
of Heaven, achieve immense good." 



Drom Rev. •Alexander Proudfil, D. Z>., of the ^sociate 
Presbyterian Church, Scdem^ JV*. Y. 

"Although * Baxter's Rest' has been familiar to me 
from my childhood, and probably several hundred copies 
of it have passed through my hands, yet I recently read 
every page of it with great delight, and I hope, with spir- 
itual profit I have procured, at different times, copies of 



CIRCULATION OP VOLUMSa 19 

the ^ fissays to do Good,' * Doddridge's Rise,' Baxter's 
works, and ' Persuasives to Early Piety,' on purpose to 
loan among my people, particularly among the youth, and 
iiave found that they were read with great avidity, and, I 
trust, saving advdntage. Indeed, my attention, for more 
than forty years, has been directed to the promotion of 
religion, by the distribution of Tracts and volumes on 
practical subjects, in our town and through the frontier 
settlements ; and intelligence has been so fi-equently re- 
ceived of their happy results, both in the conversion of 
sinners and in refreshing and edifying the saint, that I 
will very cheerfully cooperate with your Society, as op- 
portunity offers, in this labor of love." 



Drom Bev, James Bichards, D, />., Theological Seminary^ 

Avbimiy JSt, Y, 

" I highly approve of the project of publishing what 
you denominate the Evangdiccd Family Ubrary, The 
selection you have made is excellent, and a wide diffusion 
of such writings as it contains, I should regard as pe- 
coliarly important at the present time. The public stand 
in need of something which is deeply practical, spiritual, 
and substantial ; something which is safe and yet soul- 
stirring. Great as the march of mind is in these days, I 
doabt if any thing better could be done for the cause of 
soond piety than a republication and extensive circulation 
of the works you have named." 



FWmii Beo. Archibald Alexander, D. Z>., Theological Semi- 

nary, Princeton, JVi J 

*^1 have perused your circular, addressed to me, with 



20 CIBCULATION OF VOLUMES. 

heartfelt satisfaction. I rejoice sincerely in the socooN 
with which you are enabled to prosecute the benevolent 
plan of supplying every family, in several of the southom 
states, with a copy of one or more of your bound volumes. 
I have no doubt but that the light of eternity will discover 
that tliis enterprise has been the means of bringing, 
through Christ, many sons and daughters to glory. As 
the destitute cannot be everywhere supplied with living 
preachers, let the pious dead be sent to speak to them 
* all the words of this life.' Send Baxter, and Flavel, and 
AUeinc, and Edwards, and Bunyan, to preach to them 
that Gospel by which they have long since been guided 
to heaven. And if every village and remote setd^nent 
had a faitliful pastor, what better aid could they have than 
one of these precious volumes, in every family of their 
respective charges ? The truth is, that such books do 
more good where the Gospel is preached, than where its 
sound is seldom heard; because there a taste for such 
reading has been generated. In every part of the coun- 
try, therefore, these books will be found exceedingly use- 
ful ; and there is no room to doubt that the effort should 
be extended to every slate and territory in the Union, I 
do not, I confess, know of any means in our power by 
which 80 much good may immediately be effected ; and as 
human life is short, and men are perishing for lack of 
knowledge, there should be no delay nor procrastination 
of this work. Let it be urged forward with a zeal and 
energy proportioned to the magnitude of the interests at 
stake. Let agents be found running in all directions 
bearing in their hands these books, which explain the true 
and only method of salvation, 
w The work which you propose is great, and no one can 



CIRCULATION OF VOLUHiB. SI 

biow long it may take to accomplish it Exert all your 
gy, but guard against a collapse of zeal." 



n Rev. Jod Parker^ D. D., of the Presbyterian Church, 

PhUcMphicL 

Without doubt a general circulation of these books 
Id accomplish great good, and for the following rea^ 

: 1. The books themselves are of a character which 
mends them to all who are friendly to vital godliness, 
'hey would place the means of grace, to a consider- 

extent, in thousands of families, who probably will 
enjoy a preached Gospel in the lifetime of this 
jration." 



n (he Hon, Benjamin F. BuUer, •Attorney- General of 

the United States. 

The volumes published by the Society comprise such 
m as Baxter's Saints' Rest, Bunyan's Pilgrim's Prog- 
, Doddridge's Rise and Progress, the mere titles of 
;h, as enumerated in the last annual report, will be 
cient to satisfy the Christian community of their 
ing value. 

The whole collection can be furnished by the Society 
a average cost of about thirty cents per volume ; and 
ay be safely affirmed that it is impossible to difiuse, in 
other way, so much important instruction at so cheap 
te. To say that the supplying of every American 
ly with one or more of the bound volumes issued by 
• Society would subserve the interests of piety, is only 
isert what most persons at all acquainted with their 
ents will readily admit ; and if the difiusion of an in- 



CIRCULATION OF VOLCMEB. 



toUigont Christian faith, and the exemplaiy practice of 
ChriHtian virtue, be calculated to pr6mote the haj^niieBB 
of individuals, and of society at large, as is generalljr al- 
lowed to bo the case, then it is not less certain that trm 
palriotism is equally interested in this benevolent efSaiL* 



From Bev. WilWm S. Humer, D, Z>., of the Prtdnftmm 

Churchy BcdHmore, 

^ Your favor was received with emotions of humiliating 
gratitude. It aiSected me as the near approach of the 
wagons from Egypt affected Jacob. My spirit revived. I 
fell on my knees and gave thanks, with tears of joy, to 
the Father of mercies. I thought of the saying of one, to 
whom, under God, I am much indebted: *We are bound 
to thank God always for you, brethren, as it is meet, be- 
cause your faith groweth exceedingly, and the charity of 
every one of you all aboundeth.' 

"I believe that the whole matter is from God; and that 
your Committee ccmnot innocently hold hack from the great 
enterprise you are contemplating. My reasons are the 
following : 

" 1. The conversion and growth in grace of souls in this 
land does much depend on an extensive distribution of 
such books as those you circulate. 

"2. There is no other institution in this land whose 
object it is to furnish religious family libraries. 

" 3. Even if private capitalists should furnish the books 
for the market, it would be at such prices as the poor can 
ill afford to pay. You have the means of doing the work 
cheaply. You have also a good reputation for economy 
and efficiency. 



CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. S8 

L Appointed, in God's providence, the alnidners of & 
•n's bounty for a great work, and bound continually 
!ckon on the hosts of God to glorious war, you may 
nnocently give a reluctant assent to any plan that 
ars wise and efficient Indeed, if you would escape 
, you must be diligent in devising methods of enlist- 
he whole nation in this and such like good works, 
must lead on public opinion. 

>. If you do not practise thus, I believe God will lay 
Society aside as a worn-out and useless engine, and 
raise up another instrumentality that will be more 
ent Please to read Esther 4 : 14. 
u The effkd of these books, if widely circulated, will 
lost saltdary on the people. Many of them, such as 
ards on the Affections, and the life of Brainerd, will 
30 from carnal security old professors. Many of them 
give strength and stability to the Christian character 
>ung converts, and especially to such as have a feeble 
3tiy, or a state of things tending to extravagance, 
ine's Alarm, Pilgrim's Progress, and Edwards on the 
itions have great excellency in this respect Infidels, 
can be induced to read Keith on Prophecy, will at 
• respect the claims of Christianity; and if they will 
half of your publications, they will find the bum- 
vords in their consciences. Again, people who can- 
■ead will, by receiving such a book, or such books, 
the desire of learning to read wakened up in their 
s. Thus, also, many parents will be reminded of the 
rtance of having their children taught to read. Many 
cannot read, will yet be directly benefited by the 
8. Two sisters received a copy of Alleine's Alarm — 
er of them could read — ^they carried it to a neighbor 



CmCULATION OF VOLUMES. 

and he read it in their hearing — they were impressed, an 
soon both were hopefully brought into the marvellous lig^ 
of the GrospeL Again, many proud and haughty scornei 
who attend no place of worship, will yet buy and lea 
these books ; and many who will not encourage their fim 
ilies to go to church, will buyusuch books f<M' them, u 
encourage the reading of them. I could recite son 
affecting incidents under this head. I will just say, thi 
a man and his wife, who seldom, if ever, went to ai 
church, were thus lead to a prayer-meeting held by a dt 
tributer on the Sabbath, after he had given them a book- 
then to church — ^then to a hope of salvation. An uifid 
of wealth, who discourages the attendance of his fami 
at church, and whose house the agent feared to approac 
bought several volumes, saying he was willing his fami 
should read on the subject of religion. Again, the effe 
of these books has been felt in tippling-houses, and sue 
like places. A keeper of a grog-shop spent three da] 
reading these books. Again, the sick and the afflict! 
will thus be visited and cheered. Our great Naval Ho 
pita], at Norfolk, is an instance on a large scale. The 
sands of such occur. In fine, good must result, or e^ 
be prevented, wherever these books are read. 

** 7. Preachers, seeing their people becoming a readii 
people, will perceive the importance of giving themselvi 
to closer study, that they may be able to give sound ai 
copious instruction. Thus the character of the minist 
will be elevated. 

** 8. In many cases these books will be carried to scho 
and used as school-books. One man who opposed tl 
work of love is a school-teacher, many of whose pup: 
are reading, in the hearing of the whole school, the 

4 



OIRCTJLATION OF VOLUMES. 25 

books, instead of ordinary school-books. The chil- 
generally are pleased with the neatness of the vol- 
3, not less, perhaps, than with what one called ' the 
y reading ' in the book. Thus our schools will be 
oved in moral character. 

J. This enterprise, more than almost any other, will 
igoodmenafd^erentdenomiriMms, Pious members 
le society of Friends, zealous and humble members 
le Protestant Episcopal, Regular Baptist, Protestant 
lodist, and Presbyterian churches, are almost invari- 
warm and useful friends ; and many, very many, of 
iear brethren of the Methodist Episcopal church are 
i whit behind their neighbors. Now, how important 
;ep all good men working together as much as pos- 
I in these days of division and coldness of love. 

10. These books will never lose iheirpotoer until they 
their existence. The famous copy of Alleine's Alarm, 
hich you have heard so much as being the means of 
rival in two colleges and many congregations in Vir- 
i, in the days of the Rev. John Blair Smith, was still 
le a few years ago, and when read in the presence of 
ung lady, made her cry aloud for mercy, and soon she 
ght she found Christ The famous copy of FlavePs 
ions, of which I told you last spring, is still in exist- 
, and has been the means of converting a poor wick- 
inner, who is now a valuable minister of the Gospel 
e Methodist Episcopal church. 

11. The re/fex influence of the enterprise on the re- 
us character of the voluntary distributers will be, in 
St every instance, admirable. I know no instance to 
jontrary of this remark, and I know some very strik- 
instances of spiritual improvement from this cause. 

LCir. ^ 



26 CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 

We maj confidently expect to see thus raised up a harvest 
of worldng, enterprising men. This, in its ultimate results, 
will be a veiy important benefit 

^ 12. Lastly, this enterprise, boldly carried on, will, 
more than any one thing I now think of, cause your So- 
ciety to be generally regarded ajs one of the grand and 
commanding institutions of this great and growing coun- 
try. Every family in the nation will thus become ac- 
quainted with you, and feel your good and kindly influ- 
ences in their own happy little circles ; and thus you will 
remove the vulgar prejudice that Tract operatimis aie 
penny matters; and having so many and so warm friends, 
you can go on to assist in filling the world with the know- 
ledge of God. 

" It may be diffUvU to gd (he money, but a difficulty is 
not an impossibility. It will not be half so difficult to get 
all the money necessary, as it is for ont rich man to enter 
heaven. See Matt 19 :24. And shall not rich men try 
to go to heaven ? And shall not you try to get tiiis 
money? 

^ And now, < What man is there that is fearful and faint- 
hearted ? let him go and return unto his house, lest his 
brother's heart faint as well as his heart' Deut 20 : 8." 



About the time the above correspondence was receiv- 
ed, the Baptist General Convention, at their Triennial 
meeting in Richmond, Va., unanimously adopted the fol- 
lowing minute, viz. 

" Whereas, the American Tract Society are engaged 
in placing one or more of their bound volumes in every 
family willing to receive them, within the southern states ; 



CIRCULATION OP VOLUMEa 27 

md whereas this Society is contemplating the extension 
y£ this work throughout the United States ; therefore 

" Resolved, That this Convention approve of these ope- 
rations of the American Tract Society, and warmly com- 
mend them to the prayers and active support of all the 
friends of the Redeemer." 



We here insert the foUotmng from an Address of Rev. 
Leonard Bacour D, D., of the Congregational Church, 
New Haven, Conn,, before ihe Society, May, 1841. 

^ He should like to see two catalogues published by the 
Society. 

" 1. A catalogue of subjects of the volumes, that would 
ihow their interesting variety and adaptation to all the 
varying states of mind. There were such books as Jen- 
rns, Leslie, Lyttelton, Bogue, and Morison, to meet and 
"efute the infidel. -There is a large class of books like 
Baxter's *Call,' and Alleine's * Alarm,' to awaken the 
houghtless. There are books of Pike, and others, to 
ruide the inquiring ; others, in large variiety, to instruct 
ind establish the Christian; and others still, like the Moth- 
!r fljid Child at Home, and the series of Scripture Biog- 
u{^y and other Christian Memoirs, to bless the domestic 
;ircle, and teach by example the path of the righteous. 
AThat must be the effect of scattering annually hundreds 
>f thousands of volumes such as these through the com- 
Qunity. Why, it was enough to move old Roger Williams 
irom his grave, to hear that 10,000 such boolcs had been 
»laced in Rhode Island the last year ! 

** 2. A chronological catalogue. Who are ihe men that 
re thus installed as teachers in all our families, and when 



28 CIRCULATION OF Y0LUAIB3. 

did they live ? It is a striking fact that Iht eaiiiesl pub- 
lications suited to the practical purposes of the Society, 
are the productions of men who were cotemporary with 
the settlement of this country. Baxter's Saints' Rest was 
the first written of the series. Let us call up Beater, and 
imagine him as he was, thin and spare, looking in upon 
this aj9sembly. He sees us planning to scatter his ' Call' 
and ^ Saints' Rest,' which were translated into many of the 
languages of the earth while he lived, through a country 
of boundless extent, having scarce a name when he went 
to glory. He lived long enough to know that his * Call 
to the Unconverted ' was the second book ever printed in 
this country, translated by Eliot into the language of the 
Massachusetts Indians — Eliot's Indian Bible being the 
first; and he heard before he departed, that an Indian 
chief, who was converted by a blessing on that book, died 
in the faith while reading its pages. 

'* Bunyan was next, of the same class with Flavel and 
the noble men who were imprisoned for their non-con- 
formity and strict adherence to the truth. And who was 
Bunyan^ He was the man who has written the only 
allegorical poem which has been acceptable alike to the 
common people and to minds of the highest cultivation. 
He was one of the men who raised the storm that shook 
Ahe world, and brought down religion for the people — ^the 
whole people. The devil outwitted himself, says Baxter, 
when he shut 2,000 ministers out of the pulpit, and put 
many of them in prison ; for when they could no longer 
preach, they would write books for the people, and thus 
undermine his kingdom. And that wonderful vision which 
Bunyan saw, brighter than any other but that seen by him 
of Patmos, though Bunyan saw not what we now do— 



CIECULATION OF VOLUMES. 29 

shall be the wonder and delight of lisping infancy, and 
the joy of hoary age, till the * pilgrims ' all reach the ce- 
lestial city. 

" Passing over a century, we come down to the days of 
Doddridge and Edwards, Whitefield and Wesley, known 
as the great revival, and we find the choice productions of 
their giant minds ; and still another generation, and we 
reach WQherforot^ that illustrious morning-star of a new 
day to England. How much does England and the world 
owe to him. Single out the cotemporaries of Chatham 
and Pitt whose fame is most exalted, and the name of 
Wiiberforce will eclipse them all. His Practical View 
vna the occasion of the commencement of a revival of 
evangelical piety in England; and though written for the 
titled and the learned, it is widely known and justly prized 
here, where titles are unJ^own, and where all are sove- 
reigns. 

" Next we come to Pearce, with whom commenced the 
efforts of that era of modern missions, when Carey preach- 
ed his memorable sermon, " Attempt great things, expect 
great things." And in a later age we have a constellation 
of holy men, Buchanan, Martyn, Payson, Krummacher, 
Nevins, and others of different nations and communions, 
all bringing their large minds and warm hearts in contact 
with the people, 

'^ It is the productions of such minds that we are scat- 
tering far and wide over this land. They are too precious 
to be given away ; we sell them at their cost When the 
effort was made last autumn at New Haven, which re- 
sulted in the circulation of 4,000 volumes, I remarked to 
my people that I expected it would result in their be- 
coming a more reading people, a better instructed and 



VoLCir. 



8* 



90 CIRCULATION OF Y0LUMS8. 

indoctrinated people than ever before, and that I antici- 
pated a large blesding on the community. We have be- 
gun to receive the fulfilment of that expectation. Among 
other instrumentalities, this has been highly efficient, 
under the Divine blessing, in bringing hundreds in that 
community into a hopeful connection with Christ, and now 
with his churcL" 



In the summer of 1834, Mr. Seelt Wood, who was 
then contemplating preparation for tiie minisby, wm W 
to devote himself to this department of the Society's la- 
bors. He soon perceived the desirableness of supplying 
families, not with one volume only^ but with a library of 
good books ; and of securing, where practicable, a public 
presentation of the character and value of the volumes, 
by which method Hot only were the people prepared to 
welcome and purchase them, but intelligent members 
of the churches were often induced voluntarily to give 
their cooperation with the agent, in visiting and supply- 
ing the whole congregation. In May, 1837, he presented 
the following sketch of the way in which he had been led, 
and the success graciously granted to his efforts. 

" In first engaging in this work, I was led by * a way 
that I knew notf and a kind and merciful Provfdence 
has attended all its progress. My father having, from 
want of health, resigned the pastoral charge, obtained a 
box of the volumes of the American Tract Society to 
circulate, and being unable to prosecute the sales alone, 
I accompanied him ; and we actually spent six loeeks in 
making sales to the value of $80, nearly one-half being 



CIECULATION OF VOLUMBa 31 

jchased by clergymen for their own use and for Sun- 
y-school libraries. These circumstances led me to a 
lemn perusal of many of the volumes, and to feel 
«ply the importance of their more general circulation, 
obtained a new supply, requested clergymen to give 
iblic notice of my object, and prosecuted the sales for 
ree months, receiving only a compensation sufficient to 
eet my travelling expenses. 

^ In compliance with a request from the Society, I then 
icepted an agency for nine counties, a field afterwards 
creased to twenty-five counties, and for the first eight 
onths pursued the same method as last mentioned, cir- 
dating books to the value of some hundreds of dollars. 
^ Still I perceived that the process was slow ; that the 
ass of the population were not reached ; and felt that 
me plan must be devised for arousing the aUentum of 
I whole commimUy ; for presenting the bearings of the 
terprise on the moral condition of undying millicms; 
d for extending its blessings, as far as I should proceed, 
every accessible family, 

^Necessity was laid upon me, and I requested the 
Ivilege of addressing the people on the Sabbath and 
ler suitable occasions, on the influence of the press — 
power and danger as wielded by the enemies of God 
the adaptation of the Society's volumes to meet the 
mts of the community — their influence, under the 
vine blessing, in forming the character of the young, 
tablishing believers, and leading sinners to repentance 
d faith in Christ I endeavored not only to gain the 
ofidence of the people of Grod in the enterprise, but to 
list their personal^ voluntary services in carrying the 
ssages of grace to every family, and ofiering the word of 




33 CIRCUI*ATION OF VOLUMES. 

pal\'ation to every individual. I acknowledge with 
tilde that the privilege of publicly presenting the 
has, with a single exception, in every case been gi 

** At the first meeting where the object was pres 
ten individuals, with no compensation but the pleas 
doing good, pledged themselves to go, and, by pe 
visitation, explain the natiu*e and importance of the 
to every family in the town, offering the volumes a 
doors, at the same prices as at the Society's Depo 
The result was, that in one week 500 volumes, 
$125, were circulated among all ranks and classes 
people. Many who feared not God, and who wou 
have procured such volumes at a bookstore, or ) 
hand of a stranger, when they saw their friend 
neighbors, for the simple purpose of doing good, pi 
ing the Rise and Progress of Religion in the So 
Call to the Unconverted, AUeine's Alarm, and k 
works, purchased them to no inconsiderable amoun 

" Having pursued this method for two years, w 
greater success than I at first anticipated, I subi 
witli its results and bearings upon all classes of the 
munity, to the consideration, not of the Society on] 
of every firiend of virtue and morality and the vital 
ests of the church of Christ By this means thew 
circulated, in the second year of my agency, endinc 
183C, with some assistance from my father, 20,0C 
umes; and during the past year, with the aid < 
associate, Mr. S. S. White, for nine months, of ai 
Mr. Isaac Swift, for six months, and the coope 
of 1,000 voluntary distributers, more than 140 town 
been visited, and 43,500 volumes sold, amounti 

tio^ 4a'' 



CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 33 

^t this time, Mr. Wood and Mr. White, at the request 
the Committee, transferred their efficient services to 
i western states, where a wide, and to a great extent, 
occupied field, presented itself before them. 



The volume circulation was also energetically prese- 
tted, as had been proposed, by the Virginia Tract 
)ciety, and in other parts of the southern states ; the 
merican Tract Society at Boston, and other branches 
id auxiliaries, gave a vigorous cooperation ; clergymen 
id others voluntarily engaged in supplying their own 
)iigregations, among whom a clergyman of the Re- 
fined Dutch Church, in Columbia county, N. Y., circu- 
ted 1,300 volumes ; six agents, including those above- 
uned, devoted themselves wholly to this service ; and in 
ie year ending May, 1837, upwards of 230,000 volumes 
ere circulated, a result which had doubtless been facili- 
ted by uniting fifteen of the standard volumes in an 
Evangelical Family Library." 



In February, 1836, an effort was commenced to obtain 
Jids for the exclusive object of providing a stock of 
)oks in the Depository, which resulted in securing up- 
irds of $36,000 for that purpose. " These subscrip- 
)ns were made for the express object of furnishing the 
K5iety with a stock of stereotype plates and volumes, 
be sold at such prices thai (he Socieb/'s means should 
iiher he increased nor diminished by the preparation and 
tdng of all that are sold, and at the same prices in all 
rts qfthe country. The work thus assumes wholly a 



31 CflRCfULATION OF VOLUMES. 

benevolent character; and as such the friends 
and man are induced voluntarily to enlist in it, 
their efficient cooperation as a means of advan 
cause and kingdom of Christ; while the mas 
people are far more ready to purchase when tl 
are issued and brought to their d^rs solely for i 
benefit, irrespective of all motives of pecuniar] 
ment" 



The number of books circulated by the I 
agents and the voluntary cooperation of Christi 
led the Committee at this time to change their 
pi^edure in respect to copy-right volumes^ foi 
of which they had paid a given sum on each co] 
lated. They say, "The rights of authors to 
mercantile value of their productions, it would b 
to question ; as it would be to deny that, among 
umes held by copy-right, are some of those best 
for usefulness in the Society's channels of cir 
The fact, however, that the extent of the Society' 
circulation depends in a great measure upon the i 
^orts of Chrigtians, and the exertions of agents s 
by the Society, irrespective of the merits of each 
lar volume, led the Committee to propose to all 
prietors of the copy-rights of volumes circulate 
Society, to receive outright a specific sum as 
sation for permission to the Society to circuls 
volumes indefinitely, the proprietors reserving 1 
of issuing the same at pleasure in any and i 
channelB. In accordance with these princip 
Soeiety purchased the copy-rights of all the yi 




CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 35 

lich they had airanged to pay a premium on each copy 
nied." 



Previous to the close of the year 1837, the Rev. R. S. 
ooK, the failure of whose voice for a time, had caused 
m to suspend his stated ministrations in Berkshire 
rnnty, Mass., providentially called at the Tract House 
^ obtain volumes for his own use. The thought there 
xurred to him, that through these volumes he might 
ill preach to his people, and likewise return to neigh- 
)ring congregations the kindness which their pastors 
ere conferring by occasionally supplying his pulpit In 
Y)8ecuting these efforts, he soon perceived that the So- 
ety's volume circulation was a means admirably adapted 
r usefulness ; he was cheered with the cooperation of 
inisterial brethren and Christians, and pursued the work 
1 most of the county was supplied ; in reference to 
bich he says, in his report presented November 1, 
i38, 

"I cannot but believe that the Lord has employed this 
Btrumeotality in effecting more good, present and ulti- 
Bte, than all my labors as a pastor could have accom- 
ished. It is not too much to say, that most of the 
ecious revivals enjoyed in that county, during the last 
inter, were greaUy promoted by the influence of this 
iterprise on distributers and readers, attended with the 
aly Spirit. I have heard of many cases of hopeful 
nversion by this means, and know of at least three 
itances where God has evidently blessed volumes which 
lave given to these who might have perished without 
^a The amount circulated in the county, including 



J6 ClKCULATIOiN OF VOLUMES. 

more than 100 libraries, is nearly 7,000 YolomeB, in yth» 
about one thousand seven hundred dollars." |i 



Mr. Cook soon entered on his duties as General Agest 
of the Society for the volume circulation. In June, 1838, 
he presented the object in the diy of Hartford, Conn^ and 
the results of the effort were reported as follows : 

** The effort was commenced with trembling, and 1 
trust, in reliance on God. It cannot be looked upcm now 
but with rejoicings by every friend of Christ and the 
truth. I want your help to praise Grod for his smfles 
upon this enterprise, and the rich blessing extended, 
through it, to this noble city. 

" The object was presented before the several congre- 
gations of the city, and followed by a union meeting of 
great interest in the Centre church. The next moraing 
about sixty voluntary distributers entered upon the work 
simultaneously, in the different sections of the tcywn, and 
have been faithful and untiring in their efibrts to do good 
to souls. It would have gladdened your heart to see the 
tearful and flashing eye, or heard the subdued and solemn 
voice, as one and another related the incidents of their 
self-denying service, and expressed their interest in this 
work as connected with the eternal destinies of immortal 
beings. I know of no exception to the remark, that the 
distributers are decidedly quickened and profited by their 
engagement in this good cause. 

"I have only time to communicate the fact, that in 
Hartford — a town better supplied with religious reading, 
perhaps, than any ot!ier of its population in the country— 
about 4,000 volumes have been sold, indtuMng 120 sets <if 
ike EvangdUal Fcamly Library, in vedve abotU $1,200. 



I 



GOaaLATlOV OF yOLUMES. 87 

'^The qaestiDB is now setQed as to the adc^pMan of 

^ Mlume enierpriae to Oie watUs ofeiHeSf and the pradi' 

cdilHj/ of carrying out the scheme for the supply of a 

iai;ge population as well as a limited one. The success 

of this effort is yastly important in this view, as well as 

its immediate and incalculable importance to this com- 

Bnmity. I know not what ^ould hinder an inmiediate 

enliigement of your operations in this department, so as 

to einbrace the whole country. It is needed everywhere ; 

it is everywhere practicable. The blessings of a that- 

ooghly biblical literature may and will be enjoyed eveiy- 

where, if you will but spread yourselves over the land, 

bearing Gospd truth, and scattering the blessings of a 

60^ salvati(Hi.'' 



In the following month, Mr. Cook made a similar effort 
in Providttusey R. /., of which he said, 

''I know it will rejoice your hearts to learn that the 
Lord has blessed the efforts f(»r the volume circulation iu 
tins city. It was found here, as elsewhere, that the mass 
of the people were uninformed of the character of the 
enterprise for the supply of religious reading for the 
whole community. So &r as the public could be reached 
from the pulpit, they were apprised of the nature of the 
enterprise, and prepared to welcome the self-denying 
laborers who should devote themselves to the work of 
supplying the city with a sanctified literature. Several 
churches of the Episcopal, Baptist, Congregational, and 
Free Will Baptist denominations, were addressed sepa- 
rately, while a more full commendation of the object was 
given at a union meeting, by pastors of churches in the 
city, and other distbgoished clergymen. 



88 dSCULATION OF VOLUIOB. 

** About eigfdif vohmiary distributersy of all profesc 
and employments, engaged personally in the distribi 
of volumes in their several districts, with various 
and of course with different success. Had ciU ent 
upon the work with the noble views entertained by f 
of its importance and power, the circulation would 
been without precedent, and an amount of present 
ultimate good accomplished, which no mind can cone 
Those who imagine that work so simple can be doi 
any hwbfj mistake greatly the nature of the enter] 
and the nature of mankind. Multitudes will re< 
irom the hands of a respected friend or neighbor, w 
station and character is a sufficient guarantee fo 
purity, a volume or library which may be the meai 
Halvation to whole households, while the application 
stranger might be immediately rejected. 

^ I was never more impressed with the important 
having enlisted in this work men of experience, 
character, and devoted piety; nor have I ever hei 
much delighted and encouraged as with the cordis 
operation of some of this class in this city. One 
vidual, whose generous and enlightened devotion U 
cause wUl be remembered with gratitude by others 
your correspondent, sold nearly 400 volumes, inch 
17 sets of the Library, value $135. A brother o 
Baptist church has already circulated volumes tc 
value of $75. Another of the Episcopal church ; 
$60. A young lady of the Free Will Baptist chui 
herself converted by the Divine blessing on the 
ing of Baxter's Call — about $70. A brother of the 
dODomiDation, about $100. The rector of Grace cl 
iddrowod his people twice on the subject, and 8e< 



CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 39 

l7 distributerB, who supplied an entire ward. The result 
is a circulation of about 5,000 volumes, indtuUng 160 
ads of the library, value aboiU $1,400. 

''The grand resuUa in souls converted, and saints 
quickened, we shall not see until the books are opened, 
and we stand together in judgment O that the Spirit 
of truth might descend and quicken the seed thus sown, 
causing it to spring up and bear abundant fruit, to the 
gloiy of his grace." 



Mr. Cook proceeded to the South for the winter months, 
visiting some of the principal towns. 

" On arriving at Savannah, in December," he says, " I 
found that the Lord had ordered all things well for this 
undertaking ; and kind, hospitable friends were raised up 
in every instance as they were needed. The pastors of 
the churches welcomed me and my cause with open arms. 
The bearings of the enterprise were explained from the 
different pulpits, and a sufficient number of efficient, 
noble-minded distributers, enlisted at once, and cordially, 
in the effort to carry the volumes to every family. The 
cMe^ and almost the ordy difficulty, was removed in a 
day. The question of the practicability of securing 
suitable persons for distributers at the South, was the one 
which caused most anxiety, and that question is settled, 

''More than thirty gentlemen, in Savannah alone, 
shared in the self-denial and blessedness of this engage- 
ment, and with an intelligent, principled zeal, which I do 
not remember to have seen equalled in my experience in 
this enterprise. The circulation amounted to more than 
ikaiyjine hundred volumes, including 150 Libraries of 15 
f«iiimes each, value, in all, more than $1,300. 




40 oacuLAnon or younoHi 

''What a noble eomm/miixmad of the great woBl flf 
blessing the Sooth with a sanctified literatare-; to bt 
efficiently and perseveringly followed np, I tnut, ufltil 
this most interesting region shall be made to rejoice in 
the possession of the Grospel in the powerful form is 
which it is preached by Baxter and Doddridge, and those 
who, like them, have written, not fix the North or tbe 
South, for this denomination or that, but for Christ and 
the world." 

He proceeded to visit .^i^ftuto, Gto^ with similar 
cheering results, 3,000 volumes having been sold, in 
value about $1,200; and having visited numerous -other 
places, he retmned to enter on the duties of a Cones- 
ponding Secretary of the Society, with special referenci 
to the department of the circulation of the Society's pdb- 
lications in connection wkh personal effixrt for the Mob 
of men. 



In the following winter he visited Ctoiealon, S. C) 
where a public union-meeting was held, followed by t 
large meeting of distributers to arrange for the circula- 
tion, who, after five days met again, when it iq^peaied 
that nearly six thousand vdumes, including about dOO 
Libraries, had been circulated. At the close of tht 
offi>rt, he says, 

^ One distributer sold more than thirty Libraries and 
other volumes, amounting to more tiian $200. Another 
circulated more than $200. A clerg3rman of the Epis- 
copal Church more than $130. The preacher of the 
Protestant Methodist Church, about $80. Others in 
amounts frcnn $50 to $150. A gentleman of the Baptist 
Qnnch purchased for distribution, Apprentices' LilMiiyi 



COtCULATION OF VOLUMEB. 4l 

etc^ more than $150 worth of volumes, besides a liberal 
donation for foreign distribution. The Orphan Asylum, 
Workhouse, Jail, Marine Hospital, etc., were supplied 
gratuitously by direction of the mayor of the city. Large 
numbers of the volumes, and in many instances entire 
libraries, were joyfully purchased by the colored popula- 
tion, or given to them by the distributers and others. 

" A general seriousness was manifest in the different 
congregations, and in most some hopeful conversions are 
occurring. I cannot but hope that in Charleston, as at 
Savannah, where the effort was so much blessed a year 
since, the dews which are now softly distilling may be 
speedily followed by copious showers of grace, and that 
thousands will rejoice in eternity that nearly 10,000 vol- 
ume8, induding about 400 Libraries, valve more than 
$3,000, toere circulated in Charleston, In addition to this 
sum, about $700 were received in donations, chiefly for 
foreign distribution. Brother Curtis, General Agent for 
the South, cooperated with me during a part of this effort, 
and its large success is not a littie owing to his faithful 
and self-denying exertions." 

At a subsequent period he visited New Haven, Conn., 
where about 4,000 volumes were circulated, value about 
$1,400 ; the <5ity of Boston, where not far from 10,000 
volumes were circulated to the value of more than 
$3,500 ; and numerous other places, with like cheering 
results. 



In May, 1841, with the voluntary cooperation of prob- 
ably not far from 20,000 Christians, about 1,800,000 
volumes had been circulated, including about 200,000 

4* 



▼•I. dr. 



42 CnCULATTON OF VOLDMES. 

by Mr. Wood and his ■Bsociates in the western statel. 
But the appalling fkct pressed on the hearts of those 
more actively engaged in the prosecution of the enter- 
prise, that in the old, and especially in the more recently 
settled states, the circulation had been effected mamly 
among the members of churches and well organized con- 
gregations ; while the most destitute population, North, 
South, East, and West, were still nnsupplied. Mr. Wood 
estimated that, even in the counties and neighborhoods 
vihich had been viiUed in the wegUm ttakSj not more ihan 
antsixth of the families had been supplied, even with a 
single volume ; and it was evident that the great mass of 
our more destitute population had not been reached. 
The anxious and {miyerful attenticm of the Committee 
and officers of the Society and Mr. Wood, devoted to the 
question how this large and wmparaiiody n^Uded popU' 
lotion $hould be wpplitdj led the Committee to authorize 
the expenditure in the western states, in the year tiien 
ensuing, so fax as should be found necessary, of the sum 
of $2,500, in supporting a class of agents to labor in ^ 
most destitute portion of those states, and the further 
sum of $2,500 in grants of books to families destitute 
of books, who should be unable to purchase, while it wu 
hoped that similar effi)rts for the destitute would be made 
in other parts of the country. In these efforts com- 
menced THE Colporteur ststev, which is now bless- 
ing the families of our land, by bearing the Society^ 
volumes to their doors and commending them to their 
acceptance, with kind and prayerful effi)rts for their best, 
tfa^ eternal welfare. 



liL. 



CHARACTER 



or 



THE VOLUMES 

Of TBI 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 



All these works have been selected and prepared by 
an able, evangelical Committee, for the sole purpose of 
promoting the best interests of the community ; and in 
their high, evangelical character, spiritual power, and 
practical worth — ^in exhibiting ** Christ and him crucified," 
as our only hope, through faith in Him and the renewing 
of the Holy Spirit, they are not excelled by any similar 
collection in any language. The most watchful parent, 
who may be unable to examine all the works provided for 
his children, may supply them with every book the So- 
ciety has issued, not only with safety to their best and 
eternal interests, but with hope, in answer to prayer, of 
the richest spiritual blessings. 

Much pains has been taken to secure the best editions 
of these works, which are printed entire, except as an- 
nounced in the beginning of the volume, where valuable 
hints will often be found as to the histoiy and character 
of the respective works. 



44 CHARACTER OF TOUTMBB. 

STANDARD SPIRITUAL WORKS 

OF THE SSVENTEENTH CENTU&T. 

The two thousand Non-conformists, who by one act of 
tyranny, in 1662, were ejected from the exercise of their 
ministry, included many intellectual and moral giants. 
In the providence of God a generation of men were then 
raised up in England, who in the highest and noblest 
traits of character have rarely been equalled in any age 
or country, and among them were our pilgrim fathers. 
These Non- conformists were struggling as pastors, at 
fearful odds, against the prevailing formalism, and the 
spirit of this world in high places ; and the act which 
closed their mouths, shut up a fire in their bones, which 
poured itself out in works of unequalled power. Had 
they not been pastors and accustomed to deal with sin- 
ners, they could not have written with such practical 
adaptation to the wants of men. Had they continued ii 
the undisturbed exercise of their ministry, they woul^ 
have still preached the truth, but would never have thus 
embodied it on the printed page to bless the church anc 
the world in all coming time. See Rev. Dr. William R 
Williams' article on the character of the Society's publi- 
cations, in the proceedings of the public deliberative 
meeting of the Board and fiiends of the institution. 

" They speak," says Thomas Erskine in his preface U 
the Saints' Rest, " with the solemn dignity of mart3n:s 
They seem to feel the importance of their theme, and th< 
perpetual presence of Him who is the great subject of it 
There are only two things which they seem to conside: 
as realities — ^the favor of God, and the enmity of God 
and only two parties in the universe to choose between- 



CHABACTER OF VOLOHEft 4§ 

tibe party of God, and the party of hk adversaries. They 
stood in the midst of the tempestaous ocean, secure au 
the Rock of ages ; and as they uttered to those around 
them their invitations, or remonstrances, or consolations, 
they thought not of the tastes, but of the necessities of 
men — ^they thought only of the difference between being 
lost and being saved, and they cried aloud and spared 
not These are the great men of England. They were 
indeed a noble army ; they were bom from above, to be 
the combatants for truth ; they were placed in the gap, 
and they held theit ground, or fell at their posts. In tins 
anny 'Baxter was a standard-bearer. His mind is inex- 
haustible, and vigorous, and vivacious, to an extraordinary 
degree. He seizes irresistibly on the attention, and car- 
ries it along with him. He brings his reader directly 
ftce to ^e with death, and judgment, and eternity ; and 
compels him to look upon them and converse with them.* 
Baxter, Bunyan, Flavel, AUeine, and Owen, whose 
works are so prominent among the Society's publications, 
afl suffered as Non-conformists; and Bishops Hall and 
Hopkins, and Archbishop Leighton, were men of the 
age, and of a kjndred spirit. 



BAXTER'S SAINTS' REST. 

Published in 18mo, and also in 12mo, large type, fbt 
the aged. 

Baxter, who died in 1691, wrote this, his first work, in 
circumstances which give to it uncommon interest He 
was withdrawn from his public labors — away from home 
• without books, except a Bible and concordance — ^with 
an illness from which he never expected to recover — ^in- 
4eed under sentence of death from his physicians. Very 



46 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

soon, as he supposed, to enter upon the heavenly rest, he 
commenced, and after much toil and efiS>rt, completed the 
work, which deserves a place hy the side of the Bible 
and in the library of every Christian. It richly deserve 
an annual reading. It is admirably calculated, if heeded 
to prepare us to live well and to die welL No Christiai 
should be without it; no Christian should be ignorant ol 
its valuable instructions. 

" The writing of it," he said, " has benefited me men 
than all the studies of my life." The latter chapters of i 
he used often to re-peruse for the benefit of his own soii 

The late Rev. Dr. Wilson, of Philadelphia, when h 
had retired from the city to die, was found with the Bibl 
and the Saints' Rest on his table, the latter of whicl 
next to the former, he said he found the sweetest an 
most profitable companion, as he was drawing near th 
rest of heaven. Eminent Christians in England hav 
borne a similar testimony. 

On its being placed simultaneously in every family i 
a large town, the pastor said its influence was very pei 
ceptible, like a gentle outpouring of the Holy Spirit. 

It has been translated into many languages, aD 
blessed to multitudes in every age, and will doubtlef 
continue to be read and blessed down to the day of mi 
lennial glory. Printed 120,000. 

When Adam Clarke, author of the celebrated Commentai 
on the Bible, was a boy, a pious woman in Coleraine, Irelan< 
lent him two books — an abridgment of Baxter's Saints' Res 
and the life of Brainerd. To these two books he ascribe 
under God, the formation of his Christian and ministerii 
character. 

The Rev. E. F. H , of New York city, states tha 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 47 

having retired to his chamber after a solemn conversation 
with Harlan Page, at the close of the evening, he took up 
Baxtefs Saints Seat, when his eye fell on a passage like 
this : " God has signed and sealed his covenant — ^it only re- 
mains for you to add your name." The Holy Spirit, he 
trusts, applied the truth to his heart, and that moment he 
found peace with Grod. 



BAXTER»S CALL TO THE UNCONVERTED. 

Baxter wrote this book, he says, feeling that vehement 
persuasions were more likely to benefit the ungodly, than 
directions only. About 20,000 copies were circulated 
the first year; it was soon translated into French and 
G^man, and into Indian by Eliot Baxter was informed 
of almost whole households, and in one instance of six 
brotherSj hopefully converted by it It has continued to 
be read and blessed in every age. In powerful revivals 
of religion it is sought with eagerness, and seems to be a 
voice speaking directly firom the etiemal world. See ad- 
vertisement prefixed to the volume. Printed 250,000. 

A fiiend in Virginia offering Baxter's Call to two grown 
daughters, in the absence of their parents, found that they 
could not read. He still insisted on their accepting it. They 
did so ; and scarcely was the distributer out of sight, when 
they called on an aged Methodist in the neighborhood, told 
him of the strange visitor and his surprising kindness, and 
begged him to read to them the book. He had not read three 
pages, when one of them, in tears, stopped him, and begged 
bim to pray. The other wept. They read and prayed alter- 
nately. Truth reached their consciences — they trembled — 
repented, and were converted. By and by the parents re- 
tained. They had the same blessed book read to tbaMM^ 



48 OBARAISTER OF VmAIOB. 

ihtj too were bronght to rejoice in hope ei the i^ory of (kL 
Here were four aonli aayed in one house by means of Bazto^ 
Call. Sixteen other cases of conrenion have ocenned in te 
same county by the same means. 

Mr. S. Wood states that a man when a youth fonnd im 
leaves of Baxter's Call, and became so mndi interested in 
them, that he searched several libraries for the book, aad 
finally sent to New York for a copy, which he obtained and 
read. It was instrumental of his conversion, and he is now 
an eminent minister of the Groepel. 

Said a man near seventy years of age, " I once lived wheie 
the society was good — ^too good for me. I wanted to get 

away from it. Accordingly I moved to , the fjoortt 

place that I could hear of, where I might practice all manner 
of wickedness without restraint. While thus revelling ia 
sensuality, Baxtef*8 Call fell into my hands. I took it up* 
with one of Ballou's works, for I was a Universalist, to com- 
pare each win the Bible : I saw the fallacy of the latter ; was 
powerfully impressed with the truth as it appeared in the 
former ; was brought, as I humbly trust, to the foot of the 
eross, and to accept of the offers of mercy, as they are freely 
made in the Grospel, to the chief of sinners." 

A wealthy infidel, in Vermont, was induced to purchase 
Baxter's Call. He read it, gave np his infidelity, and wai 
anxiously inquiring after tmdi, much troubled in spirit. He 
came and said, " Give to every one of ray neighbors a copy of 
that book, where you find unbelievers, uid / will pay fm 
(Aem. Do what yon can for the salvation of their souls, ij 
mine ts loet ; for I have been the means of leading many t( 
embrace this doctrine, which I fear will prove their ruin." 

Mr. S. Wells says, " I sent twelve Baxter's Call to a high- 
school near the Hermitage. The Rev. Mr. R distrib 

nted them among the scholars. So great was the interest ii 
Miding them, that one of the young men committed mh 



CBAlAeFER OP TOLUItEa 49 

qC the chapters and delivered it as an address. In a reyival, 
which occurred some three months afterwards, five out of 
thfr twenty-three who were subjects of the work acknow- 
ledged Baxter as the instrument. In some five or six schools 
about Nashville, Baxter's Call has been, during the last 
sommer, introduced as a reading-book. Much good, I trust, 
has been done in this way. The cheapness of this and the 
other publications has induced many to introduce them as 
Bekool'booka." 



BAXTER'S DYING THOUGHTS. 

This book was written about 40 years after the Saints' 
Rest, and breathes the same spirit It shows what it is 
**to depart and be with Christ," and why this is **far 
better" than to remain here* It is not a book of ecstasies, 
bat presents a calm and scriptural view of what every 
Christian should aspire after, and by the gnice of God 
way attain. It is, in a word, the simple unfolding of Bax- 
ter's heart in reference to his own approaching change, 
and is adapted to the wants of all, both old and young. 



FLAVEL'S FOUNTAIN OF LIFE.— FLAVEL'S 
METHOD OF GRACE. 

ThesI two great works are intimately cormected, the 
first showing Redemption j?rovu^; the other, Redemption 
apfiied by the Holy Spirit to the souls of men. Together 
they form a system of practical theology, full of "Christ 
and him crucified" and rich in Bible truth, of inestimable 
worth to the humble and prayerful reader. While Flavel, 
who died in 1691, the same year with Baxter, is as rich 
in doctrinal truth as any writer of his age, he perhaps 
esoek all Ib a spiritoal unction and tenderness, that wina 



50 CHASACTER OF YOUJMEB. 

JtB way to the heait, and aa it were constraiDS the smner 
to be reconciled to God. 

The Fountain of Life, or Ditpiay of Chid in 1A 
EasenUal and Mediatorial CRonfy presents Christ as he 
was with the Father, in the ages of eternity ; the covenut 
of Redemption ; his consecration to the office of Medi- 
ator ; the nature of his Mediation ; the fulffiment of his 
offices as Prophet, Priest, and King ; his humiliatioii in 
his incarnation and life ; the preparatives for his death, 
in his prayer for his people, institution of the Supper, 
agony in the garden, the treason of Judas, asd his tiial 
and condemnation; the nature of his death, its solitaii- 
ncss, patience, etc. ; his seven last sayings on the cross, 
** Father, forgive them," " Behold thy mother," « To-day 
shalt thou be with me," etc., « My God," etc., " I thiist," 
** It is finished," ^ Father, into thy hands," etc. ; his fune- 
ral, resurrection, ascension, session at the right hand of 
God, and advent to judgment Probably no other treatise 
extant exhibits so Hill and clear a doctrinal view of the 
great work of Redemption, combined with such mehiiig 
tenderness, breathing from the author's full soul in almost 
every page, and adapted to enlighten and refresh the 
spirit in the great vital points o£ aahfotion by aUmmg 
Uood, 

The Hon. Theodore Frelinghuysen writes, " I have just read 
with deep interest, and, I trust, some profit, The Fountam f/ 
Life, by Flavel, as republished by your Society ; and I regard 
it among the richest ofierings that you have made to the 
Christian public. The wonderful scheme of redemption, fimn 
its beginning in the councils of Infinite Love, through all hi 
eventful passages, to the finished work and triumphant accom- 
plishment, when our Saviour ascended to his Father, is hers 



CHABACTER OF VOLUMES. 51 

portrayed by a pen that glows with the richest conceptions 
and best sjrmpathies of ripe and sanctified experience. Flayel, 
if ever man did, wrote from the heart. To the mind that is 
afflicted by painfiil doubts, this volume will prove a healing 
balm, as it opens the broad foundations and the immeasurable 
heights and depths of the love of God in Christ. And there 
is another class who should prize it — the men of considerate 
and serious reflection, who often feel that all is not right or 
safe ; to whom the question sometimes comes with thrilling 
power, * How shall man be just with God V they should study 
this Fountain of Life, and learn the soul-comforting solution, 
in the suflerings and death of the Son of God. May it be as 
life from the dead to many such." 

A female teacher says, "I never read any work which 
so interested my feelings, and at the same time so much 
afifected my heart. At the end of every chapter I have felt 
' in a strait betwixt two,' whether to go on to the next chapter, 
or to re-peruse the other immediately, and thus give myself an 
opportunity of deriving still greater benefit from it. I love 
your Society better than ever for giving me — ^for giving the 
world — such a book, and my prayer and confidence is, that 
yim will not lose your reward." 

The Method of Grace is a sequel to the Fountain 
of Life ; showing the method by which the Redemption, 
purchased by Christ, is applied to men in the work of the 
Holy Spiht in the heart ; or how Christ is "of God made 
onto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, 
and redemption" — ^the act of faith " by which we effect- 
ually apply Christ to our own souls," and the believer's 
union and fellowship with Him. It largely presses the 
invitation, " Come unto me," under the heads of the en- 
dearing "titles" by which Christ is presented to us in 
the Scriptures, and the unspeakable *< benefits" we re- 



63 CHARACTER OF YOLDMBBL 

ceive from Him. It explains the nature of true conyictitt 
for sin, being " slain by the law," and ** taught of God.* jU 
It presents the discriminating evidences of union with 
Christ, in the indwelling of the Spirit, beccmung a w^ 
creature, the mortification of sin, and the imitation of 
Christ; and closes in bewailing the unbelief, sin, and 
blindness, that bind the soul in a state of spiritual death. 



FLAVEL ON KEEPING THE HEART. 

Showing the nature, and the necessity of this duty ai 
essential to secure the ends of our being ; and aiding ns 
to keep the heart, when in (Nxisperity and in adversity, in 
Zion's troubles, in public danger, in duties, in want, triak 
and temptation, in spiritual darkness and sufferings, in 
sickness and in death. The author will be found to have 
explored the avenues and windings of the human heart, 
and to have here embodied a manual of Christian coonsd, 
worthy of constant perusaL Printed 80,000. 

Rev. Mr. N , of B , stated to his people, that when 

a young man, a copy of Flavel on Ketping the Heart fell 
into his hands. His eye rested on a leaf on which it was 
stated that this book was the means of the conversion of a con- 
firmed infidel, during the lifetime of its author. The reflection 
instantly suggested itself to him, " If one sinner has been con- 
verted by that book, why may I not hope to be ?" He read it 
attentively, and it was blessed of the Spirit to his conversion. 
He urged every member of his congregation to read that book. 
He added, that he had been too much in the habit of reading 
profeasionallyy that is, with a view to present preparation fbr 
the pulpit ; and too little with a view to his own spiritual 
profit. ** But,** said he, " my views are changed. For the last 
two weeks / have been batbimg my aoul in the ' Fountmm. of 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 58 

lAftl and I intend to read all of those old practical writeis. 
Henceforth, I mean to preach more in their spirit — ^making 
'Christ and him cmcified/ my constant theme." 



FLAVEL'S TOUCHSTONE OF SINCERITY. 

The author, with tenderness and a keen spiritual dis- 
cernment, points out the danger of mistake as to our 
Christian character, "Thou say est I am rich and increased 
with* goods, and have need of nothing ; and knowest not 
that thou art wretched, and miserahle, and poor, and hlind, 
and naked ;" exhibiting the nature of true holiness ; and 
showing how we may try ourselves : the different effects 
upon true Christians and impenitent sinners, of prosperity 
and adversity ; of a sense of indwelling sin ; of obliga- 
tion to duty ; of sufferings for the sake of Christ ; with 
various other helps to discover whether in sincerity and 
in truth we are the followers of Him, and may hope, 
** through faith and patience," to " inherit the promises." 
Printed 70,000. 

BUNYAN'S PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Published in 18mo, and also in 12mo, large type, with 
beautiful illustrations. 

The Christian experience of Bunyan, who died in 1688 
just before Baxter and Flavel, as related in his " Grace 
Abounding to the Chief of Sinners " which is prefixed to 
the Society's larger edition of the Pilgrim's Progress, was 
one of the most striking that is known. A long time he 
was plunged in the depths of despair ; and his gracious 
deliverance, with the persecutions he suffered for Christ 
including his twelve years' imprisonment, and his pn>- 

▼oLCir. ^ 




54 CHARACTER QT TOLUHBa 

(bund study of the Bible and his own heart, lendflfcd 
him, under the teaching of the Spirit, a prince of practkil 
theology. 

His great work, the Pilgrim's Progress, was planned 
with masterly skill, to be, as an allegorical narrative, so 
entertaining that the heedless youth is attracted to it; 
whUe yet it so illustrates the windings of the human 
heart, and the ways of Grod in bringing sinners to him- 
self, that the Christian pilgrim finds here his own history, 
in all the dangers, temptations, sins, falls and Asing 
again, struggles and conquests of the spiritual life. 

*' Within the confines of a jail he was able so to delin- 
eate the Christian's course, with its various difficultiea 
perils, and conflicts, that scarcely any thing seems U 
have escaped his notice. The most accurate observe] 
will hardly find one character, either good or bad, or cm 
fatal delusion, or injurious mistake, which is not eseett 
tially pointed out in the Pilgrim's Progress. The borf 
suits all the various descriptions of persons who profea 
godliness; and relates the experience, temptations, con 
flicts, supports, and consolations of Christians in our owi 
times, as exactly as if it had been penned for their owi 
immediate benefit" 

The child may read it with intense interest for thi 
story, perhaps reluctantly perceiving its relation to spirit 
ual things ; and when inquiring the way of life he wil 
read it again, as clearly pointing him to Christ ; and as hi 
advances in the Christian course he will read it again, U 
learn the Christian warfare ; and even to old age he wil 
delight in it more and more, as enlightening his path, aiM 
conducting him to the heavenly Jerusalem. 

Poets and literaiy men, able theologians, enlight^iiei 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMBS. 55 

Qmstians, &ad humble cottagers unite in admiration of 
diis work. The celebrated Dr. Johnson said of it, that 
it was the only work he ever read which he thought too 
short 

The |K)et Coleridge says, " This wonderful work is one 
of the few books which may be read over repeatedly at 
different times, and each time with new and different 
pleasure. I read it once as a theologian — and let me 
assure you, that there is great theological acumen in the 
work — once with devotional feelings, and once as a poet 
I know of no book — ^the Bible excepted, as above all com- 
parison — ^which I, acc(»ding to my judgment and expe- 
rience, should so safely recommend as teaching and 
enforcing the whole saving truth according to the mind 
of the Spirit, as the Pilgrim's Progress. It is, in my 
conviction, incomparably the best aumma theologuB evan- 
gdkiB^ (summary of evangelical religion,) ever produced 
by a writer not miraculously inspired." Printed 110,000. 



ALLEINE'S ALARM TO THE UNCONVERTED. 

This wonderful book, next to Baxter's Call, has proba- 
bly been more blessed than any other of its kind in arous- 
ing the attention of the careless, and bringing men to 
Christ All that is said above of the soul-stirring power 
of Baxter in seizing the attention and setting before 
dying men heaven and hell, with the motives to secure 
the one and shun the other, is true of Alleine, who died at 
the early age of thirty-five, in 1668. With great earnest- 
ness and tender entreaty he shows what true conversion 
iii detecting mistakes respecting it ; the necessity of con- 
vanions the marks and the miseries of the unconverted* 



56 CBAIACTKK OF YOLUMESL 

widi clear and invaloable diiectioiis, and overwfaelmiiii 
motives to urge djing men to make their peace witi 
Ciod. Baxter honored this woik hy writing an adminiM 
preface to it : in three years from its first pahlication n 
less than 75,000 copies were sold; it has been issued ii 
multiplied editions, and never was mme (Nrized, or man 
osefiil, than at the present hour. See the testimony d 
Rev. Dr. Hill to its usefulness in Hampden Sydney Cd 
lege, and other testimonies to its w(Mth, pages 10 aoc 
23 above. Printed 125/X)0. 

When Rev. Mr. Demelle presented a clergyman Alleine'i 
Alarm, he replied, " That is the book that alarmed me. If ] 
have ever been useful in the world, mider God, it is attrib- 
utable to that little book." He has been in the ministry abooi 
thirty-five years, and one of the most worthy and sncceflBfii 
ministers west of the momitains. 

Mr. Swift states that a clergyman testified fiom his po^ 
that while in college, the reading of AUeine^a Alarm wai 
apparently, in the hands of the Holy Spirit, the instnunent oi 
his conversion. And said he to the dear people of his charge 
*' Had it not been for the reading of that little work, I proba 
bly should not have had the privilege of standing before yo) 
as I do this day, and of breaking to you the bread of life." 

A merchant with whom some books were left by Mr. Whil 
said, " I had in my employ a man who was a thorottgh ii4 
del, and so active in difihsing his sentiments that I knew im 
but it was my duty to turn him away. One day, as he can 
into my store, I took up Alleine^s Alarm, and asked if 1 
would read it on condition of my presenting it to him. E 
agreed to do so ; and the first Sabbath in February read tl 
book. On Monday evening he came into my counting-nxn 
and when I inquired how he liked the book, he immediate 
burst into tears, unable longer to conceal his emotion. Aft 



GBARACTER OF VOLUim. 57 

! more composed, he went on to relate the ezereiMft 
id. He requested me to pray for him ; and like 
Id, ' chose' that very night ' whom he would serve ^ 
e gives the most decided evidence <^ piety." 
1 address in a Methodist church in Massachusetts, 

er. Rev. Mr. C , said, " he owed it to the bless- 

d on Alleine's Alarm, that he was brought to sub- 
i." 

A. Alderson writes, " One young lady was enabled 
I the Saviour, while reading the following lines in 
A-larm : * Here,' saith the convinced sinner, * I will 
nd if I perish, I perish ; if I die, I will die here ; 
suffer me not to perish under the eye of thy mercy.* 
man while under conviction derived much benefit 
same book. He was enabled to see his character 
a a much clearer light, and to feel more deeply the 
Saviour. He is a young man of intelligence, and 
(king fonvard to the ministry." 



N ON THE FORGIVENESS OF SIN, OR 
PSALM 130. 

ly many sound, practical divines, has beea con- 
he best of the works of Dr. Owen, who died 
Ts before Baxter, in 1683. Those fkmiliar with 
n on which it is founded, *< Out of the depths 
ied unto thee, O Lord — ^If thou shouldest mark 
, O Lord, who shall stand ? But there is forgive- 

thee — ^My soul waiteth for the Lord," etc., will 
icover in it the great outlines of the whole sys- 
Jvation by Christ, and can well suppose that, as 
pended upon it the full energies of his powerftd 

heart, under the guidance of the Spirit, it c<m- 



58 CHARACTER OF VOLU1IE& 

tains exhaofltlesB mines of divine troth ; tracing out tlis 
lurking-places and windings of sin in the human heiit; 
the hinderances to the saving acceptance of mercy ; and 
exhibiting the superaboanding grace of Cxod, rich, fbO) 
and unfailing, evermore tendered to our acceptance, sod 
which still remains rich and free, however blind, did^t ||^ 
and reluctant our hearts may be. ^ There are no deptb 
of darkness, doubt, and trial, which the author does not 
seem to have explored ; none for which he does not show 
the most rich provision ; no false refuge against which 
he does not guard. Indeed, there is not perhaps in the 
language a work which more assuredly carries the ham- 
ble and prayerful reader through all spiritual difficultieB, 
and guides his feet to the rock whence they can nefff 
be moved. It is good to be brought into immediate con- 
tact with the warm, glowing heart of Owen. Evay 1^ 
spiritual reader will bless God that he was enabled tin* j^ 
to write. We hope that thousands will drink at this fixm* 
tain and live for ever." 



r 

w 

IB 



BP. HOPKINS ON THE TEN COMMANDMENTS. 






i| 



The Rt Rev. Ezekiel Hopkins, D. D., author of tfaifl |^ 

work, who died in London, in 1690, was cotempomy < li 
with Baxter, Bunyan, and Flavel, and drank deeply of 
their spirit A distinguished divine, after carefully exam- 
ining all the treatises on the Commandments within laa 

reach, stated that the principal ideas contained in the K 

whole are found condensed in this work of Hopkins. I| 

There is an originality, distinctness, and energy of p 

thought, in a bold and forcible style; a view of the > 

Ten Ck)mmandments as comprehending the whole monl I 

1 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMBa 59 

kw of God; a discussion of the principles for rightly 
nderstanding them; and then a discussion of each 
[Hnmand in its various relations to the divine requisi- 
ons and human duty, which render the work one of 
reat value. The discussions of the first, fourth, and 
flh commands, especially, present a very full and com- 
rehensive view of the great practical subjects which 
ley embrace. 



BP. HALL'S SCRIPTURE HISTORY. 

The author of these '' Contemplations on the Historical 
assages of the Old and New Testaments," who wrote 
imewhat earlier than Baxter, has been admired for his 
fise, powerful illustrations of Bible truth. In 1618, he 
us one of four deputed by the Church of England to 
lend the Synod of Dort, and he died in 1656. These 
Lustrations of the historical parts of the Bible combine, 
ith much originality, sprightliness, and force of thought, 
1 unction and power of evangelical truth, which has 
lade it a favorite with pious and discriminating minds. 
he work embraces 103 articles, commencing with the 
reation. Paradise, Cain and Abel, Noah, Abraham, etc., 
id ending with our Saviour's Crucifixion, Resurrection, 
id Ascension. It is throughout characterized by a 
aoyancy and fascination of style, and sprightliness and 
iginality of thought, that interests the reader of every 
re, and fixes the barbed arrows of truth deep in the 
lart, ere the more heedless reader is aware that it con- 
ined any message particularly adapted to himself. 



6D CHAEAOTEE OP VOUOn^ 

STANDARD SPimTUAL WORKS 

OP THE EiaHTEENTH AND THE FRSSSHT CKHTUJUBS. 



DODDRIDGE'S RISE AND PROGRESS. 

Dr. Doddridge, who died in 1751, had die coudbbI ind 
prayers of Dr. Watts and other eminent ChiistiaiiB in the 
writing and revision of this wcH*k, which, his biogn^bei 
well says, ^ is indeed a body of practical divinity an^ 
Christian experience, and contains, as it were, the sub- 
stance of all his preaching." It was designed to shoi 
*^ the rise and the progress" of the work of divine gnc< 
in the sool of man, from the first awakening of the care 
less sinner to conviction of sin, a sense of just condenma 
tion, and of the need of mercy in Christ and the assist 
ance of the Spirit, and the beholding of Christ by faid 
and self-dedication to Him ; with directions for the Chris 
tian life, in prosperity and in adversity ; warnings agains 
temptations and spiritual decays; helps to growtii i 
grace, joy in God, active usefulness, and preparation fb 
death and the judgment The work was written under i 
deep sense of the responsibility assumed in thus attempt 
ing to guide sinners to Christ ; every line was carefuU; 
weighed; and though the author cautions against tii 
idea that the Spirit's operation is similar in all cases, yc 
very many, in the serious and prayerful reading of tiii 
book, have found their hearts accompanying the autho 
in the several stages of the wori^ and have been brougl 
to the saving knowledge of Christ 

Of the works issued by the Society, the Annual Report 
contain more testimonies to the blessing of God on thi 



CHAKACTER OF VOLUBfE& 61 

than on any other, exeept it be the Call to the Uncon- 
verted. Those testimonies fill many pages, and are most 
cheering. Printed 110,000. 

The Rev. Dr. M'Cartee says, " I well remember when two 
fronng lawyers, both &r from ^od and engaged in the pursuit 
)f the luxuries and wealth of this world, met in the city of 
^ew York, when, as one took some legal documents from 
lis pocket, -the other, to his surprise, discovered among them 
The Hise and Progress of Religion in the Soul. Nor was 
he surprise of the first any the less, when he discovered lying 
•n the table, at the hand of his fellow, Baxter's Sainted Rest. 
i^ach appeared at first confused and ashamed at the discovery, 
>r they had not yet learned to glory in the cross. But a few 
ibments, however, had elapsed j when they mutually found 
tiat the attention of each had been powerfully arrested by 
liose volumes, and that each was deeply anxious for the sal- 
ation of his soul. Together they sought the Lord ; and 
gonizing to enter into the kingdom, they both, at about the 
ime time, were enabled to hope in the mercy of Jesus 
Ihrist for eternal life. One of them, having fought the fight 
nd kept the fiiith, has long since gone upward — the other 
ill lives to proclaim to dying sinners, in his native city, 
ilvation through the blood and righteousness of the blessed 
Redeemer.** 

Another clerg3rman said publicly, "Had it not been for 
hddridge*s Rise and Progress^ I should have been, to all 
Oman view, a lawyer. My fkther had made arrangements 
»r my studjring law, when that book was put into my hands, 
nd was instrumental, as I trust, in my conversion." 

This work, taken from the bookcase by a young man in 
few Hampshire, was blessed to his conversion, which was 
»llowed by the conversion of three brothers, and more than 
venty souls in the neighborhood. 



63 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

A young man in C , N. Y., was reqaested to read ^ 

portion of this work publicly in a prayer-meeting. He con^ 
sented — began to read — his heart was touched — ^he resoWet^ 
not to betray his emotions — ^he proceeded — but at length 
melted into tears, and was obliged to stop and cry for mercy. 
The leader of the meeting offered prayer for him, and that 
very night witnessed his surrender to Grod. He is now a 
faithful, laborious clergyman ; and horn that hour a work of 
grace commenced in the neighborhood, in which 20 souls 
were hopefully bom again. 

A young lady at the South, who promised to read the Rise 
and Progress, became deeply interested, and followed the 
writer with little opposition till she came to the 17th, which 
is styled " the self-dedication chapter." While transcribing 
this chapter, as the author advises, to make it .her own act, 
she hesitated, but soon resolved to give up aU for Christ, and 
imited with the church. 

A clergyman of Virginia says, that in the winter of 18S8) 
Jive individuals, to whom this book was lent by a school- 
teacher, were all brought to renounce the world and profess 
their faith in Christ. 

The superintendent of a Sabbath-school in Providence, 
R. I., who presented a copy to each of ten young ladies, ob- 
tained satisfactory evidence, that, in coimection with other 
means, it was blessed in leading them all to the Saviour. 

The librarian of a college at the West, during a revival of 
religion, remarked that this work was apparently the meant 
of spiritual good to every inquirer who gave it a serious 
perusal. 

The Rev. Dr. John H. Rice sent a copy of this work to a 
sick lady. It became the means of the conversion of a 
mother and daughter, and a number of other persons, of 
procuring the preached Gospel, and establishing a flourishing 




CHARACTER OF VOLUBfES. 63 

EDWARDS' HISTORY OF REDEMPTION. 

TJiis great work embraces a compendious history of 
the world from the creation to our times, and then, as 
drawn from prophecy, to the final conflagration. It is 
founded on the only just principle, that God is in His- 
tory, and shows how the rise and fall of nations, and all 
the events of the successive periods of time have furthered 
the plan of Redemption. It is thus a universal history, a 
church history, a Bible history, an unfoldmg of the ways 
of God in giving his Son to die, and an inculcation of 
the practicsd and saving truths of the Gospel, which are 
not found combined in any other human production. He 
that trembles for the ark of God, fearing that infidelity, 
or formalism and superstition, arbitrary power civil or 
ecclesiastical, false religions or paganism, will prevent 
the advance and triumph of the Redeemer's kingdom, 
may here learn, that " the church is safe f that the ways 
of Grod are not as our ways ; that he who controls all 
events is mighty, and will fulfil his own designs of love. 
An able divine states that, on his first reading this work, 
it so enlarged his conceptions of the works and ways of 
Grod, that he felt as if he had hitherto ^been living in a 
nutshell." Printed 40,000. 



PRESIDENT EDWARDS ON REVIVALS. 

This work was written amidst those glorious revivals 
of religion which President Edwards was permitted to 
mtness and record, occurring about the year 1740, afler 
a period of great spiritual dearth. He was made a prom- 
inent instrument of those revivals, in which the church 
for which he labored was peculiarly blessed; and his 



64 CHABACTEE OF YOUptEA, 

object is to vindicate the genuine wc^k of the Spirit, on 
the one hand from the opposition of foimalists, and on 
the other from perversions by enthusiasts. He first gives 
a ^ Narrative of Surprising Conversions," as the fiictB 
then occurred under the dispensation of the Spirit ; and 
proceeds to show the discriminating marks or evidencoB 
that such a work is ^ a glorious work of Grod f the obli- 
gations of all to rejoice in it and promote it ; the dangei 
of opposing such a work ; characteristics of a true revival 
for which those laboring in it should not be censured; 
injurious errors which should be avoided ; and what is to 
be done to promote such a work. 

This is the standard treatise on the subject of revivals 
of religion, adapted to be permanently useful, both as a 
means of quickening the churches when in a state of 
spiritual declension, and guiding the laborers in the woik 
of God where it is specially revived. 

" Nowhere in the English language, or in any other 
language, even within the compass of many volumes, can 
be found so much heavenly wisdom and experience in 
the work of God. The book is one which nunisters and 
private Christians may tiuchf with advantage. Nowhere, 
that we know of, do the excellent qualities of Edwards' 
own mind and heart, under the training, instruction, and 
sanctifying influences of the Holy Spirit, appear more 
conspicuous. Every page of the book is full of heavenly 
wisdom." 



1 



EDWARDS ON THE AFFECTIONS. 
This treatise is considered by many, the best of Presi- 
dent Edwards' productions, and is almost universally re- 
(udod as a great standard work on Christian ezperiencei 




CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 65 

and the evidence of saving conversion. It was wholly 
re-written by Ellerbt, who ascribed to it his own con- 
firmed hope in Christ, from a belief that, by presenting 
the precise thoughts of the author in a less cumbrous and 
more modem style, and with considerable abridgment, it 
might obtain a wide additional circulation. ** I am 
pleased," writes Rev. Seth Williston, "with this edition 
of so valuable a work, and hope it may be the means of 
promoting genuine religion. There is nothing more 
ruinous than false experiences." 

The author first shows that true religion consist** 
chiefly in the affections, or in other words, is a religion 
of the heart He then lays down twelve marks of char- 
acter or experience, which afford no decisive evidence 
either that the affections are, or are not, truly sanctified ; 
and adds more fully twelve "distinguishing signs of 
truly gracious and holy affections." It would seem that 
no one, on a candid and prayerfiil study of this treatise, 
can reasonably mistake as to the question of his own 
acceptance with God. Printed 60,000. 



VENN'S COMPLETE DUTY OF MAN. 

This " System of Doctrinal and Practical Christianity," 
by Rev. Henry Venn, written about the year 1763, is a 
well-known standard work, presenting, with great rich- 
ness, originality, and force of thought, the high tiiemes 
of salvation by the cross, and showing the utter futility 
of any other system of morals. The existence in Eng- 
land of a work with nearly the same title, which gained 
"n. inde circulation, and vainly essayed to guide to " tho 
whole duty of man" without duly honoring redemption as 

ToL OSr. ^ ^ 



06 CHARACTEE OT YOLDMBa 

the fbundation of all hia attaimnents or bopeo, gaive n 
to the preparation of the preaent treatiaey " which, as wt 
as the evan^lical preaching of its author, largely coi 
tributed to revive the then slumbering spirit of the Refix 
roation f* and kindled a light which has been continued i 
the labors of Simeon, Newton, Scott, and others, and : 
may be hoped will never be extinguished. Beginnin 
with the excellency of the Soul, the author treats of G<x 
of Man, of the Law, of Faith in Christ, of the Holy Spidi 
of Repentance, of the Christian Graces and DispositioD 
towards God and towards men, of Relative Duties, o 
S^-denial in the restraining of all unholy passions, o 
Prayer, of the Scriptures, and closes with Christian Jo) 
which is sought in vain from any other fbundation tfaa 
that is laid, even Christ and his saving benefits. Tb 
Committee cannot but hope that this work, which vn 
read with deep interest by some of themselves when ic 
quiring for the way of life, may be blessed to thousand 
in the various channels now providentially opened befor 
this Society. 



MASON'S SPIRITUAL TREASURY. 

This work, which was written towards the close of tl 
last century, consists of a MedUation for each Day in i 
year upon Texts of Scripture, selected from the momii 
and evening meditations of this devout author, each occ 
pying a little more than one 12mo page. These mec 
tations were *" humbly intended to establish the fait 
promote the comfort, and influence the practice of tl 
followers of the Lamb ;** and none familiar with th( 
contents will doubt their general adaptation to so hi( 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 07 

nd sacred an end. Without prolixity, or the introduc- 
ion of irrelevant matter, the author condenses the spiritual 
nd practical thoughts growing out of the inspired pas- 
age, furnishing the reader with materials fi>r reflection 
n topics immediately connected with our eternal inter- 
sts. Many, both clerg3rmen and laymen, regard this 
rork with ^ a strong and grateful attachment," ajs the 
nea^ of guiding their own inquiries for salvation, and 
iding them in the Christian life. It is believed that this 
olume, comprising a meditation for each day, chosen out 
>f those prepared by the author for hoth morning and 
venxng, will prove eminently a "devotional assistant)** 
specially to the exercises of the closet and of fiunily 
vorship. 



PIKE'S PERSUASIVES TO EARLY PIETY. 

This work is written in a style of tender entreaty, 
^hile, in its solemn and moving appeals, it has been 
hought more to resemble the writings of Baxter than any 
)ther work written in the present age. It presents the 
*allen and guilty state of man ; the nature of real relig- 
on ; the' delusive supports on which the soul is prone to 
'est; the love of God and the Lord Jesus Christ; the 
idvantages and pleasantness of early piety ; the happiness 
t produces at the close of life and in eternity ; warnings 
igainst ingratitude to Grod and the attractions of the 
^orld ; the hard way of ^transgressors, in the present and 
nture life ; with answers to the usual objections to early 
)iety, and earnest appeals to make no delay in yielding 
lie heart to God. It has been blessed to the salvaticm 
)fmany. Printed 65,000. 



66 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

A clergyman reports that a yonng lady, by reading thi^ 
work, " was deeply conriiiced of her guilt and danger, an<i 
found no rest till she was brought to believe in the blessed 
Saviour. She recommended it to all her young associates, 
and some of them became alarmed at their condition, and 
have expressed hope in Christ. I think it will be found in 
the day of judgment/' he says, '* that thit one copy was a great 
blessing to these souls." 

A lady in Philadelphia stated, that four members of her 
own family had been hopefully converted from sin to God, by 
reading this publication. 

A respected clergyman in C county, N. Y., stated that 

it was Pike's Persuasives that led him to Christ and to the 
ministry. 



PIKE'S GUIDE TO YOUNG DISCIPLES. 

A delightful work to accompany the author's ** Persua- 
sives to Early Piety :" presenting the perfections of God; 
the work of Christ and of the Holy Spirit; the life of 
faith and prayer ; Christian holiness, mortification of sin 
humility, patience; the government of the temper, tlu 
thoughts, the lips, and conduct; recreations, choice oi 
companions, family duties; the Sabbath, study of thi 
Scriptures, the Lord's Supper, doing good, love to ene 
mies, spiritual conflicts and sorrows in the Christian pil 
grimage, and consolations and encouragements in lif 
and in death. The author has been peculiarly happy h 
thus furnishing a compendium of Christian truth am 
duty, in a serious yet clear and attractive form, whicl 
has proved not only a cherished " Guide to Young Disci 
pies," but has led many wandering souls from the dark 
nesB and unbelief of sin to God. Printed 65,000. 



CHARACTER OF VOLUBCES. 69 

PIKE'S RELIGION AND ETERNAL LIFE. 

** Religion and Eternal Life, or Irreligion and Perpet- 
ual Ruin, the only Alternative for Mankind,'* by the 
author of the "PersnajBives" and " Gruide" jnst noticed, 
** addresses its readers as fallen and dying, yet immortal 
beings, who need eternal salvation. It aims hnmbly to 
follow in the track of those * Calls ' and * Alarms ' to the 
Unconverted, by which Baxter, and Doddridge, and Al> 
leine, and others * being dead yet speak.'" Printed 
45,000. 

JAMES* ANXIOUS INQUIRER. 

This work is written in a modem, attractive style, 
^hich may gain the attrition of many who would neglect 
the works <rf some of the old writere, while it presents, 
with great seriousness, the reasonableness of anxiety on 
the subject of salvation ; the importance of gaining scrip- 
tural views of trutli ; the nature of repentance and faith ; 
and guards against mistakes, perplexities, and discourage- 
ments, which may attend the commencement of the Chris- 
tian course. The respected author, in a cordial commu- 
nication expressing his joy in the prospect of the circu- 
lation of the work among the millions of our growing 
country, stated that between two and three hundred thou- 
sand copies had been circulated in Great Britain ; and 
that it had been translated into the Welsh, French, 
Gaelic, and German, and was about to be translated into 
Swedish. 

A clerg3rman in Pittsburg writes, " The Lord has been 
pleased to give us another reviving from his presence. Most 
of the converts are young men and women ; and it is a re- 
markable fiict, that nearly all who were hopefully converted 



70 CHARACTEK OF VOLUMEBL 

were more or leas benefited by the pernsal of lames' Asxi 
Inquirer. As new cases of interest occurred from day to ( 
I was frequently asked by the officers of the church whe 
these persons also * had that little book ;* and in nearly e^ 
instance I had already placed James in their hands. 
what a high and glorious reward its author will have in 
• day of the Lord !" Printed 30^0. 



GURNEY ON LOVE TO GOD. 
This essay on the Habitual Exercise of Love to * 
considered as a Preparation for Heaven, by Joseph J 
Gumey, of the Society of Friends, author of the Trac 
Redemption and otiier valuable works, is a calm, s 
and evangelical jn-esentation of an important praci 
subject ; showing the necessity of meetness for hea 
and then proceeding to the contemplation of God, 
only in nature and providence, but more fully as Fal 
Son, and Spirit in Redemption ; together with the 
jects of communion with Grod, submission to his 
conformity to his attributes, and consequent love tow 
men. 



SHERMANS GUIDE TO ACQUAINTAJS^CE WI' 

GOD. 
This serious and attractive work by the successo 
the Rev. Rowland Hill, in London, is founded on 
text, " Acquaint now thyself with God, and be at pe 
thereby good shall come unto thee." It shows the na 
of acquaintance with God, or true religion ; the esse 
means of this high attainment, namely, the mediatio: 
Christ, and faith in Him ; the influences and work of 
Holy Spirit; the preached and written word, pn 
meditatioii, and holy walking with God; the best se 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 71 

tor commencing acquaintance with God, in which the 
present time is urged by many affecting considerations ; 
lilosing with a view of the advantages attending this high 
ind sacred duty. 

HENRY ON MEEKNESS. 
This treatise by Rev. Matthew Henry, author of the 
Commentary, who died 1714, illustrates the nature and 
excellency of that ^ meek and quiet spirit which is, in the 
si^t of Grod, of great price f with the various encourage- 
ments to its exercise. It may profitably be made a 
manual by all, and is well adapted to allay the agitations 
which so often disturb the haraiony and oeace of the 
chmxshes. Printed 35,00a 



ANDREW FULLER'S BACKSLIDER. 

This is a short but able and practical treatise, exhibit- 
ing the general nature and different species of backslid- 
ing, its symptoms, dangers, and the means of recovery. 
The present edition has a brief preface by Rev. Mr. 
James, of Birmingham. 



HELFFENSTEIN'S SELF-DECEPTION. 

This treatise has grown out of the lamentable state of 
many individuals and churches, maintaining the outward 
forms of religion, while they give sad evidence that their 
heart is not right with God. It points out the nature and 
forms of self-deception ; the danger and consequences of 
being self-deceived, and the liability that the mistake 
will be one for eternity, and then directs to the only and 
never-foiling remedy. 



73 CBAKACTER OF TOUJHBBL 

ELEGANT PRACTICAL WORKS. 

The works ander this head are vahiable spiritDal tm- 
tises, written in a more elegant and polished Btyle fttt 
some of the preceding, and which may cpmmeDd tiiem- 
selves to particular classes of minds. 



WILBERFORCE'S PRACTICAL VIEW. 1 

This Practical View of Christianity has long been le- 
garded as a standard wo^ and has exerted a powofiil 
moral and religious influence among the higher claflses 
in Great Britain. Its style is elevated ; and it so en- 
forces the necessity of vital godliness, that it would seeiB 
no intelligent reader can deem himself a Christian whik 
having the form only. Within a few days after its first 
appearance it was out of print, and within half a year 
five editions, 7,500 copies, had been called fi>r. The 
author received thanks and congratulations on the issoing 
of the book, from many honored names, including lords 
and bishops ; and the Rev. John Newton said, ** 1 deem 
it the most valuable and important publication of the 
present age." " I am filled with wonder and with hope. 
I accept it as a token for good ; yea, as the bii^itest 
token I can discover in this dark and perilous day." 

The Rev. Legh Richmond, author of the Dauyman's 
Daughter, writes, "I feel it to be a debt of gratitude 
which I owe to God and to man to state, that to the un- 
sought and unexpected introduction of Mr. Wilberforce's 
book on Practical Christianity, I owe, through God^s 
mercy, the first sacred impression which I ever received 
It being after he had entered the ministry) as to the 



CHARACTER OP VOLUMES. 73 

>iritual nature of the Gospel system, the vital character. 
f personal religion, the corruption of the human heart, 
id the way of salvation hy Jesus Christ.'' 

Soon afler this work was issued by the Religious Tract 
ociety in London, an unknown English Christian wbjb 
) deeply impressed with its worth, that he committed to 
lat Society sufficient funds to enable them to distribute 
,000 copies gratis among the nobility and the higher 
lasses. 

A respected clergyman, being at the mansion of Mr. 
^ilberforce, told him that he received his first religious 
npressions from the Practical View ; and that to him he 
-aa indebted for all the light he had received, and all the 
ood accomplished by his ministry. Mr. Wilberforce, 
eeply affected by the recital, kept exclaiming, as the 
ars rolled down his face, "Give God the praise, sir; 
ive God the praise — ^the man is a sinner." The pious 
lergyman and his spiritual benefactor wept together, 
ad rejoiced together over all tlie goodness and the 
lercy which the Lord had made to pass before them. 



HANNAH MORE'S PRACTICAL PIETY. 
" Practical Piety, or the Influence of Religion on the 
[ind and Heart," is a standard work of this favorite 
ithor, who began her efforts in defence of vital Chris- 
anity against iofidelity and formalism as early as the 
>mmencement of the present century, and who coope- 
ited with Wilberforce with a spirit kindred to his. This 
ork, like Wilberforce's View, is adapted to the taste 
ad refinement of those moving in the higher walks of 
fe, while yet, in every chapter, it discusses topics involv- 
ig the salvaticm of the soul; as prayer, a devotional 

VoLCir. ' * 




f^ CHAEACTEB OF VOLUKEB. 

■pirit, iJiB love of God, holiness of heart, aelf-«xa 
duticfl of Chriatians to the irreligioua, watchfiiln 
nesa of life, and the temper and conduct of the < 
in BJckieas and death. In these discuesions eh 
with heivcD-directed skill and energy, those a 
divine tnilh, that, with the blessing of the Spii 
tnte thf heart, open the eyes of the spiritually I 
subdue uid humble the souL 

ELIJAH THE TISHBITE. 
This Tork, by Eev. F. W. Knnmnacher, D. I 
Talley ot' Bannen, Prussia, was traoslated from tb< 
for the Heligious Tract Society in London. 1 
nently evangelical, and written with great powei 
tlie reater forward by its richness, beauty, sjid 
Uluatratjon, and revealing mines of divine instnic 
the di!<p-}nsBtioits of God and the displays of hia 
and by Ihat wonderful and favcsred prophet, who ^ 
called to taste of death, and was honored to ap 
Clirist ii glory on the mount 

ABBOTT'S YOUNG CHRISTIAJ*. 
This attractive woA is not so much a discuss: 
dactrines of the Bible, as an iUustration of Chn 
and praOke, founded on the plan of salvation 
and the renewing of the Spirit After tieati] 
confesaiiu of ain, Christ aa a eympalhizing frien 
the cojiaequencea of neglecting duty, and the i 
being only ahnoat a Chnatiiin, the author illustn 
of the difficulties of religion, the evidences of ( 
ity. the study of the Bible, the Sabbath, trial s 
pline, and penoiul improYoment A nuniber 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMEa 75 

have been reported of a blessing attending the reading 
of this booL 



JAY*S MORNING EXERCISES. 

These Exercises for the Closet, for every day in the year, 
two volumes in one, embracing about 600 full pages 12mo, 
have been so extensively introduced into Christian fam- 
ilies, that his peculiarly happy style of presenting relig- 
ious truth is well known. It is *^ clear, simple, pointed, 
and forcible ; but its greatest excellence is the appropri- 
ate and beautiful illustrations from the Scriptures, with 
which his works everywhere abound." There is a sweet- 
ness and spnghtliness that sustains the interest of the in- 
dividual reader, or the family circle, while they feel that 
their minds are under the direction of a master-spirit 
which has drawn deep from the fountains of divine 
Tuth, and brings them into a communion with God that 
hall be renewed and perfected in that brighter world to 
^hich the author allures and leads the way. 



JAY'S CHRISTIAN CONTEMPLATED. 

This work exhibits ^ the mellowness of age, in addition 
the tastefulness and beauty which characterize his 
er works." It contemplates the Christian, in Ch4st, 
'he closet, the family, the church, and the world; u 

tperity, in adversity, in spiritual sorrows and spirif la 1 

; in death, the grave, and heaven. 



NEVINS* PRACTICAL THOUGHTS. 

ese Practical Thoughts consist of forty-six articles, 
lyer, pr&ise, professing Christ, duties to Sabbath- 
% the monthly concert, the conversion of the world 



7G CfHARACTER OF VOLUMBS. 

violations of the Sabbath, liberality, man's incansisteney 
the pity of the Lord, Christian datj, death, etc., the last 
of which are, " Heaven's Attractions" and f* The Heavenlj 
Recognition," closing with the words, ^ By the time w( 
have done what I recommend, we shall be dose upon the 
celestial confines — perhaps within heaven's limits." * * 
Here the author laid down his pen, leaving the article mt 
finished, and went, none can doubt, to enjoy the blessei 
reality of the scenes he had been so vividly describing 
The articles combine great simplicity, attractiveness, aiM 
vivacity of thought and style, with a spiritual nnctioi 
rarely to be found in any writer. Thousands of mindi 
were impressed with them as they first appeared ; the] 
reproved the inconsistent Christian, roused the slmnber 
ing, and poured a precious balm into many an afflictet 
bosom. While writing them, the author buried a belovei 
wife, and had daily more and more sure Indications tba 
the hour of his own departure was at hand ; and Grod en 
abled him, from the depths of his own Christian ezperi 
ence, to open rich fountains of blessing for others. 



MELVILL'S BIBLE THOUGHTS. 
The Rev. Dr. Milnor, who selected these Thought 
from the published discourses of Melvill, says, *^Th 
author is one of the most able and eloquent of the evai 
gelical clergy of the Church of England. He is constantl 
listened to with breathless attention, by crowded and ii 
telligent audiences ; and though sometimes, in the fervc 
of a warm imagination and glowing religious afiectioni 
he may be considered as somewhat transcending the limit 
of a pure and chastened style, it is believed all who pa 
sess any measure of that spirit by which the preacher a] 



CHASAGTER OP VOLUMES. 77 

pears to be actuated, oust admire and be profited by his 
pulpit efi^rts. No doubt those who have the means of 
access to the original sermons, will desire to peruse them 
at large ; but it was thought, that a collection of a portion 
of his beautifully expressed thoughts on particular topics 
would be an acceptable present to those who may not 
possess them in full, and that the passages which are here 
presented are calculated to promote the interests of evan- 
gelical truth and righteousness. They are sent forth with 
the {Huyer, that the divine blessing may attend their pe- 
rusal, and make them instrumental in exciting increased 
reoerencefir the holy Scripttarts as a divine revelation, hve 
%o God their Author,yai^ in the adorabU Redeemer, attach- 
ment to the great doctrines of salvation, and a sacred re- 
gard to that holiness of heart and life which is the only 
decisive evidence of their sanctified impression on the 
soul of the believer." 



EVIDENCES OF CHRISTIANITY. 

OLINTHUS GREGORY'S EVIDENCES. 

This work consists of familiar " Letters to a Friend on 
the Evidences, Doctrines, and Duties of the Christian Re- 
ligion." " It is very possible, and indeed very common 
for men to be Christians in name and in theory, and infi- 
dels in practice ; to profess a belief in Christ, and in heart 
to deny him ; to avow the warmest admiration of the New 
Testament, and to despise and ridicule every thing in it 
which is characteristic and peculiar, and which constitutes 
it a summary of that * truth' which alone can *make us 
free ' from the dominion of sin and the punishment due to 

1* 

YA Cir. * 



78 CHARACTER OF YOLCJlfEB. 

it" This state of mind the author of this wcnic has en- 
deav(M^ to meet, and ^ to exhibit, in a small compass, a 
view not merely of the evidences, but of the distinguish- 
ing doctrines and principal binding duties of the Chns- 
tian religion.'' The aspect of the work is kind, the train 
of thought clear, scriptural, and conclusive, and it is one 
of t^ best of books on the evidences. It was greatly 
blesied in promoting the work of grace in the Militsiy 
Academy at West Point, by which several cadets were 
brought to Christ, in connection with the labors of Bishop 
Mcllvaine, while he was there stationed. 

The Rev. Robert Hall said of this work, "Dr. Gregory 
has united, with extraordinary attainments in the severer 
sciences, the art of recommending his sentiments with the 
most impressive effect; and though he is above solicitude 
respecting the minuter graces of finished composition, he 
exhibits, in an eminent degree, the most important ingre- 
dients of good writing. He is correct and luminous, and 
often rises to the tone of the most impassioned feeling. 
His language is eminently easy, flowing, and idiomatic. 
We earnestly recommend this work to the attentive pe- 
rusal of young persons whose minds have been cultivated 
by science and letters ; and must be permitted to add, thai 
we are acquainted with no hock, in the circle of English 
literature, which is equally calculated to give persons oi 
that description just views of the evidence, the nature, and 
the importance of revealed religion." 



THE BIBLE NOT OF MAN. 

This is an argument from the Internal Evidence, drawn 
with a masterly hand. The tram of thought is clear and 



CHAEACTEE OF VOLUMES. 79 

convincing, adapted to young men of our colleges, and 
to the ministry generally, while the style is attractive, and 
the argument intelligible to the common mind. The work 
has a directness and force, which may be in part account- 
ed for fr(»n the fact that it had its origin in the doubts of 
an accomplished scholar, who frankly stated to the author 
that no proofs of Christianity were satisfactory. Tha au- 
thor presented the Bible itself as the best of all arguments, 
and found it carried conviction to the acute mind of the 
inquirer as nothing else did — the Bible itself, which, when 
fully examined, is seen to be an effect as truly superior to 
every human cause, as is the sun in the heavens ; display- 
ing intellect above the human intellect; its spirit a super- 
human spirit ; its standard of moral rectitude above any 
mere human standard; its peculiar doctrines above human 
systems ; its religion unearthly ; its harmony, or agreement 
with itself, though written by various authors and at dis- 
tant periods, above human productions ; its adaptation to 
the wants of man in all his relations, such as man could 
not have devised; its consonance with reason; and its 
actually having its counterpart in the experience of men. 
Yet, adapted as the work is to carry conviction to the in- 
tellect and reason, it has a higher excellence. It ad- 
dresses the conscience, and unfolds those characteristics 
of the Bible which the unsanctified mind would never 
discern, but which, to the spiritual Christian, carry con- 
viction so sure that persecution and death cannot shake 
it Other evidences may lie buried in distant centuries, 
or in the infinitude of God's works. The most powerfiil 
of all evidences every one may have in his hand, in the 
Bible itself; and this work helps him to discover and ap- 
preciate them. 



80 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

NELSON'S CAUSE AND CURE OF INFIDELITY. 

Dr. Nelson was once an infidel physician, and he has 
here embodied ^ a notice of his unbelief, and the means 
of his rescue." The work is written from the heart, and 
reaches the heart of the reader. It is especially adapted 
to the state of many intelligent and active minds tainted 
with scepticism, who are not accustomed to read the grave 
and excellent treatises extant on the subject. There was 
needed, says the president of a western college, a work 
on the evidences, ^^ adapted to excite curiosity, awaken 
attention, and stimulate inquiry ; which should bring down 
abstruse argument to the apprehension of men in general, 
and present striking facts to arrest the attention of the 
indifferent and the sceptical. Pacts, drawn from history, 
science, and observation, are here placed in a strong and 
often startling light ; and there is an earnestness, a per- 
sonality, a warm life's-blood of reality, running through 
the whole, which gives to the written argument much of 
the interest and power of an oral address." 

Mr. W. of S states, that his son was led to see the 

folly of Universalism by reading this book. He has since 
been hopefully converted, and is studying for the ministry. 

Mr. S. Wells says, " Judge , who was hopefully con- 
verted by a blessing on the perusal of Nelson's Cause and 
Cure of Infidelity, loaned it to two sceptical lawyers, who 
were also hopefully converted. They were men of in^uence, 
and established meetings at two different points, in connection 
with which some two hundred individuals were hopefully con- 
verted, and have been gathered into the church. A former 
member of Congress is among the converts." 

A Christian friend in New Jersey loaned this work to a 

leading Univcrsalist. He read it eagerly ; his attention was 

arrcBted; he waUQ||^MUid in the compaxvi o€ CVix\&t.\A.ti8« 




CHARACTER OF VOLUBfES. 81 

g an interest in their prayers, and is now a praying 
His conversion was the beginning of a revival of re- 
el uring which nearly seventy were added to the church. 

. Mr. W of the Lutheran church, Penn., says, 

is a splendid work. It is the best thing I ever saw on 
hject. The style is fresh, vigorous, and racy ; it is a 
production throughout: the arguments, especially on 
filment of prophecy, are actually irresistible. No rational 
an read this work and continue to be an infidel. If I 
•ich I would have that book stereotyped by your Society, 
jnt to every nook and comer of our republic. I hope 
wealthy and benevolent patriot and Christian will give 
70 or three thousand dollars for this very purpose. May 
pen the hearts of some of his children to do it. The 
r Bridgewater has immortalized his name and memory 
munificence in bequeathing £SfiOO for the treatises that 
ds name. Might not some wealthy follower of Jesus 
immortalize his name in both worlds by sending forth 
I or 20,000 copies of the * Cause and Cure of Infideli^,* 
bat the hundreds of deistical works that are now cursLug 
idr 



JME OF SELECT TREATISES ON INFIDELITY. 
is volume on Infidelity, or Evidences of Christianity, 
*ises several standard treatises on the Evidences, 
replies to some of the most able and injurious 
I publications. The treatise on the Interned Evi- 

by Soame Jenyns, was considered by Paley so 
rly a production, that, in the corresponding part 
I Evidences of Christianity, he says, " I should will- 

if the nature and limits of my work admitted of it, 
;ribe the whole of what this author has said on the 
ity of the Gospel ; because it perfectly agrees with 



82 CHARACTER OF VOLUMBa 

my own opinion, and because it is impossible tx) say 
same things so welL" To LMi^a Method with Deuts no 
infidel is known yet to have even attempted areptif. The 
observations of Lyttellon on the Conversum ofPavl fonn 
at once a brief, attractive, and triumphant argument for 
the truth of revelation. The treatises of Bishop Watson 
in reply to Gibbon and Paine, are masterly and unanswer- 
able productions, outliving many contemporaneous trea- 
tises ; opposing the shield of truth to the polished and 
malignant shafts of the one, and vindicating the word of 
God from the shameless vulgarity and wilful or ignorant 
perversions of the other — ^too sad an impress, it is but 
truth to say, of the character of the unprincipled, lasciv- 
ious, and, in his last years, habitual drunkard, that gave 
them birth. The notice of Htune^s sophism on mirades is 
chiefly from Starkie's able treatise on Evidence, and 
though brief, is entirely conclusive ; and the extract from 
Gilbert West on the Resurrection, simply gives the order of 
events deduced by him from the several evangelical na^ 
ratives, and by which all axe so satisfactorily explained. 

The Rev. Dr. A. Alexander says of Jenyns on the Internal 
Evidence, " I have heard it asserted, and never contradicted, 
that the late Patrick Henry, the celebrated orator of Virginia 
and of the American revolution, had been in early life scep- 
tical, bnt was fully satisfied of the truth of the Christian relig- 
ion by this little treatise of Soame Jenyns. It is a well-known 
fiict that the work was reprinted while he was governor of 
Virginia, and was widely circulated through the state, and, as 
was said and believed, under his auspices." The Rev. T. P. 
Hunt, observing the above, says, " I know this to be a fact. I 
resided in the family of one of the daughters of Patrick Henry 
for upwards of a year, and frequently heard her mention it. 



CHARACrrEB OF VOLUMES. 83 

The work was published at his expense, and he distributed 
many copies of it among his friends. He dreaded Infidelity 
more than he did all the armies of the world, against the 
liberty of his country." 

The writer knew a Virginia infidel into whose hands the 
treatise of Jenyns fell, who, on reading it, said to himself, 
" Here is such proof that the Gospels could not have been in- 
vented by fishermen, that I must yield to it, or renounce the 
use of my reason/' He received the Bible as true, Christ as 
the only Saviour, and humbly trusted in him alone for mercy. 

" It is stated by Rev. T. T. Biddolph, that Lord Lyttelton 
and his friend Gilbert West, Esq., both men of acknowledged 
talents, had imbibed the principles of Infidelity from a super- 
ficial view of the Scriptures. Fully persuaded that the Bible 
was an imposture, they were determined to expose the cheat. 
Lord Lyttelton chose the Conversion of Paul, and Mr. West 
the Resurrection of Christ, for the subject of hostile criticism. 
Both sat down to their respective tasks ftiU of prejudice ; but 
the result of their separate attempts was, that they were both 
converted by their efforts to overthrow the truth of Christi- 
anity. They came together, not as they expected, to exult 
over an imposture exposed to ridicule, but to lament over 
their own folly, and to felicitate each other on their joint con- 
viction that the Bible is the word of God. Their able 
inquiries have furnished two of the most valuable treatises in 
favor of revelation, one entitled * Observations on the Convet 
sion of St. Paul,' and the other ' Observations on the Resur- 
rection of Christ.' " 



PALEY'S NATURAL THEOLOGY. 

This treatise is not only a most masterly exhibition of 
the argument proving the existence of (rod from the 
marks of design in his works; but in showing these 



84 CBABACrER OF YOUJUEtL 

nuurks of design by an indactkm of paiticiilarB, it iitio- 
daces the reader to a delightful acquaintance with tiie 
wonderful works of God in the visible unirerse. It v 
thus a storehouse of knowledge as to the natural worid, 
exhibiting the goodness as identical with the wisdom of 
Crod in his handiwork — in the structure of the vegetable 
and animal kingdom ; the human firame, the bones, joints, 
and muscles; the perfection of the animal structure; 
peculiar organizations ; instincts, insects, the astronomi- 
cal world, etc^ and out of all deducing the personality, 
attributes, unity, and goodness of God. A clergyman 
says, " The reading of this work when a youth, not only 
charmed me with the clearness of the author's style and 
argument, but opened my eyes to the beauties of nature, 
and gave me new delight in the happiness of the animal 
kingdom and especially of the young, which God has 
everywhere diffused. I have ever since been a happier 
man, and delighted more in the happiness of all the crea- 
tures of God." 



BOGUE'S EVIDENCES OF CHRISTIANITY. 

This Essay on the Divine Authority of the New Testa- 
ment presents, with great richness and condensation ol 
thought, in a clear and simple style, the prominent facte 
and arguments constituting the evidences of Christianity 
admirably blended with the mellowing and hallowed influ 
ence of vital godliness. The internal evidence of th< 
truth of religion, breathing from the pages of the boo! 
itself, has carried conviction to minds unaffected by othe 
treatises on this great subject 

Rev. C H states, that when in a very sceptica 

■late of mind, he read all the prominent treatises on th 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 85 

evidences of Christianity within his reach without 9atis- 
&ction, but the spiritual unction and the unanswerable 
arguments of Bogue convinced his mind, and in the Ser- 
mon on the Mount he found Christian joy. 

The Rev. William Nast lent this work in German to a 
leading infidel in New York. He aflerwards says, " You 
can imagine my feelings when a few weeks ago I read 
Dr. F.'s public recantation of infidelity, in which he men- 
tions, among other means by which it pleased the Lord 
to convince him of his evil way, the reading of Bogue I 
Surely this is great encouragement — ^the Goliath of Ger- 
man infidelity on his knees, a weeping penitent What 
a powerful besom may your Bogue prove in the hand of 
the Lord, to sweep from this land the mass of infidelity 
idiich is constantly imported from Germany !" 



MORISON'S COUNSELS TO YOUNG MEN. 

These Counsels to Young Men on Modem Infidelity 
are written in a rapid, glowing, attractive style, adapted 
to fasten the attention ; and contain a conclusive exhibi- 
tion of the evidences, both external and intemaL 



KEITH'S EVIDENCE OF PROPHECY. 
This little work comprises the substance of tibe excel 
lent work of Rev. A. Keith, showing the literal fulfilment 
of prophecy, particularly as illustrated by the history of 
the Jews, and the discoveries of recent travellers. 



PLUMER'S BIBLE TRUE. 
This treatise comprises a summary of all the principal 
arguments in support of Christianity, plainly and bri< 

8 



YoLCir. 



brieteM 



90 CHASACTER OF VOLUMSa 

Btated, for the use of those who aie p re vent ed fvom eiur^ 
ining larger works. 

UNIVERSALISM NOT OF GOD. 

What Nelson has done for Infidelity, it remained for 
the writer of this book to do for UniverBalism. The 
author, like Nelson, knew from bitter experience tii0 
evils of the system he exposes ; and by mingled nariatiyei 
argmnent, and expostulation, *seeks to warn the ccHmim- 
nity of the dangers of a seductive system of error, and to 
lead its votaries from their delusion to the troth as it is in 
Jesus. He gives the narrative of his own experience for 
twelve years as a preacher of Universalism, and the stale 
of his mind in relinquishing that cherished system fot 
faith in Christ He presents tibe difi^ulties of Um¥e^ 
salism, examines its arguments, shows its destructiYe ten- 
dencies and influences, and proves its inConsiatendy with 
the truth of the Bible. 

While Universalism has apparently been waning in 
some parts of the country, in others it threatens to be- 
come ihe absorbing error. We know of no better metof 
of counteracting its mischiefs than the circulation of this 
work. 



lyAUBIGN^'S 

HISTORY OF THE REFORMATIOIT. 

This History of the great Reformation in the sixteenth 
century, by Rev. Dr. Merle D'Aubign6, in four volumes, 
averaging 457 pages each, is a new translation by Dr.H. 
White, of Trinity College, Cambridge, carefully revised 
by Dr. D'Aubign6, who has also made various &dditkn0 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES* 87 

ot before published, and inserted an elegant preface. It 
ontains a portrait of the author and of Luther, and a 
ertificate presenting a fac-simile of the author's hand : 
le stamps on the backs of the four volumes in cloth show- 
ig Luther finding the Bible in the monastery, climbing 
'Hate's staircase, nailing the theses to the church door» 
nd at the Wartburg translating the Bible into the ver- 
lacular Geiman. It gives a condensed history of the 
lominally Christian world from the birth of Christ to the 
izteenth century ; the birth of Luther in 1483, his youth, 
nd early labors ; and then the great events which ushered 
Q the Reformation, under the general topics of the In- 
iulgences and the Theses ; Luther before the Legate ; the 
ieipzic disputation ; the Papal bull ; the Diet of Worms ; 
he Swiss; the first reforms ; agitation, reverses, and prog- 
ess ; divisions, Switzerland and Germany ; the French ; 
he protest and the conference ; the Augsburg confession; 
Switzerland, conquests; Switzerland, catastrophe. A 
earned professor has well said, this is << one of the most 
imely and useful works of the present century. It is in- 
leed the only history that opens to the French or English 
eader any thing like an interior view of that great work 
)f God, the Reformation in the sixteenth century ; the 
rtyle is graphic and full of life, and a delightful spirit of 
evangelical piety pervades the whole." If the reader would 
lave an intellectual treat ; if he would have a graphic and 
luthentic history of the period more full of interest and 
ncident than any other of modem times ; if he love racy 
inecdote and brilliant biographical sketches ; if he would 
Iraw spiritual refreshment from the delineation of such 
^reat truths as are associated with the doctrine of the Ref- 
ifinatioii) jtuiification by/mih; if he would know popeiy 



88 CBARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

as it was, and is, and would trace its likeness to <Aa 
systems of formalism and error, let him read this book. 
And if he would aid his neighbor in all these respeds, 
let him procure it for him or lend it to him. 

Perhaps no uninspired work is better adapted fix' gene- 
ral circulation, at the present time, in every port of oar 
country, unfolding the wiles of popeiy, and showing what 
that true, spiritual religion is, for which rivers of blood 
have flowed, and without which none can be saved. We 
bless God for this work, and commend it to the prayers of 
his people, and their active efibrts for its wide difibsion. 



THE REFORMATION IN EUROPE. 
This work embraces a histoiy of the Refonnation in 
Great Britain, Holland, Sweden, Poland, and other coun- 
tries not embraced in the first four volumes of D'Aubign^, 
exhibiting the fidelity and the sufferings of the followers 
of Christ, with a chronology of the Reformation. 



ROMANISM. 

NEVINS' THOUGHTS ON POPERY. 

The fifty-eight short articles which compose this work 
exhibit the sprightliness, distinctness, and originality} 
which characterize the author's style, while the facts and 
conclusive arguments carry conviction to the mind of the 
unbiassed reader. Item by item, the delusions and super- 
stitions of popery are exposed, under the heads of the suf- 
ficiency of the Bible, the nine commandments, mortal and 
venial sins, infallibility, idolatry, relics, the seven sacra- 
ments, penance, the mass, celibacy of the clergy, par- 



GHARAGTER OF VOLUMBS. 89 

itoiy, canonizmg saints, Lafayette not at rest, the Leo- 
lid reports, supererogation, convents, etc. Perhaps noth- 
g has yet been issued, which so lays open the deform- 
es of popery to common minds, or is so admirably adapt- 
l to save our country from its wiles, and to guard the 
uls of men from its fatal snares. 

" Perhaps nothing has appeared on the subject of popery 
hich arraigns it before the tribunal of common sense and the 
ble> and convicts it of falsehood and absurdity, more tri- 
nphantly than these articles. The style is unique and sim- 
e, the argument scriptural and logical, and a cheerful piety 
diffused thr6ugh the whole book, such as might be expected 
)m one who eminently * died the death of the righteous.' " 



THE SPIRIT OF POPERY. 
This " Exposure of the Origin, Character, and Results 
' Popery" is written in the form of letters from a father 
his children, and ornamented with twelve beautiful eil- 
tivings. In a kind and pleasing style it presents almost 
I the prominent peculiarities of Romanism ; its stealthy 
roads upon the churches, and various false assumptions ; 
e pomp and unmeaning ceremonies at Rome ; the re- 
tmblance of popery and heathenism ; the confessional ; 
e mass ; worship of saints ; purgatory ; taking the veil ; 
nglish monasteries; the Inquisition; mode of making 
xwelytes, etc. 

THE COLPORTEUR AND ROMAN CATHOLIC. 

This dialogue, by the Rev. Dr. Archibald Alexander, 

written in a spirit of the utmost kindness and deep 

ixiety for the salvation of the blinded Catholic; and 

hile, in the course of the conversations, it confutes hML 

Vol Cir. ^ J^^ 



90 CHARACTER OF VOLUUBS. 

principal errors, it gradually unfolds to him, in a man 
inasterly manner than any thing else we have seen, iM 
true rdigion is, which allies the heart to Christ, and se- 
cures a happy eternity. 



BIOGRAPHY. 

^ Faithful Christian biography has at once its sanction 
and model in the word of God." He that is a man can- 
not fail to feel an interest in the dealings of Grod witii a 
man like himself, in life and in death ; and he that would 
live the life of a Christian cannot but be instructed and 
benefited by learning the errors into which others in- 
dulging the same hopes have fallen, and how the grace of 
God enabled them to conquer sin, and to labor, and suffer, 
and die for Christ 



MEMOIR OF ISABELLA GRAHAM. 

This is well known as one of the best female biogra- 
phies of any age. Combining uncommon brilliancy and 
power of intellect with a warm, gushing heart and untir- 
ing energy, exhibited in their various actings through a 
long and chequered life, and in a rich Christian experi- 
ence — ^uniting unshaken reliance on God through her Re- 
deemer's righteousness, and trust in his word and promises, 
with an active, self-denying, practical benevolence that 
has scarcely a parallel — ^the life of this excellent woman 
is adapted to interest and profit every class of readers. 
This edition is enriched by her own affecting narrative of 
her husband's death and other correspondence, selected 
from the published volume of her letters and a memoir 
issued in Scotland, the committee having had the aid of 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 91 

le surviving author of tibe original memoir in revising 
ad preparing for the press the present standard edition. 



MEMOIR OF DR. PAYSON. 

The biography of this man of God opens before tibe 
sader a rich fountain of Christian experience. The pow- 
FS of his mind and imagination were brilliant, while the 
rork of divine grace in his soul humbled him in the dust, 
nd gave him a clear and practical apprehension of the 
reat truths and doctrines of the Bible, every line of 
rhich he had studied with prayer for divine illumination, 
lometimes prostrated with a sense of his unworthiness, 
nd again exalted to the heights of Christian joy — ^richly 
lessed in his ministry, and then crushed by disease — ^his 
aried life and triumphant death fill up a memoir of un- 
sual worth in the church of God. 

Said one of the clergymen in P — —-, to his congregation. 
Last summer was a season of great declension in religion. I 
x>k up the memoir of Payson and read it. Its influence on 
ly mind led me to consecrate myself anew to God — anew to 
le holy service of the ministry. I felt differently, prayed dif- 
jrently, preached differently, and from that day God began to 
am our captivity ; the church were revived, and sinners were 
onverted to him. I trace that revival, by the blessing of God,. 
) the reading of that work.'' 



MEMOIR OF JAMES BRAINERD TAYLOR. 

This memoir presents a character combining, in an un- 
oimnon degree, sprightliness and vivacity with a glow of 
iety towards God and burning zeal and activity for the 
alvation of men ; forming an admirable pattern, at once 
or the pastor of the church, the student, and candidate 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMBL 



for the ministry, and the comnKm Christian ; and se 
before the impenitent sinner .a living illustration o 
truth and excellency of religion, which must carry co 
tion to the candid mind that it is ^ the one thing nee( 



MEMOIR OF HARLAN PAGE. 

This memoir is designed to illustrate a single poii 
^powtr of prayer andpersonoL tfforifor tht souls o/ino 
vols; lowing the singleness of aim and skill with ^ 
a humble Christian labored, for twenty years, to gl 
Grod in promoting the spirituality of Christians, an( 
conversion of the impenitent, of every age and in al 
cumstances, to whom he had access — ^in his own fami 
in his large Sabbath-school — ^in the Bible-class — ^ii 
ligious meetings — ^in the Tract and Bible houses 
seeking out the destitute in their own places of abode 
private correspondence — together with the signal bl« 
of Grod upon his efforts — and his most happy and tr 
phant death. It is hoped this example may encourage 1 
sands of Christians in duty. A distinguished clergy 
in New York city recently expressed to the authoi 
gratitude for the aid he had derived from this work i 
citing him to pastoral labors, and assisting him to re 
them the means of good to individual souls. 

Rev. Mr. C of New Hampshire says, "It is a con 

remark to me, that it seems to be the design of providenc 
raising up such men as Harlan Page, to show the men 
of the church how much each Christian can do, with th 
vine blessing, to convert the world." 

A clergyman in Missouri says, " I never saw before sc 
practical illustration of the precept, ' Be instant in season 
out of season.' Never — ^do> not even in the lives of such 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 93 

on and Baxter — have I read of a man who seemed to 
t so completely the busineaa of his life to ^fiect the 
n of men. He seems not to have omitted one single 
nity of personal application to his impenitent fellow- 
behalf of God and their own, souls ; and his efibrts 
variably accompanied with his prayers for their sac- 
The memoir of Page ought to be read, nay, it ought to 
'ext-book of every layman in the church." 
voted pastor in New York city writes, " A short time 
took up the life of Harlan Page, I had read, thought, 
ached much on personal obligation to labor in the work 
ng souls, but never did my own individual reai)on6i- 
nd that of my church press upon me as when I arose 
.e perusal of that precious little volume. I saw my 
[ wept, and renewedly consecrated myself to that cause 
h brother Page had so humbly, silently, and yet suc- 
r labored ; and resolved, that, if possible, every member 
church of which I am pastor should possess a copy, 
weekly prayer-meeting, and from the desk on the Sab- 
recommended it strongly to the church, and requested 
jry member should obtain a copy. The request was 
rain : within a few weeks the whole church, (of more 
)0 members,) with a few exceptions, were furnished 
copy. The effect of so general a circulation, I need 
r add, has already been most delightful. The interest- 
1 almost universal inquiry was immediately excited, 
what wilt thou have me to do V " 
ink you," says the Hon. Theodore Frelinghuysen, " that 
I Page ever knew a regret because of his toils in this 
service ? It was the glory of his life ; it was the joy 
ying hour ; it will be his bright and imperishable crown 
And when that blessed spirit shall meet the goodly 
• whom he turned to righteousness, as they strike their 
)gether in the new song of praise to the Lamb t^t 



94 CHARACTER OF YQLDMES. 

was 8lain, then, and for endless ages thereafter, he will begin 
to leam of the heights and depths of the recompense that 
grace awards to those who have done good to souls. He has 
furnished a new chapter on Christian faithfulness. Every 
follower of Christ should study his life, should tread closely in 
his footsteps, should covet such blessed gifts of the Spirit." 



LIFE OF BAXTER. 

The life of this eminent servant of Grod abounds with 
striking incidents, and is adapted to be useful to alL The 
reader is struck with his extraordinary reliance on the 
efficacy of prayer; his abundant labors as a pastor; the 
rudeness, ignorance, and persecuting spirit of the age in 
which he lived ; his zeal for the spread of the Gospel at 
that early period of modem missions ; the great variety 
of works he was enabled to write, though in a very low 
state of health ; and the wonderful degree to which the 
powers of his mind were sustained under the multiplied 
infirmities of age. 

LIFE OF MATTHEW HENRY. 

Matthew Henry, the conunentator, was bom in 1662, 
memorable for the act of Non-conformity, by which his 
distinguished father, the Rev. Philip Henry, suffered. The 
son visited Baxter when in prison, and drank deeply of 
the spirit of the Puritans. The history of his life, his 
correspondence and his writings, many valuable portions 
of which are embraced in the memoir, are of uncommon 
interest to all classes of readers. 



LIFE OF ARCHBISHOP LEIGHTON. 
Leighttm died in 1684, and was contemporary with 
In the troublous times in which he lived, he ir&i 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 95 

an advocate of forbearance and peace; meek and humble 
in the ecclesiastical prefeiment, which he reluctantly re- 
ceived and formally resigned ; fiadthful to the souls under 
his oversight ; a profound student of the Scriptures, the 
evangelical power and spirit of which he deeply imbibed ; 
a man of retirement and devotion, who lived above the 
world and " walked with God!^ 



LIFE OF JOHN NEWTON. 
Written by himself to the year 1763, and by Cecil con- 
tinued to his death in 1807. From the depths of darkness 
and sin, while wandering on the ocean and engaged in 
the slave-trade in Africa, and afler a chequered and mis- 
erable life for twelve years, the prayers of his mother 
were answered, and he became one of the brightest (mm- 
ments of the church of God, distinguished for devotional 
pie^, ripeness of Christian character, and usefulness as 
a minister of the Grospel, and an author of practical works 
and hymns of praise which have embalmed his memory 
in the hearts of evangelical Christians. Scarcely an ex- 
ample of such humble, mature, and cheerful piety is to be 
found in the history of good men. 



LIFE OF REV. SAMUEL KILPIN. 

This mentoir presents the life of a humble Christian 
and godly minister^ burning with zeal to be instrumental 
in bringing multitudes to God ; laboring ^ in season and out 
of season" with great skill and success, and ^ceasing not 
to warn every one, night and day, with tears." Perhaps 
there is no more striking example of a pastor successfully 
Uending personal efforts for the souls of men, like those 
of HarloQ Page, with fidelity in the pulpit, and the adop- 



96 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

tion of all other means to reach those in the highwa; 
and hedges of sin, and hring them to Christ As his ] 
bors were permanently blessed among those living in op 
neglect of the Gospel, so his own life was a pattem 
Christian devotion and zeal. 

A letter from Mrs. Kilpin of Exeter, Ehigland, says, " Y 
have perceived that the same spirit which has produced 1 
revivals in your highly favored country, dwelt richly in i 
beloved husband's heart, and produced Bimilap fruit — a s 
render of the soul with its mighty powers to the living G> 
Perhaps few, very few ministers of Christ reaped a lari 
harvest of souls for the Redeemer's kingdom whilst on ear 
but the good seed, which he was ever scattering in all dir 
tions, had taken root, and was producing the peaceful fin 
of righteousness to a much greater extent than he had imi 
ined. The intense desire for souls which he habitually i 
was the sure precursor of success eventually ; and being de 
he yet speaketh. His little unpretending memorial has b 
employed by the Lord the Spirit, to arouse, awaken, stii 
late, cheer, and comfort many a sleepy, weary pilgrim ; an 
have the consolation of seeing orphan-houses, day-schools, e 
springing up around me through the influence he exerted." 



MEMOIR OF HANNAH HOBBIE. 

She was remarkably disciplined for a long course 
years by distressing sickness, in which the meekness, ] 
tience, and triumphs of true religion were signally < 
hibited. Her religious exercises were very rich and 
structive, being mingled all the way with efforts for l 
good of others — in her letters, conversation, and even 1 
teaching of a Sabbath-school, who assembled in the ro 
of her confinement to hear &om her lips the words 
eternal life. 



CHARACTER OP VOLUMES. 97 

MEMOIR OF NORMAND SMITH. 

^ery striking exemplification of the usefulness of 
ligent Christian serving God in his business — con- 
ig his substance, from principle, to the spread of 
}pel ; and at the same time bearing the fruits of 
I a devout, prayerful life of useful efibrt for the 
'men." 



MISSIONARY MEMOIRS. 

Rev. Dr. Alexander, in the conclusion of the Soci- 
ition of the Memoir of Buchanan, speaks of the gen- 
luence of Missionary biography as follows: "This 
, with the biography of Brainerd, Pearce, Martyn, 
ind others, we trust will be the means of elevating 
va and giving impulse to the pious feelings of many 
ful mind. There is no stronger encouragement to 
lent efibrt than observing the efficacy which God 
.ciousjy given to the example of such a man as 
Brainerd, who spent his life in the deepest ob- 

in the dark bosom of the forest, among the un- 
savages ; but his memory is now embalmed, and 
ng dead, yet speaketh. May some of the same 

fruits attend the reading of this memoir of Bu- 
. English literature is now rich in evangelical 
•hy, and the stock is increasing every day." "Had 
Iville Home with trumpet tongue," said the Rev. 
ter of Andover, "aroused the energies of a slumber- 
u:ch, and Buchanan lifled the pall which covered 
lions of India, your missionaries would never have 
upon pagan ground." 



96 OHARACTER OF VOUTIIHK 

LIFE OF DAVID BRAINERD. 

Periiapfl in no other uninspired man have the fen 
penonal piety and devoted missionaiy zeal heen so 
nently united. His memoir being mainly extracted 
his diaiy, a great part of which was written as a pi 
record of Grod's dealings with his own soul, present 
true character, and is a burning fire, from which I 
Martyn and thousands of others have lit a flame th( 
blessed the world. 



MEMOIR OF REV. DR. BUCHANAN, 
This is the memoir by Pearson, in some parts a 
erably abridged, and in others much enlarged froi 
Buchanan's ^Christian Researches in Asia." Tl 
Dr. Pearson felt constrained to omit all that was cont 
in the " Christian Researches," which were publish* 
Dr. Buchanan, and doubtless form the most inten 
portion of his biography, yet the memoir comprises 
450 large 12mo pages. By the careful hand of ai 
and discreet theological professor, those parts of th 
moir "which cannot be of permanent interest ii 
country " were erased ; " the narrative of Dr. Buchc 
life afler his return to England, comprising 100 pa| 
Pearson, condensed into one short chapter," and 
most valuable portions of the Christian Research< 
serted in the order of time," with the addition of 
concluding remarks. The whole was then careful 
vised under the direction of the committee. " It i 
lieved," in the concluding words of the preface, ' 
every thing of permanent value in the memoir by Pe 
is retained, and that the additions from the Rosea 
in Asia render this volume more valuable than the 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. ^ 

Hal ; and^ indeed, in relation to Eastern missions, one of 
lie most instructive and useful works that have been 
'Tritten." 



MEMOIR OF HENRY MARTYN. 

The immediate cause which led this accomplished 
tcholax to relinquish his flattering prospects in England, 
ind devote himself as a missionary to the heathen, was, 
n the language of his biographer, ^'hearing the Rev. Mr. 
Simeon remark on the benefit which had resulted fix)m 
he services of Dr. Carey in India ; soon after which, pe> 
wsing the life of David Brainerd who finished a course 
>f self-denying labors for his Redeemer with unspeakable 
oy, his soul was filled with a holy emulation of that ex- 
raordinary man ; and afler deep consideration and fervent 
nrayer, he was at length fixed in a resolution to imitate 
lis example." The flame thus kindled in his heart ex- 
ured not till he yielded up his soul to God on the sultry 
>lains of Persia. His memoir is one of deep interest, 
nrhether regard be had to the spirit of self-consecration 
»rith which he thus early devoted himself; the conscien- 
aous cultivation of piety in his own heart ; his abundant 
md successful labors in India and Persia; his intercourse 
vith leading pagans and Mahommedans ; his translations 
if the Scriptures, or the various incidents through which 
le passed, till " dying, weary and alone, after the severest 
itniggles and most self-denying exertions," he was called 
x> rest in the bosom of his Lord. 



MEMOIR OF HARRIET WINSLOW. 
Mrs. Winslow having been for thbrteen years an active 
member of the mission in Ceylon, this memoir is valuable. 



100 CHARACTER OF VOLDlfES. 

not only as presenting the character of an acccnnplidied 
young lady consecrating herself to the welfare of tiie 
heathen, when the flame of missionary zeal had scarcely 
begun to bum and almost all around her frowned upon 
the enterprise, but as intelligently and happily introducing 
the reader into the daily trials and enjoyments, the hopes, 
labors, and disappointments of missionary life. In an 
introduction by the Rev. James H. Evans, to one of tbe 
two reprints of this work in England, from which it has 
also been translated into French, he justly notices tiie 
mass of missionary intelligence it comprises ; the ease 
and simplicity of its style and narrative of occurring 
events ; the example it affords of early consecration and 
patient self-denying activity and perseverance in the ser- 
vice of Christ ; the illustration of the usefulness, respon- 
sibility, and encouragements of Christian mothers, and 
especially the wives of missionaries ; the value to those 
abroad of mutual confidence, watchfulness, and fidelity; 
the riches of divine grace bestowed on the prayers and 
labors of faith and love ; and the exhibition it contains of 
the true principles of missionary efibrt, on the success of 
which depends, under God, the hope of millions throng- 
ing the pathway to eternal perdition. 

The Rev. Dr. Anderson says, " I do not know a biog- 
raphy, male or female, which, all things considered, gives 
so good an illustration of missionary life. The mission 
to which she belonged was among the best constituted, 
best tempered of missions among the heathen ; and she 
was among its fairest ornaments. I would that all wives 
of missionaries were like her, in their endeavors to be 
useful beyond the sphere of their own families. Her 
memoir is of great value, as furnishing an example ci 



CHABACTER OF VOLUMES. 101 

what female missionaries ought to be ; and it gives an 
admirable view of the mission, which cannot fail perma- 
nently to interest Christians of every grade of intelli- 
gence. It unfolds the true theory of missions, in a course 
of practice which, if carried into all nations with the 
same devout, humble, zealous spirit, will not disappoint 
the hopes of the people of God." 

An able writer says, " In Mrs. Winslow we have decided 
piety and the public profession of her faith at the early age of 
thirteen ; the period of youth improved amidst the social en- 
joyments and benefits of an accomplished circle of yomig 
ladies, and employed in forming the first Sabbath-school in 
her native town, and in all the deeds that give a charm to 
female piety ; early consecration to the missionary work, 
while almost all around her hesitated or opposed ; the descent 
of the Holy Spirit on the ship's company in which she sailed ; 
thirteen years of well-directed, prayerful, faithful labors, in a 
united and successful mission; her superintendence of the 
large native female school at Oodooville, from which it is re- 
markable that no pupil was regularly discharged who had not 
publicly prof eased faith in Christ; her character as a mother, 
committing some of her children to the dust in Ceylon, and 
sending her only son to die almost as soon as his feet were 
planted on her native shores ; her kind and attractive influ- 
ence exerted in journal letters to her friends, which led three 
of her sisters to follow her to India, and which constitute a 
valuable history of the mission ; and her eminent preparation 
for death, as if she had known that her Lord would come sud- 
denly, * as a thief in the night.' " 



MEMOIR OF MRS. SARAH L. H. SMITH. 
Mrs. Sarah Lanman Huntington Smith, late of the 
American mission in Syria, was a young lady of superioc 

9* 



▼«kCir. 



102 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

accomplishments, who early devoted heiself tothe seniee 
of Christ Her benevolent and sympathizing heait wis 
first moved to labor for the Mohegan Indians in her own 
vicinity, and she then became the wife of the Rev. Eli 
Smith, missionary in Syria, where she early fell a martyr 
to her excessive labors in a debilitating climate. She 
combined in a very uncommon degree the charms of in- 
tellectual, moral, and social refinement, and presents a 
model of female excellence worthy of imitation by all the 
daughters of our land. 

LIFE OF SCHWARTZ. 
Previous to the conunencement of American foreign 
missions, Schwartz labored nearly fifty years in India, 
from 1750 to his death in 1798. He was meek and gen- 
tle, and by the prevalence of Christian love, with forbear- 
ance, a deep discernment of character, true intellectual 
greatness, and steadfast singleness of purpose to benefit 
the heathen, he acquired the unbounded confidence, not 
only of the masses of the people, but of their pagan 
rulers, and of evangelical Christians in Great Britain, on 
the continent of Europe, and in America. 



LIFE OF REV. SAMUEL PEARCE. 
Pearce was the companion of Carey and Thomas, in 
establishing missions in India in 1793, and but for the 
conscientious interposition of his brethren, would have 
been the companion of their toils among the heathen. 
There is exhibited a sweetness in his character and piety; 
a spirit of self-sacrifice for the salvation of men ; a di- 
rectness and skill in his laborious efforts ; and an expan- 
sion of views, grasping at nothing less than the conver- 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 103 

*ion of the world to Christ, which renders the memoir at 
<tece highly attractive and adapted to be useful. 



MISClELLANEOUS. 

SACRED SONGS FOR FAMILY AND SOCIAL 

WORSHIP. 

This book of hymns with music has proved to be 
mong the most acceptable and useful of the Society's 
•ublications, " affording a much greater facility for culti 
ating and sustaining this delightful part of worship in 
lie family than has hitherto been enjoyed." The Hymns 
re of that standard, evangelical character, which has 
tamped with immortality the productions of Watts, Dod- 
ridge, Newton, Cowper, Steele, and kindred poets ; and 
he Umta those adapted for general and permanent use ; 
»mitting, on the one hand, those ungrammatical in their 
composition or offensive to musical taste; and on the 
>ther, those too delicate and refined, or more exclusively 
idapted to the worship of the great congregation. The 
nusic has been selected and adapted by Thos. Hastings, 
Esq. of New York, with the counsel and aid of Lowell 
\Ia8on, Esq. of Boston, Messrs. Pond of New York, 
Kingsley of Philadelphia, and others, the kind and gene- 
rous cooperation of all of whom the Conunittee would 
^tefully acknowledge. It is hoped that these " Sacred 
Songs " will be blessed of the Holy Spirit, in promoting 
individual, family, and social piety ; in refining and en- 
nobling the taste of the young, so as to supersede the 
relish for vulgar amusements and pursuits ; in endearing 
the parental roof to children, and in quickening 



gtha^^- 



104 CHAEACTER Or YOSJaWB. 

tion and enlnrening the afiectians of domestic chcke, tf 
they read the word of God and bow aroand the fiumly 
altar. 
The Hymns to this work are published separately. 



HYMNS FOR SOCIAL WORSHIP. 
This selection was occasioned by a demand f(xr a man- 
ual of Hymns adapted for use in neighborhood and other 
social meetings, embracing individuals under the yarioos 
operations of the Holy Spirit ; and by Christians of difb- 
ent denominations, whose efibrts are in many cases hap- 
pily united for the salvation of men. In its preparation 
the love of novelty and of change has been suppressed, 
while the most devout and spiritual efiusions of Watts, 
Newton, Cowper, Doddridge, Steele, and others, adapted 
equally to the learned and the unlearned, have been 
sought; and notwithstanding the variety of readings 
which have been extensively spread before the public, it 
is hoped that most Christians will, in this, as in the 
^Sacred Songs," find the hymns in the same form in 
which they have committed many of them to memory, and 
been accustomed to employ them in their songs of praise. 

ANECDOTES FOR THE FAMILY AND SOCIAL 

CIRCLE. 

This book contains 308 anecdotes, arranged under the 
heads of delightful discoveries, providential deliver- 
ances, irreligion and sins, reproofs, instruction, conver- 
sions, religion, love, duties, intercourse, kindness, and 
deaths in the family and social circle ; each conveying 
some valuable lesson, and almost all having a decidedly 
religious bearing. Being in an attractive form, amusing 



GHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 105 

ost thoughtless by their incident, *' teaching Provi- 
" to the most grave and reflecting, and instructing 
the facts of real life, it promises to be extensively 



MAMMON. 
s prize essay by Rev. John Harris, D. D., has corn- 
ed a wide circulation both in England and America, 
roduced a deeper impression, probably, than any 
work on this important subject The style is ele- 
idapted to the most refined taste, and pervaded by 
Scriptural sentiment, while the current of thought 
g through the book is of surpassing richness and 

• 

any book has been published for twenty years," writes 
3d fiiend, " which is worth the careful reading of every 
an in our land, * Mammon ' is surely that book. In 
>nto the pleasing fact that twenty editions of 1,000 each 
>een circulated in England, and many thousand copies 
erica, I see it stated that the sum of $1,000 has lately 
ontributed to the cause of missions by a single individ- 
lio was made sensible of his duty by a perusal of this 
nt and soul-stirring work." 



ABBOTT'S MOTHER AT HOME. 

3 work, which is written in a chaste aUd attractive 
was designed for the benefit of "mothers in the 
DU walks of life," to aid them, by familiar illustra- 
>f maternal duty, in the fulfilment of their arduous 
The various topics are arranged under the heads 
ponsibility; maternal authority; the mother's difii- 
i; faults and errors; religious instruction, 



:3fs 



100 CHARACTER OP YOUma 

suits. It has proved highly acceptable to motfaeis, comag 
directly home to their hearts, in the bosiiieaB of training 
their little ones. The mother sees the high standard be- 
fore her, in reference to her efforts for the welfare of ha 
children hoth in this life and that to come. She feels 
new courage in her endeavors ; and regrets that she can- 
not retain the kind and sympathizing author longer tbn 
to his closing paragraph. Let this book be univeisally 
obeyed, and the coming age will be trained for the mil- 
lenniuuL 



JAMES' YOUNG MAN FROM HOME. 
This work is written in an attractive style with pate^ 
nal affection, and is well adapted to guard the young who 
are away fix)m the restraints of hcMne, against the snares 
and temptations by which they are surrounded, especially 
in larger cities and towns. 



MASON ON SELF-KNOWLEDGE. 
This work, which ably discusses the nature and im- 
portance of self-knowledge, its benefits, and the varioos 
means by which it may be attained, was first published 
in 1745. It not only guides the mind to an acquaintance 
with itself, but to the cultivation of such habits of self- 
examination and reflection as are likely to fit for Ae 
duties and relations of life ; and at the same time, bj 
showing our unworthiness and ruin by sin, to make ufi 
feel the need of a Mediator, through whose atonemeni 
and merits alone we can ever be found accepted witli 
God. 

The late Hon. Thomas W. Gilmer, Secretary of thi 
Navy, stated to Mr. S. R S. Bissel, that when he was in 



CHARACTER OF V0LU1I£8.> |07 

Washingtoii, profiecutmg some business before one of the 
eonimittees of Congress,, time hung rather hesvy upon his 
hands, and he went into a bookstore to procure a novel, 
or some other light work, to drive away the ennuL As 
he was looking over the titles of various works, his eye 
^as arrested by that word, ^ Self4cnowledgeJ He took 
bwn the book — ^read a brief portion — ^became more and 
!iO!re interested — ^purcha^ed and carried it to his room, 
nawsa permitted to thank (rod, veiy soon after, that it 
ras the means of acquainting him, not only with himself, 
ut also with the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom 
:> know is life eternal. He then proceeded to speak of 
ther instances of good effected by means of that book, 
[m>ugh his own and other instrumentalities. 



DIBBLE'S THOUGHTS ON MISSIONS. 

This is one of the most powerful, impassioned, and soul 
tirring appeals for missions, that has been written ; dis 
ussing the subjects of the true spirit of missions ; Chris 
ian stewardship; the guilt of neglecting tlie heathen 
be Saviour's last command ; laymen called to the field 
f missions ; claims of missions on ministers of influence 
inport of the great commission ; trials to be met It has 
n additional interest as being a voice from the tomb 
he self-sacrificing and devoted author having been called 
enter into rest soon after it was prepared for the press. 

The Rev. Dr. Wayland, of Providence, R. L, expressed 
is e^miest desire that this work should be published, as 
ceeminently adapted to enkindle a missionary spirit ; and 
be Rev. Dr. Tucker says of it, " It is a wonderful book, 
t stirred my soul like the sound of a trumpet Having 
teen on the ground, where the Spirit of God was poured 




108 CHARACTER Or VOLDIOS. . 

out more cq[)iotiBly than in any place since tilie great le* 
▼ival at Jerusalem, he wrote under the influence of ^ 
same Spirit No man who had not been Unitized fion 
above could have written such a Ikx^" 



SCUDDER'S REDEEMER'S LAST COMMAND. 
This is a bold and stirring appeal in behalf of tihe 
millions of perishing heathen, addressed to all ChristiaiiB, 
and more especially to mothers, ministers. Sabbath-school 
teachers, laymen, pious young men, pious physiciaos, 
and theological students. It is an appeal from a glowing 
heart, made after twenty-five years* service in India, and 
just as the author was about to return to his field of labor 
at Madras, where his eldest son was already laboring as 
a missionary, and to which field his second son was about 
to accompany the father, and his third son was ezpectiiig 
soon to follow them. We know not who could more «^ 
propriately address the churches on this subject 



SCUDDER'S APPEAL TO MOTHERS. 
This appeal in behalf of the heathen portrays the mise- 
ries of the pagan world, and the blessings which the Gos- 
pel brings to females, with cogent motives to mothers to 
train their sons for the missionary work. 



THE WITHERED BRANCH REVIVED. 
A beautiful and authentic narrative of a young lady> 
(Miss Malcom, of New York,) who became pious under 
the faithful labors of the author; but was enticed into 
fashionable amusements until she became a "withered 
branch ;" and then, by the grace of God, was " revived,** 
and won back again to honor Christ in her life and death. 



OHAAACTER OF VOLaMES: 109 

" BEECHER ON INTEMPERANCE. 

Showing Uie nature, occiuionB, signs, evils, and remedy 
P Intemperance. ThoAgh written at the commencement 
f the Temperance reformation, these disconrses, in por- 
raying the varioos bearings of the sin, and in powerfiil 
ppeal, equal any thing that has since appeared. 



DR. EDWARDS' TEMPERANCE MANUAL. 

The aul^hor of this standard treatise was one of the first 
lovers in the Temperance reformation, and has been fa- 
liliar with its history to the present time. At its com- 
lencement he labored seven years, visiting different 
arts of the country, and spreading out the reasons why 
U men should abstain from the use, as a beverage, of 
itoxicating liquors, and from the traffic in them. He 
Iso collected numerous facts, which were embodied in a 
olume of " Permanent Temperance Documents," which 
as been widely circulated, and translated into seven of 
1% languages of Europe. The Manual is a dense con- 
entration of the principles and facts on the subject of 
!*emperance, as adapted to the present time; showing, 
nth great clearness and force, the immorality of the use | 
f intoxicating liquors as a beverage, and of the traffic in 
hem for that purpose. No family or young man m the 
Jnited States should be without it 



DR. EDWARDS' SABBATH MANUAL. 

The first Part of this work shows that the sabbatical 
irrangement has its foundation in the nature and relations 
)f things, and that the fourth commandment is an expres- 
don of the moral obligation which thence arises, and is 

VoLCir. 1^ 




)& 



110 CHASAOTER OF yOLDMES. 

binding upon the whole human family. The seccHid Fait 
shows that the day which has ordinarily been kept by tbe ht 
Christian chorch as the Sabbath, is the day which God, h. 
in his word and his providence, has clearly shown tkt H Vi 
is his will should be so kept by all people to the eni^^ 
the world. The third Part exhibits the Sabbath as a 
FcanUy IngtihtUonj and shows its influence upon children 
while under the care of their parents, and on young foen, 
in that most dangerous of all periods, from the time they )! 
leave their fathers house to the tim^ they become heads | 
of families. The fourth Part shows the proper mode of 
keeping the Sabbath, in respect to business, travelling) 
and the various ways in which men are tempted to pro- 
fane the day. 

BURDER'S SERMONS TO THE AGED. 
Twelve sermons, in large type, on topics specially ap- 
propriate to the spiritual benefit and consolation of those 
in advanced years. * 

THE BOATSWAIN'S MATE. 

A work adapted to gain the attention of seamen, in the 
form of dialogue and narrative, and which has been in I 
demand among that large class of readers. 



THE SET OF BOUND TRACTS. 
Every one of the more than five hundred treatises em- 
braced in these neat and attractive volumes has been 
selected and prepared with great care. They contain 
the most able discussions of important topics throu^out 
the whole range of practical truth and duty ; the most 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. lU 

touching and instractive anthentic narratives, and portions 
adapted to all ages and classes of readers, embodying an 
amount of mature and condensed thought probably not to 
be found, on kindred subjects and within the same com- 
pass, in the works of any one author of any age. This 
set forms an invaluable library for a family, the children 
of which will be found repairing to it from week to week, 
and year to year, as if it contained mines of entertain- 
ment that could never be exhausted. 



VOLUMES FOR THE YOUNG. 

Among the most responsible and useful departments 
of the Society's labors is the providing of books for the 
youngj which shall interest and instruct, without cherish- 
ing those delusive views of human life which unfit them 
to meet its trials and discharge its duties. This is the 
more necessary, as the adversary, through writers, pub- 
lishers, and venders, heedless of the welfare of men and 
pandering to a corrupt taste in many cases first created 
by themselves, is filling the land with high-wrought infidel 
and licentious fiction, inflaming the young mind with 
dreams of unreal bliss, rendering the endearments of 
home insipid, and even the word of God and the Gospel 
of Christ too tame and spiritless to have their regard. 
The niunbers, especially in our cities and villages, who 
are thus ensnared and unfitted to live or to die, are lam- 
entably large, and the evil demands the united efibrts of 
the friends of truth and soberness, as far as possible to 
preoccupy minds not yet diverted from the love of truth 
and fact, and to suj^lant injurious works by providing 



112 CHARACTER OF VOUJMBB. 

books in all respects adapted to gain the attentkm tni 
vrin the underBtandiiig and the heait. 

** If the young," feays Mr. Grallaudet, " read nothing bot 
stoiy-books, intended almost entirely to entertain them; 
or, if they read so many of these books as to dislike to 
read those of a more serious and instructive kind, t^ 
there is very gnat danger of their acquiring astrong^Mt 
to the reading of the Bible, For the Bible is veiy fiir from 
being a book of mere entertainment It is full, indeed, 
of interesting things ; but to understand them, and to get 
good from them, requires patient thinking and serious fed- 
ing. Let parents and teachers beware lest, by indulging 
children too much in the perusal of books of mere amuse- 
ment, they acquire such a fondness for fiction, that it ^ 
be difficult for them to read any thing that demands at- 
tention, and tends to produce serious' thoughts. Should 
this lead to their considering it an irksome and disagree- 
able task to sit down, at suitable times, to the faitfafbl 
perusal of the sacred Scriptures, what an error in their 
education has been committed — ^what a tremendous evil 
has been incurred ! The influence of fiction is, just now, 
immense. It sways the minds of the rising generation) 
who have access to books, to a vast extent It is mould- 
ing their intellectual habits. It is forming their taste. It 
is influencing their moral feelings. It is training th^ 
up, in too many instances, to a loose, desultory, luxurious, 
and disconnected kind of reading, which will render to 
them, in maturer life, all our standard works of religious 
truffi, by which the souls of English and American Chris- 
tians of earlier days were nurtured to deep thought and 
a vigorous faith, insipid, irksome, revolting." 

<< It is painful," says Mrs. Hutchings, ^ to see the child 



CHARACTEE OF VOLUMES. 113, 

m\ has acquired a taste for fictitious reading, even 
lough of a religious cast, turn away dissatisfied fix)m 
nithfiil narrations of real life. Well may it excite pa- 
ental anxiety to see the young reader rush eagerly through 
ne fiction after another, impatient of the delay interposed 
y the moral of the tale, dashing aside every sober senti- 
lent, imbibing the stimulus, rejecting the nourishment, 
ill the mind, exhausted and craving, is unfitted for the 
lersevering ef^rt so essential to the acquisUion of useful 
nowledge, or for the performance of the common, unex- 
iting, but peremptory duties of life. There is, it may 
»e, a class of fictions not highly wrought, but tinged in 
he staid coloring of nature. While in interest these 
lannot compete with true narrative, do we not usually 
ind them stamped with the peculiar and biassed conceits 
>f the mind that invented them, rather than with those 
essons of wisdom and instruction which Providence inter- 
veaves in the thread of all actual human experience ?" 

The following criticism by the distinguished Rev. Rob- 
5RT Hall, even if it censures too severely the. writings 
>f Miss Edgeworth, presents, nevertheless, the most val- 
lable and discriminating thoughts applicable to a large 
;lass of semi-religious fiction. 

" She is the most irreligious writer I ever read ; not so much 

rom any direct attacks she makes on religion, as from a uni- 
versal and studied omission of the subject. In her writings 
^ou meet a high strain of morality. She delineates the most 
drtuous characters, and represents them in the most afiecting 
circumstances in life — ^in distress, in sickness, and even in the 
mmediate prospect of eternity, and finally sends them off the 
stage with their virtue unimpaired — and all this without the 
remotest allusion to religion. She does not directly oppose 

VoLCir. 1^ 




114 CBARACTTER OF VOLUMEa 

religion, bat makes it appear nnneceoBary, by ezlubiting t 
perfect virtue without it. No works ever produced no bti 
an effect on my own mind. I did not expect to find an/ine- 
ligion in Miss Edgeworth's writings. I was off my gnaid— 
their moral character disarmed me. I read nine volumes of 
them at once ; but I could not preach with any comfort for 
six weeks after reading them. I never felt so little ardor in 
my profession, or so little interest in religion. She was once 
called to account for the character of her works, and asked 
her reasons for representing a mere ideal morality, withoat 
attributing any influence to religion. She said that if she had 
written for the lower classes, she would have recommended 
religion ; but that she had written to a class to whom it was 
less necessary. How absurd ! She seemed to think that the 
virtues of the higher orders of society needed no assistance 
from religion, and that it was only designed as a curb and 
a muzzle for the brute." 

Of the novels of Walter Scott, which are acknow- 
ledged tx) be among the least injurious of this class of 
writings, an able writer in the London Christian Gnar- 
dian, after presenting a clear view of their influence, 
says, 

" I would raise my voice, however feeble, against their ad- 
mission into Christian families, and I do most earnestly en- 
treat of Christian parents who wish to preserve their chil- 
dren's minds in a pure and healthy state, and who desire to 
keep them * unspotted from the world,' and to bring them up 
in * the nurture and admonition of the Lord,' to beware how 
they put such works into their hands ; as I am well persuaded, 
alas, by personal experience, that the evil effects arising from 
the perusal of one novel, counteract the good effects of twenty 
sermons : the novel reader lives in a fancied world of his ] 
own, without sorrow and without pain, where all is happiness i 



CHARAOTEE OF VOLUMES. 115 

mnd peace ; and consequently, when heal misfortrine drags 
him down from his visionary world, and compels him to view 
thin^ as they beallt axe, and reminds him that he is but a 
man, he murmurs against the providence of God, repines at 
his station, becomes irritated with all around him, neglects 
the duties which he owes to his God, his country, and to him- 
eeif ; lives in misery, and ofttimes dies in woe/' 

It is most clear, that the tremendous influence of the 
public press in our country may not be left solely to the 
operation and influence of sales for the purposes of gain. 
The most valuable books must be prepared in an attractive 
0t^ej and/urmshed at the lowest rates, and Christian efforts 
must be put forth all over the land to place them in the 
hands of the people — ^by sale, if it can be done ; gratui- 
tously, if it cannot 



GALLAUDET'S SCRIPTURE BIOGRAPHY. 

/ YoL 1, Adam to Jacob. 
VoL 2, Life of Joseph. 
VoL 3, Life of Moses, Part 1. 
VoL 4, Life of Moses, Part 2. 
YoL 5, Joshua, Judges. 
YoL 6, Ruth and Samuel. 
YoL 7, life of David. 

The cordial acceptance with which, for a course of 
years, these volumes have met from parents and children, 
is the best evidence that the talents and skill of the ac- 
complished and benevolent author have been wisely em- 
ployed. In founding and for several years successfully 
conducting the American Asylum for the deaf and dumb, 
he was led patiently to analyze the process by which 
truth is received into the opening mind, and thus acquired 



1 16 CHARACTER OF YOLUMEB. 

a skill m presenting troth to the yoang idiich few odier 
men possess. 

The above works are designed and adapted, among 
other important objects, to lead the attention of the yoong 
to Bible hiaiory ; to fasten doctrinal and practical troth 
upon the mind, by inJUrwtamng it inseparably with nam- 
tive and facts in natural science; to a^pUdn difficult 
Scripture topics ; to induce the habit of do9t cmd comHii' 
wnu 1houf(ht ; to furnish an exantpU of the best methods 
of imparting religious instruction ; and, above all, to gnide 
the youthful mind to Christ 

The author, with his characteristic fidelity, cleaness 
of thought, and simplicity of style, has so presented the 
important facts of sacred history, that they cannot but 
make a lasting impression on the youthful mind ; iMe 
the various, and in some cases tragic, and very difficult 
scenes he has been called to record, have been spread 
before the reader, accompanied with such guards and 
reflections as are adapted at once to prevent injury and 
secure a good moral impression. There can be no hesi- 
tation in saying, that the volumes of this series of Scrip- 
ture Biography constitute some of the most attractive and 
yet safe Scriptural and valuable reading now extant for 
the young. 

" Said a yonng man who bought a set of these yolnmes, 
' Before I read the first volume through, I commenced a life of 
secret prayer ; before I finished the set, I found peace in be- 
lieving ; and I ascribe my conversion, under God, to the read- 
ing of these books.' When I saw him about two months 
since, he was ardently engaged in a revival, and may become 
a preacher of the Grospel. . He bids fiur for high usefulness." 




CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 117 

S HISTORY OF J6NAH.— THE HISTORY OP 

JOSIAH. 

ese works resemble the preceding volumes of Chris- 
Biography, and may yet be substantially embodied 
it series. 



LLAUDEPS YOUTHS BOOK OF NATURAL 

THEOLOGY. 

is standard work, in its familiar and attractive illus- 
Qs, conveys, even to an intelligent child, clear con- 
>ns of the nature and conclusiveness of the argument 
dch the being, wisdom, power, and goodness of God, 
roved from his works ; and in doing this it opens 
the young mind a view of the wonders of nature, in 
lutilus ; the an^ wrist, and hand ; the bones, joints, 
es, tendons, and nerves ; the eye and expression of 
)untenance ; the elephant and other animals, and in- 
; the bee and caterpillar, the chrysalis in connection 
the resurrection ; instincts ; proportion and adapta- 
f one part of the works of God tp others, etc., thus 
ng the mind to the Creator through the wonderRil 
I of his hand. " The author cannot but think," he 
n the preface to this work, " that the evidences of 
tistence of God, are quite too much overlooked in 
jly religious education of children and youth. He 
wish, for one, that they might form a part of the 
ir course of instruction in Sabbath-schools, and of 
iligious reading in families. The subject may be 
deeply interesting. Many of the fads connected 
t, are as really entertaining as most of the incidents 
books of religiatajictionj with which children have 



118 CHARACTER OF YOLUMBB. 

been so extensively supplied.^ They aie irasdy mofe |a 
instructive ; and tend, too, to form a taste for us^ tnov- 
hdge, which, if confirmed into a habit, is of uni^ieakable 
value." 



THE CHILD'S BOOK ON REPENTANCE. 
In this treatise the Scripture view of this great subject 
•is, by a skilful, analjrtical, and inductive process, gradu- 
ally and clearly unfolded to the minds of the yoang; 
while the truths involved are equally important to all, 
since one only method of salvation is revealed. Various 
practical difficulties are discussed and explained ; and an 
earnest personal application made to the conscience and 
the heart of the reader. 



ABBOTT'S CHILD AT HOME. 
This book ia for the child, what the Mother at Home, 
by the same author, is for the mother — ^ftill of interesting 
and instructive incident, presenting disobedience and vice 
in their true repulsive forms, and throwing a charm around 
filial duty and true piety calculated at once to soften, 
impress, and refine the heart The main topics of thought 
are arranged under the heads of responsibility ; decep- 
tion; obedience; religious truth; piety, and traits of 
character. 

Mr. J. C. Meeks says, " In the same house vrith a child 
who had this work, was a young man very much opposed to 
religion, so much so that he would leave the room and sit out 
of doors at the time of family worship. He could not be pre- 
vailed upon to attend upon the preaching of the Gospel or 
read the Bible. * The Child at Home* fell into his hands. 
He became interested in it ; as he read it his heart began to 



CHARAGTER OF VOLUMEa 119 

^elt and break, until, completely subdued, he thinks he gave 
himself to Christ. He appears well, and attributes his change 
of feeling, under the grace of God, to the reading of that 
book." 



THE CHILD'S BOOK ON THE SABBATH. 

This book was written with << the design of employing 
such language and modes of illustration as shall render 
the subject not only intelligible but interesting to the 
young, and be at the same time instructive and profitable 
to persons of more advanced age." All the prominent 
arguments, from the original institution of the Sabbath 
in Paradise, and its necessity to the welfare of the body, 
of the mind, and of society, are clearly presented ; its 
perpetuity shown ; the proper manner and imperative mo- 
tives for its observance enforced ; and its violations and 
the dangers that threaten it faithfully and solemnly ex- 
hibited. 



FOSTER'S APPEAL TO THE YOUNG. 
This appeal by the Rev. John Foster, author of the 
Essay on Decision of Character, is written with great 
ability and earnestness, adapted to gain the attention of 
the intellectual and refined, and impress them with the 
truths of salvation. 



NEWTON'S LETTERS TO AN ADOPTED 

DAUGHTER. 

These letters by the Rev. John Newton, are a happy 
specimen of the author's epistolary writing. There is a 
sweetness and playfulness in them which renders them 



1510 CHARACFEE OF VOLUMBI. 

attmctiTe to the yoang, while they enibody the mostnl- 
uable and instractiTe hints for gttiding the life and seecff* 
ing eternal happiness. 



THE RAISING OF LAZARUS. 

A vivid and impressive narrative of the scenes attend- 
ing the raising of Lazarus firom the dead, drawn from the 
Scripture history, with much richness of evangelical 
thought and instruction. 



THE PEEP OF DAY.— LINE UPON LINE.— 

PRECEPT UPON PRECEPT. 

These three volumes, from the gifted pen of an evan- 
gelical lady of the church of England, consist simply of 
Bihle history, brought down in the most familiar manner 
to the capacities of young ckUdren, many of whom have 
been charmed by the narrative and through it learned the 
way of eternal life. " The Peep of Day" is a minute 
history of our Lord, from his birth to his ascension. 
"Line upon Line" begins with the creation, and proceeds 
with the Old Testament history to the death of Joshua; 
and "Precept upon Precept" takes up the narrative at the 
birth of Samuel, carrying it to the close of the Old Tes- 
tament history. We regard these three works as standing 
at the head of all others in making divine truth clear 
and attractive to little children. The Biblical Repertory 
says, " We have difficulty in expressing all the admiration 
and love we feel towards the Peep of Day series. After 
using them with children, we are prepared to Set them 
above any thing of their class we have ever seen." 



GHABACTER OF VOLUMBS. 131 

VOLUMES OF NAflRATIVE TRACTS. 

3 following eight volumes, ISmo, consist of select 
ive Tracts, printed in an open type, with neat en- 
igs, three Tracts, with one exception, being em- 
i in each volume. They contain the most interest- 
id instructive reading, and in this form have proved 
r acceptable to the young, 

S DAIRTMAN's daughter, TOUNe COTTAGER, AND 
AFRICAN SERVANT. 

•ee Tracts by Rev. Legh Richmond, universally 
1 and admired, being the same which, in a some- 
more extended form, constitute his Annals of the 



the spoiled child, david baldwin, and 
general's widow. 

illage in the mountains, cgirversion of peter 
bayssiere, and history of a bible. 

e henry and his bearer, the amiable louisa, 
and ann eliza williams. 

E widow's SON, WATCHMAKER AND HIS FAMILY, 
AND 'tis all for THE BEST. 

CUNNINGHAM, DINAH DOUDNEY, AND THE CHILDREN 
OF THE FORESH 

HEPHERD OF SALISBURY PLAIN, MOUNTAIN BflLLER, 
AND GEORGE VINING. 

lM and THE WOLF, THE FOOL's FENCE, THE POOR 
man's house repaired, and JAMIE. 




199 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

MEMOIRS OF THE YOUNG. 

CLEMENTINE CUVIER. 
Amid the gay scenes of Paris, this only daughter of thfl 
celebrated Baron Cuvier devoted herself to Christ and 
faithfully exemplified the piety of the GospeL A brief 
sketch of her life and early death, by the Rev. Madi 
Wilks, is here beautifully amplified by the Rev. John 
Angell James, constituting this a most attractive and 
acceptable memoir to all classes of readers. 



kt 



i* 



HENRY OBOOKIAH. 
A native of the Sandwich Islands, whom Providence 
brought to our shores, and who, under the kind care of 
the Rev. Samuel J. Mills and others, was brought to tbe 
saving knowledge of Christ He adorned his professioD, 
and was prepared to return as a missionary to his own 
people, when he was cut down and departed in the tri- 
umphs of faith. 

CHARLES L. WINSLOW. 

This lovely youth, son of the Rev. Miron and Mrs. 
Harriet L. Winslow, missionaries in Lidia, died a few 
days after his arrival in this country. His life has been 
re-written, revised, and enlarged, by Mrs. Elizabeth C 
Hutchings, whose residence in India has eminently quali- 
fied her for the service. It is a pleasing illustration of 
consistent early piety, and the gracious rewards of parental 
faithfulness. The young have here " an illustration of 
a confiding, filial, afiectionate, and obedient temper, and 
the blessing of having pious parents. They will learn, 



CHAAAGTER OF VOLUMES. 158 

too, their own obligation to an oveiruling Providence, 
«om seeing how this child was watched over, guarded, 
^ preserved amid threatening dangers." 



AMELIA, THE PASTOR'S DAUGHTER. 
A narrative, with a preface by Rev. Mr. James of Bir- 
mingham, of a young lady who exhibited delightful evi- 
dence of piety ; was ready to devote herself to foreign 
missions, but was early called to the rest above. This is 
in all respects a pleasing and delightful memoir. 



ELIZABETH BALES. 

By her pastor, the Rev. Mr. James of Birmingham. 
She was a suffering, but highly useful female Christian, 
and her narrative furnishes a cheering example of what 
one with a debilitated frame may accomplish in Sabbath- 
schools, Tract distribution, and by other methods of use- 
fulness. 



CAROLINE HYDE. 
In a comparatively humble sphere, she abounded in 
labors for the temporal and eternal welfare of children, 
of the poor, the sick, and suffering ; and to few, from the 
time of her conversion till her death, have the words of 
the Saviour been more applicable, '' She hath done what 
she could." 

EMILY MARIA. 
A narrative of another young female, the charm of the 
femily circle and the ornament of the church of God, but 
who in early youth was called firom time. 




194 CHARACTER OP VOLUMES. 

NATHAN W. DICKERMAN. 

In the character of this lovely child, who died at the 
age of eight years, as presented by the Rev. Groiham D. 
Abbott, with strict adherence to facts, there appear very 
remarkable evidences of tnxe conversion, and a ripenefls 
and sweetness of Christian character, showing how out 
of the mouths of babes God will perfect his praise. 



JOHN MOONEY MEAD. 

A striking memoir of a child of five yeafe, who gave 
evidence of faith in Christ, and whose life is filled with 
pleasing incidents, illustrating the &ct that children may 
be early converted, and the duty and encouragement of 
parents to seek this, to labor for it, and to expect it under 
the grace and blessing of God. 



MARY LOTHROP. 
An accurate delineation of facts by the wife of Rev. 
Dr. Anderson, of Boston, " adding another to the bright 
pictures set before children to allure them into the paths 
of piety, and before parents to encourage and stimulate 
them in the religious education of their children," The 
devoted piety of the little sufiTerer magnifies the riches of 
divine grace, and her simple and pleasing stoiy has been 
told in several languages into which it has been trans- 
lated, f 

Mr. Swift says, " A young miss of a cultivated mind be- 
came deeply affected with the contents of this little work, and 
was led to exclaim, * Should little Mary give her heart to the 
Saviour, and love his service so, and should I live at enmity 
with God until I am thirteen years old V After passmg eev- 



CHARACTER OF VOLXTMES. ISKS 

«ral dasrs of sadness, and as many almost sleepless nights, she 
gave her heart to the Saviour." 

" I have just been reading Mary Lothrop," says a devoted 
mother, " and have been very much interested and afTected by 
it. I could not help going to God to thank him for the privi- 
lege of reading it, and to ask him that my own dear child 
may be like her in spirit ; and I would not except her suffer- 
ing and early death, if she must otherwise grow up in sin, an 
enemy to God, and finally go down to eternal woe. It ought 
to be in every mother's library, as well as in every child's." 



ROLLS PLUMBE. 

An authentic memoir of a child, who beautifully exem- 
plified the influence of love to Christ, by Rev. Andrew 
Reed, D. D., of London. It is written in a style adapted 
to interest the young, and adds another testimony to the 
evidences of early conversion. 



BOOKS WITH NUMEROUS ENGRAVINGS. 

TREES, FRUITS, AND FLOWERS OF THE BIBLR 
This work is in a neat, attractive style, the result of the 
careful study of the history of each tree or fruit described, 
and is a valuable help to an acquaintance with this part 
of the sacred Scriptures. 



THE SCRIPTURE ANIMALS. 
Like the " Trees,^ Fruits, and Flowers," this little book 
presents a careful and accurate yieyr of the principal ani- 
mals named in the Bible, thus assisting the young to an 
acqtiaintance with the sax^red oracles, and enriching their 

11* ^ 

Vol Cir. ^*- M 



196 OHARAGTEft OF YOLUMEB. 

minds with facts and illustrations connected widi Ail 
department of the Creator's works. 



THE CHILDREN OF THE BIBLE. 

** The Children of the Bible, as examples and as mxBr 
ings," in poetry, presents the history of Ishmael, Moees, 
Samuel, Joash, Josiah, Timothy, and others, in a fonn 
adapted to interest the young, and by the influence of 
their example to guard against sin and allure to the patlis 
of heavenly wisdom. 



CHILD'S BOOK OF BIBLE STORIES. 

Ten stories on the Fall, by Rev. Mr. Gallaudet, each 
so illustrating a great truth involved, as to be intelligible 
to a child. 



FEET'S SCRIPTURE LESSONS. 
The author's experience in reaching the opening minds 
of the deaf and dumb has given him skill in impartmg 
knowledge to the young. In this woric he. begins with 
the most simple instructions to a child in reference to 
God, the soul, and the creation; and then presents a brief 
Scripture biography, from Adam to Christ and the apos- 
tles and first mart3rrs, including a notice of the crucifixion 
and the resurrection. 



LETTERS TO LITTLE CHILDREN. 
A father here relates a series of interesting incidents, 
interweaving information and counsel beneficial to a 
child in reference both to the present and a future life. 



CHARACTER OF VOLOMEBL 137 

GRfiAT TRUTHS IN SIMPLE WORDS. 

Consisting' of forty-five short chapters, or portions, each 

istrating the existence, the works, or the providence of 

>d ; or presenting some truth of the Bible, connected 

th the plan of salvation by Christ, and our duties to 

od and men. 



AMOS ARMFIELD. 

** Amos Armfield, or the leather-covered Bible," con- 
sists of conversations by a shrewd, good-natured man, 
with children who clustered around him, all of them il- 
lustrating some narrative from the Bible; the tendency of 
the whole book being to commend the inspired volume to 
the attention and acceptance of the young. 



THE CHILD'S HYMN-BOOK. 

Containing 235 chaste and carefully selected hymns, 
embracing many pieces not found in any other collection, 
some of them adapted to young children, and others that 
will gratify the cultivated tajste of those in more mature 
yean. 

THE TRACT PRIMER. 

Prepared with great care, with multiplied engravings, 
containing alphabets, spelling lessons, simple reading in 
prose and poetry, portions of Scripture history, and every 
variety of matter appropriate to a primer, with an admi- 
rable Catechism the answers to which are in the lan- 
guage of the Bible. This attractive little work has been 
prepared not only for the children of our land generally, 
but with a special reference to the benefit of families 



190 CHARACTER OF VOUJIOSL 

reached by colporteurs in i^ch Darents or children an 
unable to read. 



DR. WATTS* CATECHISMS. 

Containing his Catechism of Scripture names, his fin 
and second Catechisms, and his Preservative &€m th 
Sins and Follies of Childhood and Youth. 



WATTS* DIVINE AND MORAL SONGS. 

A litde woi^ which has been more blessed than almo 
any thing else within so small a compass. Issued sepi 
rately, and also bound with Dr. Watts' Catechisms. 



SERIES OF CHILDREN'S BOOKS BOUND. 

BOOKS FOR SHAIiL CHILDREN. — BOOKS FOR CHILDREN.- 

BOOKS FOR THE TOUNG. 

These volumes contain a great variety of reading, 
successive numbers of books for children, each book o 
namented with neat engravings. 



POCKET MANUALS. 

CLARKE'S SCRIPTURE PROMISES. 

f 

This collection of Scripture promises, which has chee 
ed so many of the people of God amidst the various tria 
and duties of life, in sickness and the approach of deat 
is here issued in a convenient form to be a companion 
home or abroad; guiding our feet by the light of inspir 
tion itself and affording refreshment from the Bread 




.V _ . m. 



COAftACTER OF yOI.UMB& 1311 

DAILY SCRIPTURE EXPOSITOR. 

ext for each day in the year, with a brief and strik- 
>inmentary selected from some standard author. 



:IL AND FLAVEL'S GIFT FOR MOURNERS. 

;il's " Friendly Visit to the House of Mourning," 
lavel's " Token, or Gift for Mourners," two of the 
3minently rich and spiritual works of this character 
lave been produced by men uninspired; drawing 
from those eternal fountains whence alone consola- 
nd support can be derived. 



ADVICE TO A MARRIED COUPLE. 

the well-known treatise of Bean, an evangelical 
of the Rev. Heniy Venn is added, rendering this 
ily appropriate and acceptable manual 



CECIL'S REASONS FOR REPOSE. 
e substance of a morning conversation by the Rev. 
ird Cecil with a Christian who was disturbed by in- 
ioubts. An able writer on the evidences of Chris- 
f justly says, ^ It would be difficult to find so many 
r arguments in so small a space." 



E BOOK OF PSALMS. — TH^ BOOK OF PROVERBS. 



GEMS OF SACRED POETRY, 
accomplished writer says it embraces more selec- 
of real poetical beauty and merit than any other 
ition of equal compass which he has seen. 



TEXTS FOR EACH DAY IN THE YEAR. 

DAILT TEXTS. 

A text of Scripture and verse of a hymn for each day. 

DIART. 

The Daily Texts interleaved for the insertion of memo- 



190 GHARACTER OF VOLUMEB. 

MASON'S CRUMBS, 
tf Cnunhs firom the Master's Tahle f or select paflsagei k 
filled with the marrow of the GrospeL ^ 

is 

\ 
randa. |^ 

DAILT FOOD FOR CHRISTIAITS. 

A text, a verse of a hymn, and a Scripture promise fiv 
each day. 

HEAVEKLT SCAimA. 

A Scriptmre prayer and promise for each day. 

MILK FOR BABES. ' 

A text and verse of a hjrmn for each day. 

DEW-DROPS. 

A text for each day. 



VOLUMES IN GERMAN. 

TRANSLATIONS OF ENGLISH VOLUMES ABOVE 

NOTICED. 

Buntan's Pilgrim's Progress, . . See page 53 
Baxter's Saiitts' Rest, • • . « « 45 

Baxter's Call to the Unconverted, " "47 
Doddridge's Rise and Progress, . « « 60 
Nelson's Cause and Cure of Inpidelitt, " « 80 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 131 

son's Replt to Paine and Gibbon, see page 82 
Evidences of Christianity, . " "84 

ilviDENCE OF PaOPHECT, 

3n's Conversion of St. Paul, 

)r Harlan Page, 

i^RACTicAL Thoughts, 

I Mother at Hobie, 

i Child at Home, 

iRDs' Sabbath Manual, 

iiiDs' Temperance Manual, 

HER on Intemperance, 

p <5f Day, (for children,) . 

)F Mary Lothrop, 

[PTURE Animals, (with cuts,) . 



u 


u 


85 


u 


u 


82 


li 


u 


92 


u 


{( 


75 


u 


u 


105 


u 


u 


118 


u 


u 


109 


u 


u 


109 


li 


u 


109 


a 


u 


120 


(( 


({ 


124 


(^ 


u 


125 



N TRANSLATIONS OF LARGE TRACTS. 

ANDREW DUNN. 

Story of a convert from popery, showing the 
rocesses through which his mind was led, and 
IS reasons which induced him to relinquish a 
jion of forms, for the true spiritual religion of 
il of Christ 

THE FALSE CLAIMS OE THE POPE. 

Tract No. 432, written by the Rev. H. G. O. 
: Constantinople, to warn the Armenians against 

system. It is an able argument, conclusively 
by the facts of history and the word of God. 

THE LIFE OF COL. GARDINER. 

ill-known history of this decided convert, writ- 
\ Rev. Dr. Doddridge, being Tract Na 135. 



133 CHARACTBR <»> VOLUMBb. 

LITTLE HEIfllT AlfD HIS BKABXK. \^ 

Showing the conversion of a natiye of Hindoofltai 
through the influence of the child who was committed to 
his care, being Tract No. 107. ^ 

THEOPHILUS Ain) SOPHIA. 

A pleasing narrative, being one of the Society's books 
for the young, series 4, No. 2S. 



ORIGINAL 6ERIAN WORKS. 

ARNDTS TRUE CHRISTIANITY. 
The Rev. Dr. Ejiunmacher, in his preface to a hte 
edition of Amdt's True Christianity, says, no religions 
book in Germany has been more universally circulated 
and prized, or more extensively blessed from above. For 
two centuries new editions have been issued almost eveiy 
year, and it has been translated into almost all the other 
European languages. It clearly presents man's natural 
depravity; salvation by the merits of Christ, and the 
sanctifying influences of the Holy Spirit ; justification by 
faith alone ; forgiveness to the true penitent solely by the 
blood of the Redeemer; and the word of Grod, under the 
teaching of the Spirit, as the only rule of faith and holy 
living. " I know not what work can be compared with it 
The style is forcible, and breathing the consecrated oil 
of the sanctuary ; and the thoughts like fresh healing 
waters flowing from a deep and divine fountain of life. 
Nothing is superficial ; all is original, bearing the stamp of 
the inmost vital experience. Thousands have been blessed 
by this booL Thousands will be blessed. May it bring 
peace and joy to the families whose doors it shall enter." 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES 133 

AH THE TISHBITE, BY lUttTMBIACHER. See page 74. 



HOLLATZ' METHOD OF GRACE. 

his work has proved veiy efficient, and instmmental 
ringing multitudes of souls to conviction of sin, and 
Qse of the willingness of Christ to receive the retum- 
prodigaL The author lived more than a hundred 
s since, in Pomerania, Prussia; and the book has 
I much esteemed and widely circulated in Germany, 
dialogue between a Teacher and an Inquirer, the 
irer learns that his hope has no scriptural foundation, 
is led to relinquish his self-righteousness, and seek a 
! that will not make ashamed. The second part of 
book shows the way of salvation by faith in Christ 
Q ; and the third and fourth parts treat of growth in 
e, especially under trials and temptations ; and en- 
ig unto the end. The whole book is distinguished 
i for plainness and force. 



LUTHER ON THE LORD'S PRAYER. 

[lis treatise by the great reformer presents prayer as 
luty and privilege of every Christian, and the Lord's 
er as embracing the substance of all we need. He 
eeds to consider what is included in each of the 
n petitions, as practically related to Christian doc- 
I and duty, enlarging on many of the great topics 
Ived. 



THE PRIMITIVE CATHOLICISM. 

[lis is an adrnhfable treatise by Rev. John Gossner 
erlin, showing that the jnimitive or true Ct 

►1. Cir. I ^ 



^atboU^Mi 



134 CHARACTEft OF VOLUlfEa 

taught in the Bible and received by the early Christiaiis, 
consists in the conviction of ruin by sin, salvation solely 
through the death and righteousness of Christ, love to 
God and man, and a holy and spiritual life. The book 
makes no attack upon popeiy by name, but effectively 
shows its fallacy, by portraying the excellence of 
vital religion of the GospeL 



DR. EARTH'S BIBLE STORIES. 

These are 52 stories from the Old, and 52 from the 
New Testament, drawing out the substance (^ the Scrip- 
ture narrative in a veiy simple form, adapted to the minds 
of children, to whose benefit the author has for yeais de- 
voted his unceasing exertions. So acceptable have these 
stories proved, that hundreds of thousands of copies have 
been circulated in Germany. 



THIRZA. 
A narrative of the conversion of a young Jewess, per- 
secuted by her father, who at length listened to her read- 
ing of the New Testament, and believed in the Saviour 
it reveals. 



THE THREEFOLD CORD. 
A pocket manual of Scripture texts, containing a doc- 
trine, a prayer, and a promise, skilfully selected, for every 
day in the year. Such a scriptural portion, read on rising 
in the morning, furnishes a theme for meditation and 
spiritual refreshment that cannot be too highly prized. 



VOLUMES OF GERMAN TRACTS. 
See notice of volumes of Tracts in English, page 110. 



CHARACTER OP YOLUMBS. 135 

TOLUHES IN FRENCH. 

Baxter's Saints' Rest, 



. See 


page 


45 


(( 


(( 


47 


. i« 


u 


109 



Saxter's Call, .... 
Or. Edwards' Sabbath Manual, . 

THE bible man's BOOK, (Colporteior Biblique.) 

An' admirable production of the Rev. Dr. De Felice, 
>rofessor at Montauban, written for circulation in France. 
\ clergyman of high standing says, " I have read this book 
I second time with renewed interest, and regard it as 
3¥angelical in sentiment, felicitous in maimer, and admi- 
rably adapted to be useful. It is arranged under the 
leads, What is the Bible ? Why was it given us, or 
Brhat are its practical uses ? Have you a Bible ? with in- 
locements to purchase, and answers to objections. Do 
fou read the Bible ? showing in what spirit it should be 
read, and methods of reading. Do you labor to spread 
the Bible ? with a solemn appeal to those who neglect it, 
(ff read it in a heedless and unprofitable manner." 

TEACHINGS OF ROME COMPARED WITH SCRIPTURE. 

This able treatise is extracted from the standard work 
of Drelincourt, taking up the prominent errors of popery, 
and contrasting each with the words of Scripture. It is 
justly celebrated in France as a masterly and unanswer- 
ible discussion of the subject 

DEATH OF THE ELDEST SON. 

A narrative, by Rev. Dr. Malan, of a thoughtless young 
nan who was brought to serious consideration ; the in- 
Jtructions he received from a godly minister on the atone- 
nent and justification by faith ; his conversion; his anxiety 
for the salvation of others, and triumphant death. 




UH> OHARACTBR OF YOLUMJtS. 

DO TOU WISH TO DIS HAPFT ? 

The substance of this unpassioned and soul-stirring 
discourse, by Rev. Adolph Monod, of Paris, is found in 
Tract Na 425, "Can you Die Tranquil?^ It is calculated 
to rouse the attention of the careless, and pours upon the 
inquiring mind the rich and glorious truths of redemption 
by the Son of Grod. 

THE TKUE CROSS.— JESUS OUR STRENGTH. 

Two little works — ^the former by Rev. Dr. Malan of 
Greneva — setting forth " Christ and him crucified" as the 
only hope of dying men. 

THE PRmmVE CATHOLICISIC 

Translated from the Grerman. See page, • . 193 

FAREWELL TO ROME. 

•* The Pope and the Grospel, or a Farewell to Rome," 
by a Catholic priest, who first gives the history of his own 
conversion, and then powerfrdly exhibits the errofs cf 
Rome, from the testimony of the ancient fathers, and the 
word of God. 

VOLUME OF FRENCH TRACTS. 

See notice of volumes of Tracts in English, page . 110 



TOIUHES IN WBI8I. 

Buntan's Pilgrim's Progress, • • See page 53 
Baxter's Saints' Rest, ... " " 45 

Baxter's Call, « « 47 

James' Anxious iNquiREn, . . •* " 69 



! 



VOLUME IN SPANISH. 
Db. Edwards' Sabbath Manuai., . See page 109 



INDEX; 



AND 



PRICES OF THE YOLUME&. 



The pnblicatioiis marked ( f ) have iteel-plate Portraits or other steel en- 
JJi&Tiiigs. Those marked (t) have engravings on wood, many of them 
Ughlj finished. Those marked ( $ ) have been abridged. 



VOLUMES 12M0. . . 

tD'Anbign^*s History of the Befor< & I ll 

mation, a new translation revised & 5 0^ 

by the Author. 4 vob., of 450 pp. 1823 1,75 . . . 

Baxter's Saints' Rest, large type, . .540. .60. .80. 

Jty's Morning Exercises, 604. .75. . . 

( Flavel's Fountain of Life, 559. .55. .75. 

Flavel's Method of Grace, 560. .55. .75. 

I Mason's Spiritual Treasury, 528. .55. .75. 

[all's Scripture History, 516. .55. .75. 

Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, 480 

Gregory's Letters on Infidelity, 480. .55. .75. 

President Edwards on RevivaJs,....446. .50. .70. 
Bp Hopkins on Ten Commandments,442. .50. .70. 

Memoir of Mrs. Graham, 440. .50. .70. 

Paley's Natural Theology, 440. .50. .70. 

Venn's Coinnlete Duty of Man, .... 430. .50. .70. 
^ Owen on Forgiveness, Psalm 130, 429. .50. .70. 
f Mem. of Mrs. Sarah L. H. Smith, .396. .50. .70. 

t Abbott's Young Christian 395. . . .70. 

Sacred Songs, (Hymns and Tunes,) .380. .55. . . 

Do. (Patent Notes,) 380. .55.. . 

Nelson on Infidelity, 352. .45. .60. 

Dr. Spring's Bible Not of Man, 319. .45. .60. . 

VOLUMES 18M0. 

t Memoir of Dr. Payson, 486. .40. .55. . 

t Memoir of Mrs. H. L. Winslow,. .480. .40. .55. . 

t Memoir of James B. Taylor, 444. .40. .55. . 

^ Memoir of Rev. Dr. Buchanan,. . .478. .40. .55. . 
$ Guide to Young Disciples, 465. .40. .55. . 

Vol. Cir. 12* 



A. 

m 

P4 



25 



• ••• •••• ••• 


. ... . 86 


• ••• •••• ••• 




.. 45 


• ••• •••• ■ % m 




.. 75 






.. 49 


• •■• •••• ••• 




.. 49 






.. 66 






. 59 






.. 53 


^ '•• 




. 77 


• ••• •••• •••< 




.. 6:i 






.. 58 


• ••• •••• •••! 




. 90 


• ••• •••• •••< 




.. 83 






.. 65 






.. 57 






. 101 


»••• •••• •••« 




.. 74 


• ••• •••• «••< 




.. 103 


• •• • •••• ••• 




.. 103 


• ••• •••• • m • t 




.. 80 


• ••• •••• •••< 




.. 78 




.... 91 




.... 99 




• «««* gj 




'^jfl^ 


-i 


m 


^p 




UmEX; AWDPUCBB 




lirafUiiUlinTSnn, 

imaBHbalHiMmiitEi&ki, Sa..« 

H(iru'tBiid»iHafC)irlMliBi^,..398..a 

Ub of Joba Nawtss 

'.'.V..3M.'.i 



. idiiaJ Tllo^lI^l•,... 
I>ibble'■ TboDEhu BD Mdini, .. 
V ....... p^ 










iFtavel'i 



INOEZ ; AND FRICBS OF V0UTII18. 

c.KBch».«, "ST.irM: 

Bul. Bj'itr.iilwad 

OaiwUniud Knnu CiUuiUii, 

jk. namec'i BIUb Tnw, 

. Ifamiilt nf NnimmJ Sniitli, 

Uf-IlHeiitini, 

The WiUwrod Bianrli Rtvivod, . 
SdiiUef'i Appal toMWhfn.-- 

fidddeyniiii. (Wo 331110,) 1XB. 

H;diu 111 3. Songi, (Ivge ^''vo.) - -3*>*' 

BOOKS FOR THE YOU 
OMaadit't ScrailiiTr aiarTavti, — 

iViiLl,Ad»niUiJi»b "" "■ 
Vol.S,Iif»ofJoMph 
Vol. 3, lib or U0M9, Put 1. . 
Vol.S,J<ahtu,Jiidn, 

t Tol. S, Snih uid &ninel, 

iTal.T, lib or DHid... ....»«, 

tCdUndet'i TouUi'i Book of 

NUuil Thwlnfr. 931. 

t P«p of Diii,(tbT VDimgChildie 
iUnaDpoDlaxB. 1)0. 

i Precept upon P*:»pl. do. 
CbiWiHookonihBSBblMih,--- 
t Ualrymkn'* L^Qf hlsr. elo....- . 

t AbboU'i ChUd « Bdfu 

GiUiodcL'i Hkuui df Jonah, , . , . _ 
t da. ChUd'tBoi)liaoBap9iiuu»B,14T. 
1 Hem. of Nubu Vf. IllckEimaii,. IW- 



1 Spoiled ClOld, Dnir 
f ViltBfo In Uo Uoe 
"t LiiilB Dfmrj uad h 



OQa of MftTv l4(lini]}, ...... 

iwdd-i Uie of Joriib. 

lilofClisrtML.WlHtew,,. 
ellB, Ills PiMor'i DtngblBr.. 



I^t^ 



n u an Ado;il«l 



140 INDEX ; AND PRICES OF VOLUMES. 



Fum. elli. fflt. pap. P>P' 

Mflmoir of Caioliiie Hrde, 73. .10.. IS.. 5 4*> ^ 

Memoir of Rdb PInmbe, 73..10..15.. 5 1S& 

WITH NUMEROTTS EN&RAYIKeS. 

t Trees, FrniU, and Flowen of the 

Bible, (9 cnte.) 120. .90. .30.. 10 125 

t Senptnre AnimaU, (16 cats,) 06..20..30 1S5 

The Uliulrated Tract Primer, 106 127 

t Letters to Little Childran,(13oQts,) 108.. 15. .90.. 10 1» 

Great Truths in Simple Words, 15.. 20.. 10 137 

} Peet's Scriptoxe Lessons, ( cuts).. 72. -IS. .20.. 10 136 

X Gallandet's Child's Book of Bible 

Stories, (10 cats,) 73.. 15. .90.. 5 126 

t Children of the Bible, (8 cats,).... 52.. 15. .30 126 

t The Child's Hymn Book, (32mo,) 309.. 15. .90.. 10 127 

} AmosArmfield,(10oQU,) " 141.. ..90 127 

Dr.Watts' Catechisms for the Yonng, 123 

X WatU' Divine and Moral Songs, 

VOLUMES OF CHILDREN'S BOOKS. 

ILLUSTRATED. 

X Books for Small Children, 2 vols., 

32mo. (New Series I,) 90. .25 12B 

X Books for Children, 2 vols., 32mo. 

(NewSeriesH,) 25..30 128 

X Books for the If onnc 1 vol. ISmo. 

(New Series III,) 30. .40 128 

X Books for the Yonnc, 3 vols., 

18mo. (New Series IV,) 30..40 138 

POCKET MANUALS, 32MO. 

Clarke's Scripture PromiMS, 380.. 20. .25 12f 

Daily Scripture Expositor, 286..20..25 12S 

} Cecil and Flavel's Gift for 

Mourners, 124.. ..15 ISS 

X Bean and Venn's Advice to a Silk. 

Married Couple, 96 20 12S 

Book of Proverbs, 90. .10.. 15 la 

CecirsReasonsofRepose,(onInfideI.)64. .10. .15 12! 

_ Paget, cloth, gilt. M.tk. 

Book of Psalms, (48mo,) 318... 20... 25... 35 12! 

POCKET MANUALS, 64MO. 

Diary, (Daily TexU interleaved,) 256. . .15. . .20. . .30 13 

Gems of Sacred Poetry, 256... 15... 20... 30 12 

Daily Food for ChrisUans, 192... 10... 15... 25 13 

Mason's Crumbs, 176... 10... 15... 25 13 

Heavenly Manna,.... 128... 10. ..15... 25 13 

DaUy Texts. 128... 10... 15... 25 13 

Milk for Babes, 128... 10... 15... 25 13 

|]lnr-D)rof»,ad«U7text,(lS8mo»)128 10.. .20 13 



INDEX i AND PKICBB OF VOUnua. 



MISCELLAN 
VOLUMES 


ECUS 
13MO. 

lias--" 


r*t. 








aV".'.'.'.'.'"'.'.'.'. 
lo'.'.'.'.'.'.'.''.'.'.'.'.'.'. 














nouloUii 


Aged 


....l«. 



VOLUMES IN FOREIGN LANGUAGES. 



GERUAN, ISHO 



rnuChriAJiuuljt- -'-■-■ 
FncB, 4 Tob,, (uta 

GESMAN VOLUUES, IfiMO. 



'ndiiia] TtauhU. --- 
EiLdmicIM or Frupheiiy. 
I'l Filgnoi'f PioBtaii. • • 
lOn'iSejjjlo Gibbons 



MdhadorCncB..-. 
Snbbulh Mumat— 
l«iil 



1 tti« Locd'i PnjH, - 

iliveCuiu^^V-'.l -'-'.'." ' 
L coflvmed Jevron,) ..--. ' 

iDUofthaFopD, r 

iloul GBjdinv, .■•-- f 

CoDl,(IMljTiili, aSngO T 



142 INDEX ; AND PRICES OF VOLUlfE& 

BOOKS FOS THE YOUNG. 

8hM» 

nfcs.ordotB.pap. f»l^ 

I Baitli's 104 BU>le Stories, 973.. ..85.... 10 13( 
Abbott's Child at Home, 189....9B....10 118 
eepofD»7, (SeriptiiieNaRatiTei,)184....90....1O ISO 

I Seriptoie Alphabet of Animali,... 106.... 20 135 

Memob of Mary Lothiop, 104. ...10 5 1!^ 

Little Henry, etCn 79... .K).... 5 132 

Theophilos and Sophia, 68... .10.... 5 133 

FRENCH VOLUMES, 18M0. 

Baxter*! SaiBts* Rett, 220.. ..25 45 

" Call, 191. ...90.. ..10 <7 

The Bible Man's Book, (Colpoi^ 

tearBibUaiie.)ByDrJ)eFelioe,.178....15....10 13> 

Teachings of Rooaa oompaied with 

Scru)tnie, 160 15. ...10 IS? 

Death of the Eldest Son, 105. ...15.... 5 135 

Edwards' Sabbath Manual, Part I, 86 5 1J{ 

Farewell to Rome 76 5 V6 

The Primitive Catholicism, 71 5 ^ 

Do yoo Wish to Die Happy 1 64 5 v» 

The Tme Cross. By Dr.Malan,... 64 5 V» 

French Tracts, 12mo, 1 vol., 400.. ..40 Uv 

WELSH VOLUMES. 

Baxter's Saints* Rest, 12mo, 431. ...50 ^ 

Bnnyan's Pilgrim's Progress, 12mo,. 383.... 45 g 

James' Anxions Inquirer, 189 ^ 

Baxter's Call to Unconverted, 18mo,166 .... 15 .... 10 «< 

SPANISH VOLUME, 18Ma 
Edwards' Sabbath Manual, Part I, 48 5 1^9 



ALPHABETICAL INDEX. 



)ott'> Mother at Home > » 105 

'* Child at Home 118 

Young Christian 74 

iine's Alarm • 55 

elia, Pastor's Daughter 123 

iodotes 104 

ifield, Amos 127 

dt's True Christianity 132 

kslider, Andrew Faller^s.... 71 

:h's Bible Stories 134 

ter's SainU' Rest 45 

Call 47 

Dying Thonghte 49 

Life 94 

les, Elizabeth 123 

3her on Intemperance 109 

e not of Man 78 

tswain's Mate 110 

a«'s Essay 84 

nerd, Life of « 98 

hanan, Memoir of 98 

yan's Pilgrim's Progress 53 

ler's Sermons to the Aged . . 110 

I's Friendly Visit 129 

Reasons for Repose ..... 129 

dren of the Bible 126 

ke's Scripture Promises 128 

lorteur and Roman Catholic. 89 

ningham, Eliza 121 

ier, Clementine 122 

y Scripture Expositor 129 

yman s Daughter 121 

ubigne's Hist, of Reform' n. 86 

de's Thoughts on Missions . . 107 

:erman, Nathan 124 

jridge's Rise and Progress. . . 60 

iron Wish to Die Happy t. . . 136 

n,Andrew 131 



Edwards^ Hist, of RedemptiDn» » 63 

" on Revivals 63 

" on the Afiectiont>.... 64 

" Sabbath Manual 109 

*' Temperance Manual. . 109 

Eldest Son, Death of 135 

Elijah the Ttshbite. 74 

Emily Maria 183 

False Claims of the Pope 131 

Flavel's Fountain of Life 49 

'* Method of Grace 49 

" Keeping Uie Heart 53 

" Touchstone of Sincerity 53 

*' Gift for Moumen 129 

Fool's Pence, etc 121 

Foster's Appeal to the Yonng. . . 119 

Gallaudet's Scripture Biography. 115 

•' History of Jonah.... 117 

" History of Josiah. . . 117 

" Natural Theology... 117 

** Repentance 118 

« Bible Stories 196 

Gardiner, Life of 131 

Gems of Sacred Poetry 129 

Graham, Mrs 90 

Great Truths in Simple Words. . 127 

Gregory's Evidences 77 

Gumey's Love to God 70 

Hall's Scripture History 59 

Henry, Life of 94 

" on Meekness 71 

Hobbie, Hannah 96 

Hollatz' Method of Grace 133 

Hopkins' Ten Commandments. . 58 

Hyde, Caroline 1JS3 

Hymns, Social 103 

" and Music 103 

** Child's Hymn-Book.... 137 



144 



ALPHABETICAL INDEX. 



IniklditT, VolameoB 

' Jabm' Anxiotti Inqaiier 

«* Tonng Man ftom Home 

Jay's Christian Contemplated. . 
•' Bloniinc Ezercisee 

Keith OD Proi^y 

KUpin, life of. 

Laram*, Raisinc of. ■ 

Leifhton, Archbbbop 

Letten to Little Children 

Line npon Line 

Little Henry 

Lothiop, Mary 

Lntber on Lord's Prayer 

Mammon 

Married Coaple, Advice to 

Martyn, Life of. 

MiMm's Self-Knowledge 

** Bpiritnal Treasury 

Mead. John M 

MalviU's Bible Tbonghu 

Mom's Practical Piety 

Morison's Counsels 

Moumeis, Gift for 

Nebon on Infidelity 

Kevins' Popery 

** Practical Thougfato 

Newton, life of. 

*' to Adopted Daughter. . 

Obookiah, Henry 

Owen's Forgiveness 

Page, Hadan 

Paley, Natural Theology 

Pastor's Daughter 

PaysoB,Lilbof. 

raroe. Life of. 

Peep of Day 

Peet's Soripture Lessons * 

Pike's Persuasives 

" Guide 

*' Beligion and Eternal Life 
Plumbo, BoUs 



. 81 

. 69 

. 106 

. 75 

. 75 
.85 

. . 85 

190 

94 

196 

ISO 

131 

124 

133 

105 

ISO 

99 

106 

66 

134 

76 

73 

85 

139 

80 

88 

75 

93 

119 

133 
57 
93 
83 

133 
91 

103 

120 

136 
67 
68 
69 

135 



Plumer's Bible Trve 

Practical Piety 

Precept opoaPreeept 1* 

Primer, T^t l 

Primitive Catholicism i: 

Putnam and the Wolf 1: 

Reforaudion in Europe ) 

Rome« Farewell to K 

" Teaefaingsof !• 

Sabbath Manual l( 

11 
10 
10 
12 
10 
10 



ChiM's Book on 

Sacietf Songs* 

Schwartz, Life of.. 

Scripture Animals 

Scudder's Apnea! to Mothera . . . 
** Red. Last Command . 

Self-Deception 7 

Shepherd of Salisbury Plain .... 13: 

Sherman's Guide 71 

Smith, Serah L. H. lOi 

" Normand Vi 

Social Hymns IM 

Spirit of Popery 89 

Spoiled Child, etc. 131 

Spring's Bible Not of Man 7B 

Taylor, James Brainerd 91 

Temperance Manual lOU 

Tbirza ]34 

Threefold Cord l34 

Trees, Fruits, and Flowers 135 

Univeisalism Not of God 8t» 

Venn's Duty of Man 65 

Village in the Mountains 131 

Watu' Catechisms ]3d 

" DivineSongs 198 

Widow's Son, etc 121 

Wilberforce's View a 

Winslow, Harriet 90 

Charles IS 

Withered Branch Revived 108 

Young ChristiaB 74 



f>^ 



I. 



• r 



ill 



/ 



1 

I 



!• 




