CIRCULATION 



AND 



CHARACTER 



or 



THE VOLUMES 



OF THE 



rr AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 



FOR THE SOGIETY'B COLPORTEtTRS. 



PRINTED BY THE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 

1848. 



r 
J 



21842iri 



CIRCULATION 



OF 



THE VOLUMES 



OF THE 



AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 



At the time of the formation of this Society, in 1825, 
the sale of standard, practical, evangelical works in our 
country was small, and their circulation quite limited. 
After the Society had issued about two hundred Tracts, 
attention was given, in 1827, to the publication of one or 
more volumes, as the providence of God might direct; 
and the way to issue the first was made clear by the 
donation of two hundred dollars each from four venerable 
men, the late Hon. Stephen Van Rensselaer, Col. Richard 
Varick, Col. Henry Rutgers, and Nicholas Brown, Esq., 
to stereotype and perpetuate Doddridge's Rise and Prog- 
^ ress. The demand for this work, and its evident adapta- 
4 tion to be useful to the souls of men, led to the contribu- 
tion of an equal sum to stereotype and perpetuate Baxter's 
Saints' Rest ; then to the issuing of Pike's Persuasives to 
} Early Piety, a duplicate cast of the stereotype plates of 
y which was presented to the Society by an " English Bap- 

1 



4 CIRCULATION OF THE VOLUMES. 

tist;" then to tlie issuing of Bunyan's PilgTim's Progress, 
and Baxter's Call to tlie Unconverted ; and the addition, 
from year to year, of tlie various evangelical works now- 
published by tliia institution. 



The fact that the members of five evangelical denomi- 
nations united in the Publishing Committee were equally 
cordial in adopting entke tlie tliree prominent works, 
Baxter's Saints' Rest, Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, and 
Doddridge's Rise and Progress, filled tlieir hearts with 
gratitude to God, and seemed a new testimony that he 
had called tlicm to unite in this service. In tlieir Annual 
Report for 1830, tliey say, 

" The Committee believe that a faithful and prayerful 
examination of the publications of the Society cannot 
fail to result in a firm conviction of the kindness and 
mercy to a lost world, of that dispensation of Providence 
which brought it into operation in its present form, and 
has united in it the hearts and efforts of so many devout 
friends of Zion from different evangelical denominations. 
The members of the Publishing Committee, tliough from 
as many different Christian denominations as there are 
members, are united, not speculatively only, but as the 
Committee believe in heart, in those great fundamental 
truths and doctrines of tlie Bible which tlie Society is 
engaged in diffusing. The unanimous desire of all is, 
that tliose trutlis may be circulated which God shall ren- 
der effectual m breaking tlie stubborn hearts of men, and 
bringing tliem into a sweet allegiance to Jesus Christ 
They wish to be the instruments of extenninating vice 
in all its hideous forms, and promoting a sound morality 



CIRCULATION OF THE VOLUMES. 5 

throughout the community; but they hope to do this 
mainly by showing tlie ruin of man by sin, and the way 
of escape and salvation through the atoning blood of 
Clmst and the converting and sanctifying influences of 
the Holy Spirit. They find in the constitution of the 
Society and of the Publishing Committee, no obstacle 
whatever to the inculcation, in their most impressive 
forms, of all those great soul-humbling and God-exalting 
truths Avhich constitute the sum of the Gospel ; and in- 
deed, they know of no otlier publications in any language, 
exclusive of the Bible, in which these great truths are 
inculcated in a manner more forcible and heart-searching. 

" The Committee have found, as they believe, in their 
oAvn hearts, the blessedness of thus engaging with their 
fellow-laborers, of different names, in mutual endeavors 
to destroy tlie kingdom of Satan and advance the kingdom 
of Christ. They find another argument for such a union 
in the present state of our country, especially all those 
parts of it which are settled by emigrants from different 
religious denominations and different parts of the world. 
And in the cordial and general approbation of the publi- 
cations of the Society, manifested by the evangelical 
community, and above all, in the tokens of the approba- 
tion of God in renderintj them effectual in the conversion 
of souls to himself, the Committee find almost the only 
remaining evidence they could desire, that the seal of 
Heaven rests upon the Society, and that God has ordained 
it to be the means of unspeakable good. 

" It is a delightful fact," they add, " that as the institu- 
tion is sustained by the united efforts of Christians of 
different names, so the accessions made to the church of 
Christ, by the divine blessing on its publications, are 



Vol. Cir. 



1* 



6 CIRCULATION OF THE VOLUMES. 

througn all the various evangelical denominations. The 
object of tlie Tract is to direct the sinner, not to one de- 
nomination of Christians or anotlier, but to the Bible and 
the Saviour — to pluck his soul as a brand from the burn- 
ing, and save him from the perdition of the ungodly. 
Churches who have done little in promotion of this So- 
ciety, have received accessions through its instrumen- 
tality ; and but for the fulfilment of the promise, that it is 
more blessed to give than to receive, may have been 
more richly blessed than many of those by whose alma 
and efforts the Society has been sustained." 

After five years' additional experience of the divine 
blessing on their labors, they say again, 

" While the Committee believe tliat the ready access 
gained to multitudes is occasioned in no small degree by 
the union in tlie Society of evangelical Christians of 
different denominations, they feel constrained to add 
tiieir conviction, that this union, in the sight of God, 
precludes their publishing no great practical and funda- 
mental truth of tlie Gospel. A few points pertaining to 
the ordinances and government of the church tliey agree 
to pass in silence ; but in reference to the plan of salva- 
tion, and the way of the sinner's acceptance with God, 
they are of one heart and mind. Man's utter ruin by 
sin; the full salvation provided through the death and 
righteousness of Christ ; the solemn obligation devolvincr 
on all immediately to accept of this salvation by repent- 
ance and faith in Ilim, as the first, great, and only duty 
in which tlie sinner can be acceptable to God, and that 
tliis is done solely through the renewing of the Holy 
Spirit, are truths which the Committee desire to urge 
with all the solemnity and force of which language is 



CIRCULATION OF THE VOLUMES. 7 

susceptible, or -which the minds of writers can conceive, 
or the human heart feel. 

" Of tliis they believe many of the Society's Tracts and 
volumes bear the surest confirmation. If the solemn 
appeals of Baxter and Alleine ; of Doddridge, Flavel, 
Richmond, and Pike ; of Edwards, Brainerd, Payson, 
and other American authors, living and dead, issued by 
the Society, are not of this description, the Committee 
look in vain to find such among all the writings of unin- 
spired men." 



In May, 1833, or about five years afler the stereotyping 
of Doddridge's Rise and Progress, the total circulation 
of that work amounted to about 12,000, and of that and 
the other volumes then issued, to nearly 40,000 copies. 
The promise of usefulness from this department of be- 
nevolent exertion arrested the attention of intelligent 
Christians who were not immediately connected with the 
labors of the Society. They saw the hand of God in it ; 
its adaptation permanently to bless the souls of men and 
advance the interests of the Redeemer's kingdom ; and 
in various ways encouraged the Society to proceed in its 
prosecution. 

The Rev. Archibald Alexander, D. D., at this time 
cheered the Committee by communicating to them the 
following views of this subject 

" I rejoice to learn, that the Committee of the Ameri- 
can Tract Society are turning their attention specially to 
the preparation and circulation of small bound volumes. 
These are as really Tracts (treatises) as any of the pam- 



8 CIRCULATION OF THE VOLUMES. 

phlets or sheets which are sent forth from the institution. 
The Society's Tracts are now bound for such as prefer 
them in that form. And let other treatises be selected 
for publication, for which purpose there are many excel- 
lently adapted. I have attentively read over the list of 
books which the Committee have already put into circu- 
lation, and tlie selection meets with my cordial approba- 
tion. Works of a more evangelical and spiritual kind do 
not exist ; and I am gratified to see that they are printed 
and bound in a neat and handsome style. I am deeply 
persuaded that great public benefit will arise from tlie 
appropriation of a portion of your funds in this way ; and 
that the event will prove, that however expensive it may 
be in tlie commencement, it will be wise economy in the 
end. When I consider how many copies of ' Doddridge's 
Rise and Progress,' ' Baxter's Call to the Unconverted,' 
' Alleine's Alarm,' ' Edwards on the Affections,' and such 
like works, will be circulated through the whole length 
and breadth of this land, I am filled with pleasing antici- 
pations of tlie good which your Society will be the means 
of accomplishing. 

" I do sincerely hope that the Committee will persevere 
in the prosecution of this object, and as their circum- 
stances may permit, increase tlie number of tlieir publica- 
tions of this description. The success which has already 
attended your efforts in this way, is calculated to inspire 
)'-ou with confidence to go on in tlie name of the Lord." 

Again he says, five years afterwards, " I reflect on no 
part of my life with more satisfaction than any little 
agency I have had in encouraging and promoting the 
Society's volume circulation. I do consider the success 
of this enterprise as intimately connected with the proa- 



CIRCULATION OF THE VOLUMES. 9 

perity of vital Scriptural piety in our land ; not in any 
one church, but in all evangelical churches, and beyond 
them all by conveying a sound and practical knowledge 
of the Gospel to multitudes who enjoy no public means 
of grace, or have not attended on them. If I could do 
any thing more to urge on this blessed work which has 
been so auspiciously commenced, I would cordially lend 
my aid." 

Again he says, under a later date, " The success of 
the volume circulation gladdens my heart every time I 
think of it ; and I sincerely wish that, instead of twenty 
volumes, you had a hundred in circulation." 



In February, 1834, the Rev. William S. Plumer, D. D., 
then at Petersburg, Virginia, issued a circular letter to 
clergymen and laymen of different evangelical denomina- 
tions, in the southern States, requesting an expression of 
their judgment of the desirableness of attempting to sup- 
ply the families of those States with one or more of the 
Society's volumes. The replies to that circular (which 
are contained in the American Tract Magazine for July, 
1834,) were unanimously expressive of a deep sense of 
the importance of the object. 

In March of that year, a large meeting of clergymen 
and laymen was convened at Petersburg, Va., at which 
the Rev. George A. Baxter, D. D., presided, when it was 
unanimously resolved, " That the plan of enlarging the 
operations of the American Tract Society in the Southern 
country, by placing in each family one of the bound 
volumes of said Society, meets the cordial approbation of 



10 CIRCULATION OF THE VOLUMES. 

this meeting, and is earnestly recommended to the adop- 
tion of tlie American Tract Society." 

Among the deeply interesting facts and statements 
presented at that meeting, was the following narrative 
of 

The Injluencc of Alleine's Alarm, related by tJie Rev. 

William Hill, D. D. 

"I," said the venerable father, "have abundant cause for 
interest in this plan of circulating good and pious books. 
I lost my sainted mother when I was a youth, but not 
before the instructions which I received from her beloved 
lips had made a deep impression on my mind, an impres- 
sion which I carried with me into a college (Hampden 
Sydney) where there was then not one pious student. 
There I often reflected, when surrounded with young 
men who scoffed at religion, upon tlie instructions of my 
mother ; and my conscience was frequently sore dis- 
tressed. I had no Bible, and dreaded getting one, lest it 
should be found in my possession. At last I could stand 
it no longer, and therefore requested a particular friend, 
a youth whose parents lived near, and who often went 
home, to ask his pious and excellent mother to send me 
some religious book. She sent me Alleine's Alarm, an 
old black book, which looked as if it might have been 
handled by successive generations for 100 years. 

" When I got it I locked my room, and lay on my bed 
reading it, when a student knocked at the door. And 
although I gave him no answer, dreading to be found 
reading such a book, he continued to knock and beat the 
door until I had to open it. He came in, and seeing the 
book lying on tlie bed, he seized it, and examining its 



CIRCULATIOx\ OF THE VOLUMES. H 

tide, said, 'Why, Hill, do you read such books?' I 
hesitated, but God enabled me to be decided, and to 
answer him boldly, but with much emotion, ' Yes, I do.' 
The young man said, with deep agitation, ' O, Hill, I 
envy you. You may obtain religion, but / never can. I 
came here a professor of religion, but, through fear, I dis- 
sembled, and have been carried along with the wicked, 
until I fear there is no hope for me.' 

"He told me there were two others who, he believed, 
were somewhat serious. We agreed to take up tlie sub- 
ject of religion in earnest, and seek it togetlier. We 
invited the other two, and held a prayer-meeting in my 
room on the next Saturday afternoon. And O, what a 
prayer-meeting! We tried to pray, but such prayer I 
never heard the like of. We knew not how to pray, but 
tried to do it. It was the first prayer-meeting I had ever 
heard of. We tried to sing, but it was in a most sup- 
pressed manner, for we feared the other students. But 
they found it out, and gathered round the door, and made 
such a noise that some of the officers had to come and 
disperse them. And so serious was the disturbance that 
the President, the late excellent Rev. Dr. John Blair 
Smith, had to investigate the matter at prayers, that even- 
ing, in the prayer hall. When he demanded the reason 
of the riot, a ringleader in wickedness got up and stated, 
that it was occasioned by three or four of tlie boys hold- 
ing a prayer-meeting, and they were determined to have 
no such doings there. 

" The good President heard the statement with deep 
emotion, and looking at the youtlis charged with the sin 
of praying, with tears in his eyes he said, ' O, is there 
such a state of things in this college ? Then God has 



12 CIRCULATION OF THE VOLUMES. ' 

come near to us. My dear young friends, you shall be 
protected. You shall liold your next meeting in my 
parlor, and I will be one of your number.' Sure enough 
we liad our next meeting in his parlor, and half the col- 
lege were tliere. And tliere began a glorious revival of 
religion, which pervaded tlic college, and spread into the 
country around. 

"Many of those students became ministers of tlie 
Gospel. The youth who brought me Alleine's Alarm 
from his mother, was my friend the Rev. Wm. Calhoun, 
still preacliing in this vState ; and he who interrupted me 
in reading the work, is my venerable and worthy friend, 
the Rev. Dr. Blytlie, now President of a college in Indi- 
ana. Anotlier was Rev. Clement Read, of this State ; 
and a fifth, the late Rev. Carey Allen, of Kentucky. 
Truly," said Dr. Hill, " I have good reason to feel a deep 
interest in tlie proposed vrork. May God grant it suc- 
cess !" 



At a meeting of the Society's Executive Committee, to 
adopt the Annual Report for May, 1834, Dr. Plumer was 
present, and communicated the result of the correspond- 
ence and the meeting at Petersburg, above referred to ; 
and at tlie anniversar}^ the following preamble and resolu- 
tion were offered by the Rev. James Milnor, D. D., chair- 
man of the Committee, and unanimously adopted ; viz. 

" Communications having been received from highly 
respectable clergymen and laymen of different denomi- 
nations, and some of this Society's important Auxiliaries, 
in the soutliern States, urging increased activity in circu- 
lating its publications, and giving assurance of their 
cooperation, should tlie Society endeavor to supply every 



CIRCULATION OF THE VOLUMES. 13 

accessible family in those States with one or more of its 
bound volumes, which have been found peculiarly accept- 
able and useful, Therefore, 

" Resolved, That this Society, without relaxing in any 
degree its efforts for pagan lands, and for other portions 
of our own country, do cordially respond to the call of 
our brethren in the southern States ; and relying upon 
the blessing of God, and tlie zealous cooperation of the 
South, will endeavor, with the least possible delay, be- 
sides the continued circulation of Tracts, to place one or 
more of the Societv's bound volumes in every familv 
willing to receive the same, in the States of Maryland, 
Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, and 
the Territory of Florida." 



In the year ending May, 1835, the Executive Commit- 
tee issued a circular letter to prominent clergymen and 
laymen in different parts of the United States, requesting 
an expression of their opinion on the subject of the 
general circulation of the Society's volumes tlu"oughout 
the country; the replies to which circular (inserted in the 
Tract Magazine extra for August, 1835,) encouraged the 
Society unanimously to resolve, " That, in accordance 
with suggestions of Auxiliary Societies, public meetings, 
and respected individuals in various parts of the country, 
this Society will endeavor, as soon as practicable, to sup- 
pl\j ivith its standard evangelical volumes the entire accessible 
population of the United States." 



From the replies to the circular letter just noticed, and 
other correspondence at the time, the following selections 

Vol. Cir. 2 



14 CIRCULATION OF THE VOLUMES. 

are made, as containing thoughts of permanent, practical 
value, in the prosecution of this department of labor. 



Hints on the Origin, Character, and Usefulness of the 
Societfs Volumes. Furnished by a Clergyman. 

" Their origin, at least in most cases, was remarkable. 
The Rise and Progress was the work of long labor, and 
was carefully reviewed and corrected by Watts and some 
of the best men of the day, before it Avas published. 
Both Baxter's Call and Saints' Rest were written ' quite 
on the verge of heaven.' At least two of these books 
A\ere written, or much improved, in the cold dungeons 
prepared by bitter persecutors, who, Hke Paul's perse- 
cutors, knew not that thus they would furnish edification 
to the church in all coming ages. 

" The CHARACTER of the volumes themselves is excel- 
lent. On this subject I must refer you to Dr. Alexander's 
letter, and Dr. Porter's remarks on the character of the 
Saints' Rest, [see below,] Chalmers' Introductory Essay to 
the Call, and indeed the preface to almost every old 
edition of the works themselves. 

"The USEFULNESS of these works may be learned in 
part from their extensive circulation. In three years 
from the first publication of Alleine's Alarm, there were 
sold no less than seventy thousand copies. Baxter's Call 
has undoubtedly had a still more extended circulation, 
being translated into more languages. The Saints' Rest 
has also held on its steady course. The Pilgrim's Prog- 
ress, and Rise and Progress, have not been a whit be- 
hind. I liave thought that if pious men at the time when 
these books were written, and especially, if the authors 



CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 15 

of them could have availed themselves of the agency of 
such an institution as the American Tract Society for 
giving them circulation, how they would have rejoiced in 
it. Of the pious Alleine, his biographer says, that ' after 
he was unable to Avalk, he was carried to visit the schools, 
almshouses, and the godly poor, especially the widows ; 
to whom he would give money, and with whom he would 
converse and pray, buying quantities of catechisms and 
other small hooks to be distributed among them.'' O for an 
army of such Tract distributers ! Baxter was distinguished 
alike for his zeal in tlie Avork of preparing and distribut- 
ing good books. He gave in one year a hundred pounds 
to buy Bibles for the poor." 

So large a portion of the churches, adds this clergy- 
man, have been converted by reading, and it must supply 
to so great an extent the deficiency of the preached Avord, 
that it is a Avonder more lias not been done to circulate 
good books. 



IVom the Preface to a new edition of Owen on Spiritual- 
mindedness, by Rev. E. Porter, D. D. 

" In the little library of my father Avas Baxter's Saints' 
Rest, the reading of which, on account of its simplicity, 
its rhetorical vivacity, its Christian fervor and pungency, 
made an indelible impression on my mind. This im- 
pression probably had more efficacy in the formation of 
my subsequent intellectual and moral habits, than any 
other means, except parental influence. It is doubtless 
OAving to these circumstances, in part, that I have ahvays 
felt so high a regard for Baxter and his Avritings ; and 
also that the period Avhen he lived, especially as it is 



16 CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 

described in his autobiography, [contained substantially 
in tlie Society's Life of Baxter,'] has been more interesting 
to me than any otlier in the whole compass of history. 
But valuable as the Saints' Rest has been to me and to 
multitudes of others, its influence must have been very 
limited, had it remained in its original form, a quarto 
volume of more than 800 pages. For all the benefit of 
this work, readers in general have been indebted to Mr. 
Fawcett's abridgment." 



Books the means of Baxter's Conversion. 
He was awakened by reading Bunny's Resolutions, 
lent to his father by a poor man ; Dr. Sibb's Bruised 
Reed, brought to his father's door by a pedlar, gave him a 
lively apprehension of the mystery of redemption ; and a 
little piece of Perkins' work on Repentance, The Art of 
Living and Dying Well, and Government of the Tongue, 
lent him by a servant, were blessed in confirming his 
faith. " Tims," he says, " without any- means but books, 
was God pleased to resolve me for himself f^ and they Avere 
brought to him by a laborer, a pedlar, and his father's 
servant. 



IVom the Rev. William Meade, D. D., Bishop of the Prot- 
estant Episcopal Church, Virginicu 

"I have ever highly esteemed the American Tract 
Society, and wish well to all its enterprises, and hope 
that you may suggest an effectual method of increasing 
its good influence. As to all of tliose questions in your 
letter, touching tlie desirableness of circulating good 
books in tlie South, tlie great need of tliem, tlie benefits 



CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 17 

of such benevolent efforts, but one ansAver can be given. 
Would to God such large Tracts could be showered 
down upon the South and West." 



From Rev. M. P. Parks, of the Methodist Episcopal Church, 
Professor in Randolph Macon College, Va. 

" In regard to tlie publications of the American Tract 
Society, so far as I have had opportunity to become ac- 
quainted with them, I do most cordially approve of tliem, 
and consider them as eminently suited, by their circula- 
tion, to supply the lack of living teachers. If circulated, 
they cannot fail to be read; and when read, they will 
produce, probably, not much less frequently tlian the 
word preached, some saving impressions. What little 
experience I have had has convinced me that the pastor 
of a congregation can hardly avail himself of a more 
certain means of usefulness, than the loaning of useful 
books to tlie members of his congregation, or indeed 
placing them in their hands by any other means ; and 
scarcely less happy results would follow the distribution 
of them by a judicious agent of the Tract Society. The 
immediate effect of reading such books would, in many 
cases, be the least benefit that would result : the habit of 
reading, tlie method, indust)-y, enlightened principle, and 
active benevolence, which would, in many cases, be pro- 
duced, should be taken into the account." 



From Rev, J. B. Taylor, of the Baptist Church, Ridi- 

mond, Va. 

" I consider it an object of superlative importance to 
give free circulation to such books as have been pub- 

Vol. Cir. 



2* 



18 CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 

lished by the American Tract Society. It is not only 
important that men be awakened to think of eternal 
things, but that their views of divine truth be intelligent 
and scriptural ; and I know of no works so well fitted to 
inform, as well as to awaken, as those of the Society. 
The only question, then, which arises, is — Is the plan of 
universal distribution among our southern States practi- 
cable ? / believe it Z5." 



From Rev. John H. Church, D. D., of the Congregational 
Church, Aeiy Hampshire. 

" I feel much interested in the communication of your 
Executive Board, on circulating your standard volumes. 
It is a good, a noble design, to spread divine truth, by 
such means, through our whole land. I hope it will be 
executed with all practicable speed. Such volumes are 
exceedingly needed, and may be blessed to the salvation 
of many in the present and future generations. The 
progress of error must be checked by disseminating evan- 
gelical truth, and the metliod you have adopted is well 
fitted for this purpose. Only agents and means are now 
wanted to carry forward the work, and, by the blessing 
of Heaven, achieve immense good." 



IVom Rev. Mexaiuler Proudfit, D. D., of the Associate 
Presbyterian Church, Salem, JV. Y. 

" Altliough ' Baxter's Rest ' has been familiar to me 
from my childliood, and probably several hundred copies 
of it have passed through my hands, yet I recently read 
every page of it with great delight, and I hope, with spir- 
itual profit I liave procured, at different times, copies of 



CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 19 

the * Essays to do Good,' ' Doddridge's Rise,' Baxter's 
works, and ' Persuasives to Early Piety,' on purpose to 
loan among my people, particularly among the youth, and 
have found that they were read with great avidity, and, I 
trust, saving advantage. Indeed, my attention, for more 
than forty years, has been directed to the promotion of 
religion, by the distribution of Tracts and volumes on 
practical subjects, in our town and tlirough the frontier 
settlements ; and intelligence has been so frequently re- 
ceived of their happy results, both in the conversion of 
sinners and in refreshing and edifying the saint, that I 
will very cheerfully cooperate with your Society, as op- 
portunity offers, in tliis labor of love." 



From Rev. James Richard,^, D. D., Tlieologiccd Semhiari/, 

Auburrif JV. Y. 

" I highly approve of the project of publishing what 
you denominate the Evangelical Family lAbrary. The 
selection you have made is excellent, and a wide diffusion 
of such writings as it contains, I should regard as pe- 
culiarly important at the present time. The public stand 
in need of something which is deeply practical, spiritual, 
and substantial ; something which is safe and yet soul- 
stirring. Great as the march of mind is in these days, I 
doubt if any thing better could be done for the cause of 
sound piety than a republication and extensive circulation 
of the works you have named." 



From Rev. Archibald Alexander, D. D., Theological Semi- 
nary, Princeton, JV. J 

" I have perused your circular, addressed to me, with 



20 CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 

heartfelt satisfaction. I rejoice sincerely in the success 
with wliich you are enabled to prosecute the benevolent 
plan of supplying every family, in several of the southern 
states, with a copy of one or more of your bound volumes. 
I have no doubt but that tlie light of eternity will discover 
that this enterprise has been the means of bringing, 
through Christ, many sons and daughters to glory. As 
the destitute cannot be everywhere supplied with living 
preachers, let the pious dead be sent to speak to them 
' all the words of tliis life.' Send Baxter, and Flavel, and 
Alleine, and Edwards, and Bunyan, to preach to them 
that Gospel by Avhich they have long since been guided 
to heaven. And if every village and remote settlement 
had a faithful pastor, what better aid could they have than 
one of these precious volumes, in every family of their 
respective charges ? The truth is, that such books do 
more good where the Gospel is preached, tlian where its 
sound is seldom heard ; because there a taste for such 
reading has been generated. In every part of the coun- 
try, therefore, these books will be found exceedingly use- 
ful ; and there is no room to doubt that the effort should 
be extended to eveiij state and territory in the Union. I 
do not, I confess, know of any means in our power by 
which so much good may immediately be effected ; and as 
human life is short, and men are perishing for lack of 
knowledge, there should be no delay nor procrastination 
of this work. Let it be urged forward witli a zeal and 
energy proportioned to tlie magnitude of the interests at 
stake. Let agents be found runninjr in all directions 
bearing in their hands these books, which explain tlie true 
and only metliod of salvation. 

" The work which you propose is great, and no one can 



CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 2t 

tell how long it may take to accomplish it Exert all your 
energy, but guard against a collapse of zeal." 



From Rev. Joel Parker, D. D., of the Presbyterian Church, 

Philadelphia. 

" Witliout doubt a general circulation of these books 
would accomplish great good, and for tlie folloAving rea- 
sons : 1. The books themselves are of a character which 
commends them to all who are friendly to vital godliness. 
2. They would place the means of grace, to a consider- 
able extent, in thousands of families, who probably will 
not enjoy a preached Gospel in the lifetune of this 
generation." 



From tlm Hon. Benjamin F. Butler, Attorney- General of 

the United States. 

" The volumes published by the Society comprise such 
works as Baxter's Saints' Rest, Bunyan's Pilgrun's Prog- 
ress, Doddridgre's Rise and Progress, the mere titles of 
which, as enumerated in the last annual report, will be 
sufficient to satisfy the Christian community of their 
sterling value. 

" The whole collection can be furnished by the Society 
at an average cost of about thirty cents per volume ; and 
it may be safely affirmed that it is impossible to diffuse, in 
any other way, so much important instruction at so cheap 
a rate. To say that the supplying of every American 
family Avith one or more of the bound volumes issued by 
your Society would subserve the interests of piety, is only 
to assert what most persons at all acquainted with their 
contents will readily admit ; and if the diffusion of an in- 



22 CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 

telligent Christian faith, and the exemplary practice of 
Christian virtue, be calculated to promote the happiness 
of individuals, and of society at large, as is generally al- 
lowed to be the case, then it is not less certain that true 
jyab-iotism is equally interested in tliis benevolent effort." 



From Rev. William S. Plumer, D. D., of the Presbyterian 

Church, Baltimore. 

" Your favor was received with emotions of humiliating 
gratitude. It aifected me as the near approach of the 
wagons from Egypt affected Jacob. My spirit revived. I 
fell on my knees and gave thanks, with tears of joy, to 
the Father of mercies. I thought of the saying of one, to 
whom, under God, I am much indebted : ' We are bound 
to thank God always for you, brethren, as it is meet, be- 
cause your faith groweth exceedingly, and the charity of 
every one of you all aboundeth.' 

"I believe that the whole matter is from God; and that 
your Committee cannot innoceyitly hold hack from the great 
enterprise you are contemplating. My reasons are tlie 
following:: : 

" 1. The conversion and groivth in grace of souls in this 
land does much depend on an extensive distribution of 
such books as those you circulate. 

"2. There is no otJier institution in this land whose 
object it is to furnish religious family libraries. 

" 3. Even if private capitalists should furnish the books 
for the market, it would be at snch prices as the poor can 
ill afford to pay. You have tlie means of doing the work 
cheaply. You have also a good reputation for economy 
and efficiency. 



CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 23 

" 4. Appointed, in God's providence, tlie almoners of a 
nation's bounty for a great work, and bound continually 
to beckon on the hosts of God to glorious war, you may 
not innocently give a reluctant assent to any plan that 
appears wise and efficient. Indeed, if you would escape 
guilt, you must be diligent in devising methods of enlist- 
ing the whole nation in this and such like good works. 
You must lead on public opinion. 

" 5. If you do not practise thus, I believe God will lay 
your Society aside as a worn-out and useless engine, and 
will raise up another instrumentality that will be more 
efficient. Please to read Esther 4:14. 

" 6. The effect of these books, if widely circulated, will 
be most salutary on the people. Many of them, such as 
Edwards on the Affections, and the Life of Brainerd, will 
arouse from carnal security old professors. Many of them 
will give strengtli and stability to the Christian character 
of young converts, and especially to such as have a feeble 
ministry, or a state of things tending to extravagance. 
x\lleine's Alarm, Pilgrim's Progress, and Edwards on the 
Affections have great excellency in tliis respect. Infidels, 
who can be induced to read Keith on Prophecy, will at 
least respect the claims of Christianity ; and if they will 
read half of your publications, they will find the burn- 
ing words in their consciences. Again, people who can- 
not read will, by receiving such a book, or such books, 
have the desire of learning to read wakened up in their 
hearts. Thus, also, many parents will be reminded of the 
importance of having their children taught to read. Many 
who cannot read, will yet be directly benefited by the 
books. Two sisters received a copy of Alleine's Alarm — 
neither of them could read — they carried it to a neighbor 



24 CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 

and he read it in their hearing- — they were impressed, and 
soon both were hopefully brought into the marvellous light 
of the Gospel. Again, many proud and haughty scorners 
who attend no place of worship, will yet buy and read 
these books ; and many who will not encourage their fam- 
ilies to go to church, will buy such books for them, and 
encourage the reading of them. I could recite some 
affecting incidents under this head. I will just say, that 
a man and his wife, who seldom, if ever, went to any 
church, were tJnis lead to a prayer-meeting held by a dis- 
tributer on the Sabbath, after he had given them a book — 
tlien to church — then to a hope of salvation. An infidel 
of wealth, who discourages tlie attendance of his family 
at church, and whose house the agent feared to approacli, 
bouorht several volumes, saving he was willing his familv 
should read on the subject of religion. Again, tlie effect 
of tliese books has been felt in tippling-houses, and such 
like places. A keeper of a grog-shop spent three days 
reading these books. Again, the sick and tlie afflicted 
will thus be visited and cheered. Our great Naval Hos- 
pital, at Norfolk, is an instance on a large scale. Thou- 
sands of such occur. In fine, good must result, or evil 
be prevented, wherever these books are read. 

" 7. Preachers, seeing their people becoming a reading 
people, will perceive the importance of giving themselves 
to closer study, that they may be able to give sound and 
copious instruction. Thus the character of the ministry 
will be elevated. 

" 8. In many cases these books will be carried to school 
and used as school-books. One man Avho opposed this 
work of love is a school-teacher, many of whose pupOs 
are reading, in the hearing of the whole school, these 



CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 25 

very books, instead of ordinary school-books. The chil- 
dren generally are pleased with the neatness of the vol- 
umes, not less, perhaps, than with what one called ' the 
pretty reading ' in the book. Thus our schools will be 
improved in moral character. 

" 9. This enterprise, more than almost any other, will 
unite good men of different denominations. Pious members 
of the society of Friends, zealous and humble members 
of the Protestant Episcopal, Regular Baptist, Protestant 
Methodist, and Presbyterian churches, are almost invari- 
ably warm and useful friends ; and many, very many, of 
our dear brethren of the Methodist Episcopal church are 
not a whit behind their neighbors. Now, how important 
to keep all good men working together as much as pos- 
sible in these days of division and coldness of love. 

" 10. These books will never lose their power until they 
lose their existence. The famous copy of Alleine's Alarm, 
of which you have heard so much as being the means of 
a revival in two colleges and many congregations in Vir- 
ginia, in the days of the Rev. John Blair Smith, was still 
in use a few years ago, and when read in the presence of 
a young lady, made her cry aloud for mercy, and soon she 
thought she found Christ. The famous copy of Flavel's 
Sermons, of which I told you last spring, is still in exist- 
ence, and has been the means of converting a poor wick- 
ed sinner, who is now a valuable minister of the Gospel 
in the Methodist Episcopal church. 

" 11. The rejlex infiuence of tlie enterprise on the re- 
ligious character of the voluntary distributers will be, in 
almost every instance, admirable. I know no instance to 
the contrary of this remark, and I know some very strik- 
ing instances of spiritual improvement from this cause. 

Vol. Cir. 3 



26 CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 

We may confidently expect to see thus raised up a harvest 
of working;, enterprising men. This, in its ultimate results, 
will be a very important benefit. 

" 12. Lastly, this enterprise, boldly carried on, will, 
more than any one thing I now think of, cause your So- 
ciety to be generally regarded as one of the grand and 
commanding institutions of this great and growing coun- 
try. Every family in the nation will thus become ac- 
quainted with you, and feel your good and kindly influ- 
ences in their own happy little circles ; and thus you will 
remove the vulgar prejudice tliat Tract operations are 
penny matters ; and having so many and so warm friends, 
you can go on to assist in filling the world with the know- 
ledge of God. 

" It may be difficult to get the money, but a difficulty is 
not an impossibility. It will not be half so difficult to get 
all the money necessary, as it is for one rich man to enter 
heaven. See Matt. 19 : 24. And shall not rich men /n/ 
to go to heaven.^ And shall not you try to get tliis 
money ? 

" And now, ' What man is there that is fearful and faint- 
hearted ? let him go and return unto his house, lest his 
brother's heart faint as well as his heart' Deut. 20 : 8." 



About the time the above correspondence was receiv- 
ed, the Baptist General Convention, at their Triennial 
meeting in Richmond, Va., unanimously adopted the fol- 
lowing minute, viz. 

" Whereas, the American Tract Society are engaged 
in placing one or more of their bound volumes in every 
family willing to receive them, within the southern states ; 



CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 27 

and whereas this Society is contemplating' the extension 
of this work thronorhout the United States : therefore 

" Resolved, That this Convention approve of these ope- 
rations of the American Tract Society, and warmly com- 
mend them to the prayers and active support of all the 
friends of the Redeemer." 



^Fe here insert the folloiving from an Address of Rev. 
Leonard Bacon,- D. D., of the Congregaiional Church, 
JVew Haven, Conn., before tJie Society, May, 1841. 

" He should like to see two catalogues published by the 
Society. 

" 1. A catalogue of subjects of the volumes, that would 
show their interesting variety and adaptation to all the 
varying states of mind. There were such books as Jen- 
yns, Leslie, Lyttelton, Bogue, and Morison, to meet and 
refute the infidel. There is a large class of books like 
Baxter's ' Call,' and Alleine's ' Alarm,' to awaken the 
thoughtless. There are books of Pike, and others, to 
guide the inquiring ; others, in large variety, to instruct 
and establish the Christian ; and others still, like the Moth- 
er and Child at Home, and the series of Scripture Biog- 
raphy and other Christian Memoirs, to bless the domestic 
circle, and teach by example the path of the righteous. 
What must be the effect of scattering annually hundreds 
of thousands of volumes such as these throuo-h the com- 
munity. Why, it was enough to move old Roger Williams 
from his grave, to hear that 10,000 such books had been 
placed in Rhode Island the last year ! 

" 2. A chronolo2;ical catalogue. Who are tlie men that 
are tlius installed as teachers in all our families, and when 



28 CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 

did tliey live ? It is a striking fact that the earliest pub- 
lications suited to the practical purposes of the Society, 
are the productions of men who were cotemporary with 
the settlement of this country. Baxter's Saints' Rest was 
the first written of tlie series. Let us call up Baxter, and 
imagine him as he was, thin and spare, looking in upon 
this assembly. lie sees us planning to scatter his ' Call ' 
and ' Saints' Rest,' which were translated into many of tlie 
languages of tlie earth while he lived, tlirough a country 
of boundless extent, having scarce a name when he went 
to glory. He lived long enough to know that his ' Call 
to the Unconverted ' was the second book ever printed in 
this country, translated by Eliot into the language of the 
Massachusetts Indians — Eliot's Indian Bible being the 
first ; and he heard before he departed, that an Indian 
chief, who was converted by a blessing on that book, died 
in the faith while reading its pages. 

" Bunyan was next, of the same class with Flavel and 
the noble men who were imprisoned for their non-con- 
formity and strict adherence to the truth. And who was 
Bunyan^ He was the man who has written the only 
allegorical poem which has been acceptable alike to the 
common people and to minds of the highest cultivatiorL 
He was one of the men who raised the storm that shook 
the world, and brought down religion for the people — the 
whole people. The devil outwitted himself, says Baxter, 
when he shut 2,000 ministers out of the pulpit, and put 
many of them in prison ; for when they could no longer 
preach, they would write books for the people, and tlms 
undermine his kingdom. And that wonderful vision which 
Bunyan saw, brighter than any other but tliat seen by him 
of Patmos, tliougli Bunyan saw not what we now do — 



CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 29 

shall be the wonder and delight of lisping infancy, and 
the joy of hoary age, till the ' pilgrims ' all reach the ce- 
lestial city. 

" Passing over a century, we come down to the days of 
Doddridge and Edwards, Whitefield and Wesley, known 
as the great revival, and we find the choice productions of 
their giant minds ; and still another generation, and we 
reach Jfilberforce, that illustrious morning-star of a new 
day to England. How much does England and the world 
owe to him. Single out the cotemporaries of Chatham 
and Pitt whose fame is most exalted, and the name of 
Wiiberforce will eclipse them all. His Practical View 
^v'as the occasion of the commencement of a revival of 
evangelical piety in England; and though written for the 
titled and the learned, it is widely known and justly prized 
here, where titles are unltnown, and where all are sove- 
reigns. 

" Next we come to Pearce, with whom commenced the 
efforts of that era of modern missions, when Carey preach- 
ed his memorable sermon, " Attempt great things, expect 
great things." And in a later age we have a constellation 
of holy men, Buchanan, Martyn, Payson, Krummacher, 
Ne\ans, and others of different nations and communions, 
all bringing their large minds and warm hearts in contact 
with the people. 

" It is the productions of such minds that we are scat- 
tering far and wide over this land. They are too precious 
to be given awav: we sell them at their cost. When the 
effort was made last autumn at New Haven, which re- 
sulted in the circulation of 4,000 volumes, I remarked to 
my people that I expected it would result in their be- 
coming a more reading people, a better instructed and 



Vol. Cir. 



3* 



30 CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 

indoctrinated people than ever before, and that I antici- 
pated a large blessing on the community. We have be- 
gun to receive the fulfilment of that expectation. Among 
other instrumentalities, tliis has been highly efficient, 
under tlie Divine blessing, in bringing hundreds in tliat 
community into a hopeful connection with Christ, and now 
witli his church." 



In the summer of 1834, Mr. Seely Wood, who was 
then contemplating preparation for the ministry, was led 
to devote himself to this department of the Society's la- 
bors. He soon perceived the desirableness of supplying 
families, not with one volume only, but with a library of 
good books ; and of securing, where practicable, a public 
presentation of the character and value of the volumes, 
by which method not only were the people prepared to 
welcome and purchase them, but intelligent membera 
of the churches were often induced voluntarily to give 
their cooperation with the agent, in visiting and supply- 
ing tlie whole congregation. In May, 1837, he presented 
the following sketch of the way in which he had been led, 
and the success graciously granted to his efforts. 

" In first engaging in this work, I was led by ' a way 
that I knew not;' and a kind and merciful Providence 
has attended all its progress. My father having, from 
want of healtli, resigned tlie pastoral charge, obtained a 
box of the volumes of the American Tract Society to 
circulate, and being unable to prosecute the sales alone, 
I accompanied him ; and we actually spent six weeks in 
making sales to tlie value of $80, nearly one-half being 



CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 31 

purciiased by clergymen for their own use and for Sun- 
day-school libraries. These circumstances led me to a 
solemn perusal of many of the volumes, and to feel 
deeply the importance of their more general circulation. 
I obtained a new supply, requested clergymen to give 
l)ublic notice of my object, and prosecuted the sales for 
three months, receiving only a compensation sufficient to 
meet my travelling expenses, 

" In compliance with a request from the Society, I then 
accepted an agency for nine counties, a field afterwards 
increased to twenty-five counties, and for the first eight 
months pursued the same method as last mentioned, cir- 
culating books to tlie value of some hundreds of dollars. 

" Still I perceived that the process was slow ; that the 
mass of the population were not reached ; and felt that 
some plan must be devised for arousing the attention of 
the ivJiole community ; for presenting the hearings of the 
enterprise on the moral condition of undying millions; 
and for extending its blessings, as far as I should proceed, 
to every accessible family . 

"Necessity was laid upon me, and I requested tlie 
privilege of addressing the people on the Sabbath and 
otlier suitable occasions, on the influence of the press — 
its power and danger a^ wielded by the enemies of God 
— ^tlie adaptation of the Society's volumes to meet the 
w^ants of the community — their influence, under the 
Divine blessing, in forming the character of tlie young, 
establishing believers, and leading sinners to repentance 
and faith in Christ. I endeavored not only to gain the 
confidence of the people of God in the enterprise, but to 
enlist their personal, voluntary services in carrying tlie 
7nessage3 of grace to every family, and offering the word of 



32 CTRCm.ATION OF VOLUMES. 

ealvation to every individual. I acknowledge with grati- 
tude that the privilege of publicly presenting the object 
has, with a single exception, in every case been granted. 

" At the first meeting where the object was presented, 
ten individuals, with no compensation but the pleasure of 
doing good, pledged themselves to go, and, by personal 
visitation, explain the nature and importance of the object 
to every family in the town, offering the volumes at their 
doors, at the same prices as at the Society's Depositor}\ 
The result was, that in one week 500 volumes, value 
^125, were circulated among all ranks and classes of tlie 
people. Many who feared not God, and who would not 
have procured such volumes at a bookstore, or at the 
hand of a stranger, when they saw their friends and 
neighbors, for the simple purpose of doing good, present- 
ing the Rise and Progress of Religion in the Soul, the 
Call to the Unconverted, Alleine's Alarm, and kindred 
works, purchased them to no inconsiderable amount. 

" Having pursued this method for two years, with far 
greater success than I at first anticipated, I submit it, 
with its results and bearings upon all classes of the com- 
munity, to the consideration, not of tlie Society only, but 
of every friend of virtue and morality and the vital inter- 
ests of the church of Christ. By this means there were 
circulated, in the second year of my agency, ending May, 
183G, with some assistance from my father, 20,000 vol- 
umes ; and during the past year, with tlie aid of one 
associate, Mr. S. S. White, for nine months, of anotlier, 
Mr. Isaac Swift, for six months, and the cooperation 
of 1,000 voluntary distributers, more than 140 towns have 
been visited, and 43,500 volumes sold, amounting to 
$10,800 43." 



CIRCULATIOX OF VOLUMES. 33 

At this time, Mr. Wood and Mr. White, at the request 
of the Committee, transferred their efficient services to 
the western states, where a wide, and to a great extent, 
unoccupied field, presented itself before them. 



The volume circulation was also energetically prose- 
cuted, as had been proposed, by the Virginia Tract 
Society, and in other parts of the southern states ; tiie 
American Tract Society at Boston, and other branches 
and auxiliaries, gave a vigorous cooperation ; clergymen 
and others voluntarily engaged in supplying tlieir own 
congregations, among whom a clergyman of the Re- 
formed Dutch Church, in Columbia county, N. Y., circu- 
lated 1,300 volumes ; six agents, including those above- 
named, devoted themselves wholly to this service ; and in 
the year ending May, 1837, upwards of 230,000 volumes 
were circulated, a result which had doubtless been facili- 
tated by uniting fifteen of the standard volumes in an 
" Evangelical Family Library." 



In February, 1836, an effort was commenced to obtain 
funds for the exclusive object of providing a stock of 
books in the Depository, which resulted in securing up- 
wards of $3G,000 for that purpose. " These subscrip- 
tions were made for the express object of furnishing the 
Society with a stock of stereotype plates and volumes, 
to be sold at such prices that the Society^s means should 
neither he increased nor diminished by tlve preparation and. 
issuing of all that are sold, and cd the same prices in all 
parts of tJie country. The work thus assumes wholly a 



34 CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 

benevolent character; and as such the friends of God 
and man are induced voluntarily to enlist in it, giving it 
their efficient cooperation as a means of advancing the 
cause and kingdom of Christ ; while the mass of the 
people are far more ready to purchase when the books 
are issued and brought to their doors solely for their own 
benefit, irrespective of all motives of pecuniary emolu- 
ment." 



The number of books circulated by the Society's 
agents and the voluntary cooperation of Christians, also 
led the Committee at this time to change their mode of 
procedure in respect to copy-right volumes, for several 
of which they had paid a given sum on each copy circu- 
lated. They say, " The rights of authors to the fair 
mercantile value of their productions, it would be absurd 
to question ; as it would be to deny that, among the vol- 
umes held by copy-right, are some of those best adapted 
for usefulness in the Society's channels of circulation. 
The fact, however, that the extent of the Society's volume 
circulation depends in a great measure upon the voluntary 
efforts of Christians, and the exertions of agents supported 
by the Society, irrespective of the merits of each particu- 
lar volume, led the Committee to propose to all the pro- 
prietors of the copy-rights of volumes circulated by the 
Society, to receive outright a specific sum as compen- 
sation for permission to the Society to circulate such 
volumes indefinitely, the proprietors reserving the right 
of issuing the same at pleasure in any and all other 
channels. In accordance with these principles, tlie 
Society purchased the copy-rights of all the works for 



CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 35 

which they had arranged to pay a premium on each copy 
issued." 



Previous to the close of the year 1837, the Rev. R. S. 
Cook, the failure of whose voice for a time, had caused 
him to suspend his stated ministrations in Berkshire 
county, Mass., providentially called at the Tract House 
to obtain volumes for his own use. The thought there 
occurred to him, that tlirough these volumes he might 
still preach to his people, and likewise return to neigh- 
boring congregations the kindness which tlieir pastors 
were conferring by occasionally supplying his pulpit. In 
prosecuting these efforts, he soon perceived that the So- 
ciety's volume circulation was a means admirably adapted 
for usefulness ; he was cheered with tlie cooperation of 
ministerial brethren and Christians, and pursued the work 
till most of the county was supplied ; in reference to 
which he says, in his report presented November 1, 
1838, 

" I cannot but believe that the Lord has employed this 
instrumentality in effecting more good, present and ulti- 
mate, tlian all my labors as a pastor could have accom- 
plished. It is not too much to say, that most of the 
precious revivals enjoyed in that county, during the last 
winter, were greatly promoted by the influence of this 
enterprise on distributers and readers, attended with the 
Holy Spirit. I have heard of many cases of hopeful 
conversion by this means, and know of at least tliree 
instances where God has evidently blessed volumes which 
I have given to these who might have perished without 
tlienic The amount circulated in the county, including 



36 ClRCULATIOxX OF VOLUMES. 

more than TOO libraries, is nearly 7,000 volumes, in value 
about one thousand seven hundred dollars." 



Mr. Cook soon entered on his duties as General Ajrent 
of the Society for the volume circulation. In June, 1838, 
he presented the object in the city of Haii/ord, Conn., and 
the results of the effort were reported as follows : 

" Tlie effort Avas commenced with trembling, and I 
trust, in reliance on God. It cannot be looked upon now 
but with rejoicings by every friend of Christ and the 
trntli. I want your help to praise God for his smiles 
upon tliis enterprise, and the rich blessing extended, 
through it, to this noble city. 

" The object was presented before tlie several congre- 
gations of the city, and followed by a union meeting of 
great interest in the Centre church. The next morning 
about sixti/ voluntary distributers entered upon the work 
simultaneously, in the different sections of tlie town, and 
liave been faithful and untiring in their efforts to do good 
to souls. It would have gladdened your heart to see the 
tearful and flashing eye, or heard the subdued and solemn 
voice, as one and another related the incidents of their 
self-denying ser\'^ice, and expressed tlicir interest in this 
work as connected with the eternal destinies of immortal 
beings. I know of no exception to the remark, tliat the 
distributers are decidedly quickened and profited by their 
engagement in this jjood cause. 

"I have only time to communicate the fact, that in 
Hartford — a town better supplied with religious reading, 
perhaps, than any otlier of its population in the country — 
about 4,000 volumes liave been sold, inchid{7ig 120 sets of 
the Evangelical Family Library, in valne about $1,200. 



CIROULATION OF VOLUMES. 37 

" The question is now settled as to the adaptation of 
the volume enterprise to the wants of cities, and the practi- 
cability of caiTying out the scheme for tlie supply of a 
large population as well as a limited one. The success 
of this effort is vastly important in tliis view, as well as 
its immediate and incalculable importance to this com- 
munity. I know not what should hinder an immediate 
enlargement of your operations in this department, so as 
to embrace the whole country. It is needed everywhere ; 
it is everywhere practicable. The blessings of a thor- 
oughly biblical literature may and will be enjoyed every- 
where, if you will but spread yourselves over the land, 
bearing Gospel truth, and scattering tlie blessings of a 
Gospel salvation." 



In the following month, Mr. Cook made a similar effort 
in Providence, R. I., of whicli he said, 

" I know it will rejoice your hearts to learn that thie 
Lord has blessed tlie efforts for the volume circulation in 
this city. It was found here, as elsewhere, tliat the mass 
of the people were uninformed of the character of the 
enterprise for the supply of religious reading for the 
whole community. So far as the public could be reached 
from the pulpit, they were apprised of the nature of the 
enterprise, and prepared to welcome the self-denying 
laborers who should devote themselves to the work of 
supplying the city with a sanctified literature. Several 
churches of the Episcopal, Baptist, Congregational, and 
Free Will Baptist denominations, were addressed sepa- 
rately, while a more full commendation of the object was 
given at a union meeting, by pastors of churches in the 
city, and other distinguished clergymen. 

Vol. Cir. 4 



38 CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 

" About eighty voluntary distnbuter.% of all professions 
and employments, engaged personally in the distribution 
of volumes in their several districts, with various zeal, 
and of course with different success. Had all entered 
upon the work with the noble views entertained by some 
of its importance and power, the circulation would have 
been without precedent, and an amount of present and 
ultimate good accomplished, which no mind can conceive. 
Those who imagine that work so simple can be done by 
any body, mistake greatly the nature of the enterprise, 
and the nature of mankind. Multitudes will receive 
from the hands of a respected friend or neighbor, whose 
station and character is a sufficient guarantee for its 
purity, a volume or library which may be the means of 
salvation to whole households, while the application of a 
stranger might be immediately rejected. 

" I was never more impressed with tlie importance of 
having enlisted in this work men of experience, and 
character, and devoted piety ; nor have I ever been so 
much delighted and encouraged as with tlie cordial co- 
operation of some of this class in tliis city. One indi- 
vidual, whose generous and enlightened devotion to this 
cause will be remembered with gratitude by others tlian 
your correspondent, sold nearly 400 volumes, including 
17 sets of the Library, value $135. A brother of the 
Baptist church has already circulated volumes to tlie 
value of $75. Another of the Episcopal church about 
$60. A young lady of the Free Will Baptist church — 
herself converted by the Divine blessing on the read- 
ing of Baxter's Call — about $70. A brother of the same 
denomination, about $100. The rector of Grace church 
addressed his people twice on the subject, and secured 



CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 39 

1 7 distributers, who supplied an entire ward. The result 
is a circulation of about 5,000 volumes, including 160 
sets of (lie Library, value about $1,400. 

" The grand results in souls converted, and saints 
quickened, we shall not see until the books are opened, 
and we stand together in judgment. O that the Spirit 
of truth might descend and quicken the seed thus sown, 
causing it to spring up and bear abundant fruit, to the 
glory of his grace." 



Mr. Cook proceeded to the South for the winter months, 
visiting some of the principal towns. 

" On arriving at Savannah, in December," he says, " I 
found that the Lord had ordered all things well for this 
undertaking ; and kind, hospitable friends were raised up 
in every instance as they were needed. The pastors of 
the churches welcomed me and my cause with open arms. 
The bearings of the enterprise were explained from the 
different pulpits, and a sufficient number of efficient, 
noble-minded distributers, enlisted at once, and cordially, 
in the effort to carry the volumes to every family. The 
chief, and almost the only difficulty, was removed in a 
day. The question of the practicability of securing 
suitable persons for distributers at the South, was tlie one 
v/hich caused most anxiety, and that question is settled. 

" More than thirty gentlemen, in Savannah alone, 
shared in the self-denial and blessedness of this engage- 
ment, and witli an intelligent, principled zeal, which I do 
not remember to have seen equalled in my experience in 
this enterprise. The circulation amounted to more than 
tldrty-fwe hundred volumes, including 150 Libraries of 15 
volumes each, value, in all, more than $1,300. 



40 CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 

" What a noble commencement of the great work of 
blessing the South witli a sanctified literature ; to be 
efficiently and perseveringly followed up, I trust, until 
this most interesting region shall be made to rejoice in 
the possession of the Gospel in the powerful forai in 
which it is preached by Baxter and Doddridge, and those 
who, like tliem, have wi-itten, not for the North or the 
South, for this denomination or tliat, but for Christ and 
the world." 

lie proceeded to visit Augusta, Geo., with similar 
cheering results, 3,000 volumes having been sold, in 
value about $1,200 ; and having visited numerous other 
places, he returned to enter on the duties of a Corres- 
ponding Secretary of the Society, with special reference 
to the department of the circulation of the Society's pub- 
lications in connection with personal efibrt for the souls 
of men. 



In the following winter he visited Charleston, S. C, 
where a public union-meeting was held, followed by a 
large meeting of distributers to arrange for the circula- 
tion, who, after five days met again, when it appeared 
that nearly six thousand volumes, including about 200 
Libraries, had been circulated. At the close of the 
effort, he says, 

" One distributer sold more than thirty Libraries and 
other volumes, amounting to more than $200. Another 
circulated more than $200. A clergyman of the Epis- 
copal Church more tlian $130. The preacher of tlie 
Protestant Methodist Church, about $80. Others in 
amounts from $50 to $150. A gentleman of the Baptist 
Church purchased for distribution. Apprentices' Library, 



CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 4l 

etc., more than $150 worth of volumes, besides a liberal 
donation for foreign distribution. The Orphan Asylum, 
Workhouse, Jail, Marine Hospital, etc., were supplied 
gratuitously by direction of the mayor of the city. Large 
numbers of the volumes, and in many instances entire 
libraries, were joyfully purchased by tlie colored popula- 
tion, or given to them by the distributers and others. 

" A general seriousness was manifest in the different 
congregations, and in most some hopeful conversions are 
occurring. I cannot but hope that in Cliarleston, as at 
Savannah, where the effort was so much blessed a year 
since, the dews which are now softly distilling may be 
speedily followed by copious showers of grace, and that 
thousands will rejoice in eternity that nearly 10,000 vol- 
umes, including about 400 Libraries, value more than 
$3,000, ivere circulated in Charleston. In addition to this 
sum, about $700 were received in donations, chiefly for 
foreign distribution. Brother Curtis, General Agent for 
tlie South, cooperated with me during a part of this effort, 
and its large success is not a little owin^ to his faithful 
and self-denying exertions." 

At a subsequent period he visited New Haven, Conn., 
where about 4,000 volumes were circulated, value about 
$1,400 ; the city of Boston, where not far from 10,000 
volumes were circulated to the value of more than 
$3,500 ; and numerous other places, with like cheering 
results. 



In May, 1 841, with the voluntary cooperation of prob- 
ably not far from 20,000 Christians, about 1,800,000 
volumes had been circulated, including about 200,000 



Vol. Cir. 



4* 



42 CIRCULATION OF VOLUMES. 

by Mr. Wood and his associates in the western states. 
But the appalling fact pressed on the hearts of those 
more actively engaged in tlie prosecution of the enter- 
prise, that in the old, and especially in the more recently 
settled states, the circulation had been effected mainly 
among tlie members of churches and well organized con- 
gregations ; while the most destitute population. North, 
South, East, and West, were still unsupplied. Mr. Wood 
estimated that, even in the counties and neighborhoods 
which had been visited in the western states, not more tJvan 
one-sixth of the families had been supplied, even with a 
single volume ; and it was evident that the great mass of 
our more destitute population had not been reached. 
The anxious and prayerful attention of the Committee 
and officers of the Society and Mr. Wood, devoted to the 
question how this large and comparatively neglected popu- 
lation shoidd be supplied, led the Committee to authorize 
the expenditure in the western states, in the year then 
ensuing, so far as should be found necessary, of tlie sum 
of $2,500, in supporting a class of agents to labor in the 
most destitute portion of those states, and tlie further 
sum of $2,500 in grants of books to families destitute 
of books, who should be unable to purchase, while it was 
hoped that similar efforts for the destitute would be made 
in other parts of the country. In these efforts com- 
menced THE Colporteur system, which is now bless- 
ing the families of our land, by bearing the Society's 
volumes to their doors and commending them to their 
acceptance, with kind and prayerful efforts for their best, 
their eternal welfare. 



CHARACTER 



or 



THE VOLUMES 



OF THE 



AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 



All these works have been selected and prepared by 
an able, evangelical Committee, for tlie sole purpose of 
promoting tlie best interests of tlie community ; and in 
their high, evangelical character, spiritual power, and 
practical worth — in exhibiting " Christ and him crucified," 
as our only hope, through faith in Him and the renewing 
of the Holy Spirit, they are not excelled by any similar 
collection in any language. The most watcliful parent, 
who may be unable to examine all the works provided for 
his children, may supply them with every book the So- 
ciety has issued, not only with safety to their best and 
eternal interests, but with hope, in answer to prayer, of 
tlie richest spiritual blessings. 

Much pains has been taken to secure tlie best editions 
of these works, which are printed entire, except as an- 
nounced in the beginning of the volume, where valuable 
hints will often be found as to the history and character 
of the respective works. 



44 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

STANDARD SPIRITUAL WORKS 

OF THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY. 

The two thousand Non-conformists, who by one act of 
tyranny, in 1662, were ejected from the exercise of their 
ministry, included many intellectual and moral giants. 
In the providence of God a generation of men were then 
raised up in England, who in the highest and noblest 
traits of character have rarely been equalled in any ago 
or country, and among tliem were our pilgrim fathers. 
These Non- conformists were struggling as pastors, at 
fearful odds, against the prevailing formalism, and the 
spirit of this world in high places ; and tlie act which 
closed their mouths, shut up a fire in their bones, which 
poured itself out in works of unequaUed power. Had 
they not been pastors and accustomed to deal with sin- 
ners, tliey could not have written with such practical 
adaptation to the wants of men. Had tliey continued in 
tlie undisturbed exercise of their ministry, they would 
have still preached the truth, but would never have thus 
embodied it on the printed page to bless the church and 
the w^orld in all coming time. See Rev. Dr. William R. 
Williams' article on the character of the Society's publi- 
cations, in the proceedings of tlie public deliberative 
meeting of the Board and friends of the institution. 

" They speak," says Thomas Erskine in his preface to 
the Saints' Rest, " with tlie solemn dignity of martyrs. 
They seem to feel the importance of their theme, and tlie 
perpetual presence of Him who is tlie great subject of it. 
There are only two things which they seem to consider 
as realities — the favor of God, and the emnity of God • 
and only two parties in tlie universe to choose between — 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 45 

the party of God, and the party of his adversaries. They 
stood in the midst of the tempestuous ocean, secure on 
the Rock of ages ; and as they uttered to those around 
them their invitations, or remonstrances, or consolations, 
they thought not of the tastes, but of the necessities of 
men — they tliought only of the difference between being 
lost and being saved, and they cried aloud and spared 
not These are the great men of England. They were 
indeed a noble army ; they were born from above, to be 
the combatants for truth ; they were placed in the gap, 
and they held their ground, or fell at their posts. In this 
army Baxter was a standard-bearer. His mind is inex- 
haustible, and vigorous, and vivacious, to an extraordinary 
degree. He seizes irresistibly on the attention, and car- 
ries it along with him. He brings his reader directly 
face to face with death, and judgment, and eternity ; and 
compels him to look upon them and converse with tliem." 
Baxter, Bunyan, Flavel, Alleine, and Owen, whose 
works are so prominent among the Society's publications, 
all suffered as Non-conformists ; and Bishops Hall and 
Hopkins, and Archbishop Leighton, were men of the 
same age, and of a kindred spirit. 



BAXTER'S SAINTS' REST. 

Published in 18mo, and also in 12mo, large type, for 
the aged. 

Baxter, who died in 1691, wrote this, his first work, in 
circumstances which give to it uncommon interest. He 
was withdrawn from his public labors — away from home 
- without books, except a Bible and concordance — with 
an illness from which he never expected to recover — in- 
deed under sentence of death from his physicians. Very 



46 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

soon, as he supposed, to enter upon the heavenly rest, he 
commenced, and after much toil and effort, completed the 
work, which desen^es a place by the side of the Bible, 
and in tlie library of every Christian. It richly deserves 
an annual reading. It is admirably calculated, if heeded, 
to prepare us to live well and to die well. No Christian 
should be without it ; no Christian should be ignorant of 
its valuable instructions. 

" The ^vTiting of it," he said, " has benefited mo more 
than all the studies of my life." The latter chapters of it 
he used often to re-peruse for the benefit of his own soul. 

The late Rev. Dr. Wilson, of Philadelphia, when he 
had retired from tlie city to die, was found with the Bible 
and the Saints' Rest on his table, the latter of which, 
next to tlie former, he said he found the sweetest and 
most profitable companion, as he was drawing near tlie 
rest of heaven. Eminent Christians in England have 
borne a similar testimony. 

On its being placed simultaneously in every family in 
a large town, the pastor said its influence was very per- 
ceptible, like a gentle outpouring of the Holy Spirit 

It has been translated into many languages, and 
blessed to multitudes in every age, and will doubtless 
continue to be read and blessed down to the day of mil- 
lennial glory. Printed 120,000. 

When Adam Clarke, author of the celebrated Commentary 
on the Bible, was a boy, a pious woman in Coleraine, Ireland, 
lent him two books — an abridgment of Baxter's Saints' Rest, 
and the life of Brainerd. To these two books he ascribes, 
under God, the formation of his Christian and ministerial 
character. 

The Rev. E. F. H , of New York city, states that. 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 47 

having retired to his chamber after a solemn conversation 
with Harlan Page, at the close of the evening, he took up 
Baxter's Saints' Rest, when his eye fell on a passage like 
this: " God has signed and sealed his covenant — it only re- 
mains fox you to add your name." The Holy Spirit, he 
trusts, applied the truth to his heart, and that moment he 
found peace with God. 



BAXTER'S CALL TO THE UNCONVERTED. 

Baxter wrote this book, he says, feeling that vehement 
persuasions were more likely to benefit tlie ungodly, tlian 
directions only. About 20,000 copies were circulated 
the first year; it was soon translated into French and 
German, and into Indian by Eliot. Baxter was informed 
of almost whole households, and in one instance of sit 
brothers, hopefully converted by it. It has continued to 
be read and blessed in every age. In powerful revivals 
of religion it is sought with eagerness, and seems to be a 
voice speaking directly from the eternal world. See ad- 
vertisement prefixed to the volume. Printed 250,000. 

A friend in Virginia offering Baxter's Call to two grown 
daughters, in the absence of their parents, found that they 
could not read. He still insisted on their accepting it. They 
did so ; and scarcely was the distributer out of sight, when 
they called on an aged Methodist in the neighborhood, told 
him of the strange visitor and his surprising kindness, and 
begged him to read to them the book. He had not read three 
pages, when one of them, in tears, stopped him, and begged 
b'm to pray. The other wept. They read and prayed alter- 
nately. Truth reached their consciences — they trembled — 
repented, and were converted. By and by the parents re- 
turned. They had the same blessed book read to them, and 



4S CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

they too were brought to rejoice in hope of the glory of God. 
Here were four souls saved in one house by means of Baxter's 
Call. Sixteen other cases of conversion have occurred in the 
same county by the same means. 

Mr. S. Wood states that a man when a youth found two 
leaves of Baxter's Call, and became so much interested in 
them, that he searched several libraries for the book, and 
finally sent to New York for a copy, which he obtained and 
read. It was instrumental of his conversion, and he is now 
an eminent minister of the Gospel. 

Said a man near seventy years of age, " I once lived where 
the society was good — too good for me. I wanted to get 

away from it. Accordingly I moved to , the worst 

place that I could hear of, where I might practice all manner 
of wickedness without restraint. While thus revelling in 
sensuality, Baxter's Call fell into my hands. I took it up, 
with one of Ballou's works, for I was a Universalist, to com- 
pare each Vv'ith the Bible : I saw the fallacy of the latter ; was 
powerfully impressed with the truth as it appeared in the 
former ; was brought, as I humbly trust, to the foot of the 
cross, and to accept of the offers of mercy, as they are freely 
made in the Gospel, to the chief of sinners." 

A wealthy infidel, in Vermont, was induced to purchase 
Baxter's Call. He read it, gave up his infidelity, and was 
anxiously inquiring after truth, much troubled in spirit. He 
came and said, " Give to every one of my neighbors a copy of 
that book, where you find unbelievers, and I will pay for 
them. Do what you can for the salvation of their souls, if 
mine is lost ; for I have been the means of leading many to 
embrace this doctrine, which I fear will prove their ruin." 

Mr. S. Wells says, " I sent twelve Baxter's Call to a high- 
school near the Hermitage. The Rev. Mr. R distrib- 
uted them among the scholars. So great was the interest in 
reading them, that one of the young men committed one 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 49 

of the chapters and delivered it as an address. In a revival, 
which occurred some three months afterwards, five out of 
the twenty-three who were subjects of the work acknow- 
ledged Baxter as the instrument. In some five or six schools 
about Nashville, Baxter's Call has been, during the last 
summer, introduced as a reading-book. Much good, I trust, 
has been done in this way. The cheapness of this and the 
other publications has induced many to introduce them as 
school-books." 



BAXTER'S DYING THOUGHTS. 

This book was written about 40 years after the Saints' 
Rest, and breathes the same spirit. It shows what it is 
" to depart and be with Christ," and why this is " far 
better" than to remain here. It is not a book of ecstasies, 
but presents a calm and scriptural view of what every 
Christian should aspire after, and by the grace of God 
may attain. It is, in a word, the simple unfolding of Bax- 
ter's heart in reference to his own approaching change, 
and is adapted to the wants of all, both old and young. 



FLAVEL'S FOUNTAIN OF LIFE.— FLA VEL'S 
METHOD OF GRACE. 

These two great works are intimately connected, the 
first showing Redemption^rout(/ec? ; the other. Redemption 
applied by the Holy Spirit to the souls of men. Together 
they form a system of practical theology, full of " Clu-ist 
and him crucified " and rich in Bible truth, of inestimable 
worth to the humble and prayerful reader. While Flavel, 
who died in 1691, the same year with Baxter, is as rich 
in doctrinal truth as any writer of his age, he perhaps 
excels all in a spiritual unction and tenderness, that wins 

Vol. Cir. S 



50 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

its way to the heart, and as it were constrains the sinner 
to be reconciled to God. 

The Fountain of Life, or Display of Christ in his 
Essential and Mediatorial Glory, presents Christ as he 
was witli the Father, in the ages of eternity ; the covenant 
of Redemption ; his consecration to the office of Medi- 
ator ; the nature of his Mediation ; the fulfilment of his 
offices as Prophet, Priest, and King ; his humiliation in 
his incarnation and life ; the preparatives for his death, 
in his prayer for his people, institution of the Supper, 
agony in the garden, the treason of Judas, aad his trial 
and condemnation; the nature of his death, its solitari- 
ness, patience, etc. ; his seven last sayings on the cross, 
" Fatlier, forgive them," " Behold thy mother," " To-day 
shalt thou be with me," etc., " My God," etc., " I tliirst," 
" It is finished," " Father, into tliy hands," etc. ; his fune- 
ral, resurrection, ascension, session at the right hand of 
God, and advent to judgment Probably no other treatise 
extant exhibits so full and clear a doctrinal view of the 
great work of Redemption, combined with such melting 
tenderness, breatliing from the author's full soul in almost 
every page, and adapted to enlighten and refresh the 
spirit in the great vital points of salvation by atoning 
blood. 

The Hon. Theodore Frelinghuysen writes, " I have just read 
with deep interest, and, I trust, some profit. The Fountain of 
Life, by Flavel, as republished by your Society ; and I regard 
it among the richest offerings that you have made to the 
Christian public. The wonderful scheme of redemption, from 
its beginning in the councils of Infinite Love, through all its 
eventful passages, to the finished work and triumphant accom- 
plishment, when our Saviour ascended to his Father, is here 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 51 

portrayed by a pen that glows with the richest conceptions 
and best sympathies of ripe and sanctified experience. Flavel, 
if ever man did, wrote from the heart. To the mind that is 
afflicted by painful doubts, this volume will prove a healing 
balm, as it opens the broad foundations and the immeasurable 
heights and depths of the love of God in Christ. And there 
is another class who should prize it — the men of considerate 
and serious reflection, who often feel that all is not right or 
safe ; to whom the question sometimes comes with thrilling 
power, ' How shall man be just with God V they should study 
this Fountain of Life, and learn the soul-comforting solution, 
in the sufferings and death of the Son of God. May it be as 
life from the dead to many such." 

A female teacher says, " I never read any work which 
so interested my feelings, and at the same time so much 
affected my heart. At the end of every chapter I have felt 
' in a strait betwixt two,' whether to go on to the next chapter, 
or to re-peruse the other immediately, and thus give myself an 
opportunity of deriving still greater benefit from it. I love 
your Society better than ever for giving me — for giving the 
world — such a book, and my prayer and confidence is, that 
you will not lose your reward." 

The Method of Grace is a sequel to the Fountain 
of Life ; showing the method by which the Redemption, 
purchased by Christ, is applied to men in the work of the 
Holy Spirit in tlie heart ; or how Christ is " of God made 
unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, 
and redemption" — the act of faith " by which we effect- 
ually apply Christ to our own souls," and the believer's 
union and fellowship with Him. It largely presses the 
invitation, " Come unto me," under the heads of tlie en- 
dearing "titles" by which Christ is presented to us in 
the Scriptures, and the unspeakable "benefits" we re- 



52 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

ceive from Ilim. It explains the nature of true conviction 
for sin, being " slain by the law," and " taught of God." 
It presents the discriminating evidences of union with 
Christ, in the indwelling of the Spirit, becoming a new\ 
creature, tlie mortification of sin, and the imitation of 
Christ; and closes in bewailing the unbelief, sin, and 
blindness, that bind the soul in a state of spiritual death. 



FLAVEL ON KEEPING THE HEART. 

Showing the nature, and the necessity of this duty as 
essential to secure the ends of our being ; and aiding us 
to keep the heart, when in prosperity and in adversity, in 
Zion's troubles, in public danger, in duties, in want, trials 
and temptation, in spiritual darkness and sufferings, in 
sickness and in death. The autlior will be found to have 
explored the avenues and windings of the human heart, 
and to have here embodied a manual of Christian counsel, 
worthy of constant perusal. Printed 80,000. 

Rev. Mr. N , of B , stated to his people, that when 

a young man, a copy of Flavel on Keeping the Heart fell 
into his hands. His eye rested on a leaf on which it was 
stated that this book was the means of the conversion of a con- 
firmed infidel, during the lifetime of its author. The reflection 
instantly suggested itself to him, " If one sinner has been con- 
verted by that book, why may I not hope to be V He read it 
attentively, and it was blessed of the Spirit to his conversion. 
He urged eveiy member of his congregation to read that book. 
He added, that he had been too much in the habit of reading 
professionally, that is, with a view to present preparation for 
the pulpit ; and too little with a view to his own spiritual 
profit. " But," said he, " my views are changed. For the last 
two weeks / have been bathing my soul in the ' Fountain of 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 58 

Life! and I intend to read all of those old practical writers. 
Henceforth, I mean to preach more in their spirit — making 
' Christ and him crucified,' my constant theme." 



FLAVEL'S TOUCHSTONE OF SINCERITY. 
The author, with tenderness and a keen spiritual dis- 
cernment, points out the danger of mistake as to our 
Christian character, " Thou sayest I am rich and increased 
with goods, and have need of nothing ; and knowest not 
tliat thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, 
and naked ;" exhibiting tlie nature of true holiness ; and 
showing how we may try ourselves : the different effects 
upon true Christians and impenitent sinners, of prosperity 
and adversity ; of a sense of indwelling sin ; of obliga- 
tion to duty ; of sufferings for the sake of Christ ; with 
various other helps to discover whether in sincerity and 
in truth we are the followers of Him, and may hope, 
" through faith and patience," to " inherit the promises." 
Printed 70,000. 

BUNYAN'S PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Published in 18mo, and also in 12mo, large t3''pe, with 
beautiful illustrations. 

The Christian experience of Bunyan, who died in 1688 
just before Baxter and Flavel, as related in his " Grace 
Abounding to the Chief of Sinners " which is prefixed to 
tlie Society's larger edition of the Pilgrim's Progress, was 
one of the most striking that is known. A long time he 
was plunged in the depths of despair ; and his gracious 
deliverance, with the persecutions he suffered for Christ 
including his twelve years' imprisonment, and his pro- 

Vol. Cir. O 



54 CHARACTER OF VOLURlEg. 

found study of the Bible and his own heart, rendered 
hiin, under the teaching of the Spirit, a prince of practical 
theology. 

His great work, the Pilgrim's Progress, Avas planned 
with masterly skill, to be, as an allegorical narrative, so 
entertaining that tlie heedless youth is attracted to it; 
while yet it so illustrates the windings of the human 
heart, and the ways of God in bringing sinners to him- 
self, that the Christian pilgrim finds here his own history, 
in all the dangers, temptations, sins, falls and rising 
again, struggles and conquests of the spiritual life. 

" Within the confines of a jail he was able so to delin- 
eate the Christian's course, with its various difficulties, 
perils, and conflicts, that scarcely any thing seems to 
have escaped his notice. The most accurate observer 
will hardly find one character, either good or bad, or one 
fatal delusion, or injurious mistake, which is not essen- 
tially pointed out in the Pilgrim's Progress. The book 
suits all the various descriptions of persons who profess 
godliness; and relates the experience, temptations, con- 
flicts, supports, and consolations of Christians in our own 
times, as exactly as if it had been penned for their own 
immediate benefit." 

The child may read it with intense interest for tlie 
story, perhaps reluctantly perceiving its relation to spirit- 
ual things ; and when inquiring the way of life he will 
read it again, as clearly pointing him to Christ ; and as he 
advances in the Christian course he will read it ajjain, to 
learn the Christian warfare ; and even to old age he will 
delight in it more and more, as enlightening his path, and 
conducting him to the heavenly Jerusalem. 

Poets and literary men, able theologians, enlightened 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 55 

Christians, and humble cottagers unite in admiration of 
this work. The celebrated Dr. Johnson said of it, that 
it was the only work he ever read which he thought too 
short 

The poet Coleridge says, " This wonderful work is one 
of the few books which may be read over repeatedly at 
different times, and each time with new and different 
pleasure. I read it once as a theologian — and let me 
assure you, that there is great theological acumen in the 
work — once with devotional feelings, and once as a poet 
I know of no book — the Bible excepted, as above all com- 
parison — which I, according to my judgment and expe- 
rience, should so safely recommend as teaching and 
enforcing the whole saving truth according to the mind 
of the Spirit, as the Pilgrim's Progress. It is, in my 
conviction, incomparably the best summa theolog^ifE evan- 
gelic(E, (summary of evangelical religion,) ever produced 
by a writer not miraculously inspired." Printed 110,000. 



ALLEINE'S ALARM TO THE UNCONVERTED. 

This wonderful book, next to Baxter's Call, has proba- 
bly been more blessed than any otlier of its kind in arous- 
ing: the attention of the careless, and bringing men to 
Christ. All tliat is said above of the soul-stirring power 
of Baxter in seizino- the attention and setting before 
dying men heaven and hell, with tlie motives to secure 
the one and shun the other, is true of Alleine, who died at 
the early age of thirty-five, in 1668. With great earnest- 
ness and tender entreaty he shows what true conversion 
is, detecting mistakes respecting it ; the necessity of con- 
version ; the marks and the miseries of the unconverted • 



56 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

with clear and invaluable directions, and overwhelming 
motives to urge dying men to make their peace with 
God. Baxter honored this work by writing an admirable 
preface to it : in three years from its first publication no 
less than 75,000 copies were sold ; it has been issued in 
multiplied editions, and never was more prized, or moro 
useful, than at the present hour. See the testimony of 
Rev. Dr. Hill to its usefulness in Hampden Sydney Col- 
lege, and otlier testimonies to its wortli, pages 10 and 
23 above. Printed 125,000. 

When Rev. Mr. Deruclle presented a clergyman Alleine's 
Alarm, he replied, " That is the book that alarmed me. If I 
have ever been useful in the world, under God, it is attrib- 
utable to that little book." He has been in the ministry about 
thirty-five years, and one of the most worthy and successful 
ministers west of the mountains. 

Mr. Swift states that a clergyman testified from his pulpit, 
that while in college, the reading of Alleine's Alarm was 
apparently, in the hands of the Holy Spirit, the instrument of 
his conversion. And said he to the dear people of liis charge, 
•' Had it not been for the reading of that little work, I proba- 
bly should not have had the privilege of standing before you 
as I do this day, and of breaking to you the bread of life." 

A merchant with whom some books were left by Mr. White 
said, " I had in my employ a man who was a thorough infi- 
del, and so active in diffiising his sentiments that I knew not 
but it was my duty to turn him away. One day, as he came 
into my store, I took up Alleine's Alarm, and asked if he 
woukl read it on condition of my presenting it to him. He 
agreed to do so ; and the first Sabbath in February read the 
book. On Monday evening he came into my counting-room, 
and when I inquired how he liked the book, he immediately 
burst into tears, unable longer to conceal his emotion. After 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 57 

he became more composed, he went on to relate the exercises 
of his mind. He requested me to pray for him ; and like 
them of old, * chose' that very night * whom he would serve ;' 
and now he gives the most decided evidence of piety." 

After an address in a Methodist church in Massachusetts, 
the minister. Rev. Mr. C , said, " he owed it to the bless- 
ing of God on AUeine's Alarm, that he was brought to sub- 
mit to God." 

Rev. L. A. Alderson writes, " One young lady was enabled 
to trust in the Saviour, while reading the following lines in 
AUeine's Alarm : * Here,' saith the convinced sinner, ' I will 
venture, and if I perish, I perish ; if I die, I will die here ; 
but. Lord, suffer me not to perish under the eye of thy mercy.' 
A young man while under conviction derived much benefit 
from the same book. He was enabled to see his character 
set forth in a much clearer light, and to feel more deeply the 
need of a Saviour. He is a young man of intelligence, and 
is now looking forward to the ministry." 



OWEN ON THE FORGIVENESS OF SIN, OR 
PSALM 130. 

This, by many sound, practical divines, has been con- 
sidered the best of the works of Dr. Owen, who died 
eight years before Baxter, in 1683. Those familiar with 
the Psalm on which it is founded, " Out of the depths 
have I cried unto thee, O Lord — If thou shouldest mark 
iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand ? But there is forgive- 
ness ivith time — My soul waiteth for the Lord," etc., "will 
easily discover in it the great outlines of the whole sys- 
tem of salvation by Christ, and can well suppose that, as 
Owen expended upon it the full energies of his powerful 
mind and heart, under the guidance of the Spirit, it con- 



58 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

tains exhaustless mines of divine truth ; tracing out the 
lurking-places and windings of sin in the human heart ; 
tlie hinderances to the saving acceptance of mercy ; and 
exhibiting the superabounding grace of God, rich, full, 
and unfailing, evermore tendered to our acceptance, and 
which still remains rich and free, however blind, dark, 
and reluctant our hearts may be. " There are no depths 
of darkness, doubt, and trial, which the author docs not 
seem to have explored ; none for which he does not show 
the most rich provision ; no false refuge against which 
he does not guard. Indeed, there is not perhaps in the 
language a work which more assuredly carries the hum- 
ble and prayerful reader through all spiritual difficulties, 
and guides his feet to the rock whence they can never 
be moved. It is good to be brought into immediate con- 
tact witli the warm, glowing heart of Owen. Every 
spiritual reader will bless God that he was enabled thus 
to write. We hope that thousands will drink at this foun- 
tain and live for ever." 



BP. HOPKINS ON THE TEN COMMANDMENTS. 

The Rt. Rev. Ezekiel Hopkins, D. D., author of thia 
work, who died in London, in 1690, was cotemporary 
with Baxter, Bunyan, and Flavel, and drank deeply of 
their spirit. A distinguished divine, after carefully exam- 
ining all the treatises on the Commandments within hia 
reach, stated that the principal ideas contained in the 
whole are found condensed in this work of Hopkins. 
There is an originality, distinctness, and energy of 
thought, in a bold and forcible style ; a view of the 
Ten Commandments as comprehending the whole moral 



CHARACTER OP VOLUMES. 59 

law of God; a discussion of the principles for rightly 
understanding them ; and then a discussion of each 
command in its various relations to the divine requisi- 
tions and human duty, which render the work one of 
great value. The discussions of the first, fourth, and 
fifth commands, especially, present a very full and com- 
prehensive view of the great practice subjects which 
they embrace. 



BP. HALL'S SCRIPTURE HISTORY. 

The author of these " Contemplations on the Historical 
Passages of the Old and New Testaments," who wrote 
somewhat earlier than Baxter, has been admired for his 
terse, powerful illustrations of Bible truth. In 1618, he 
was one of four deputed by the Church of England to 
attend the Synod of Dort, and he died in 1656. These 
illustrations of the historical parts of the Bible combine, 
with much originality, sprightliness, and force of thought, 
an unction and power of evangelical truth, which has 
made it a favorite with pious and discriminating minds. 
The work embraces 103 articles, commencing with the 
Creation, Paradise, Cain and Abel, Noah, Abraham, etc., 
and ending with our Saviour's Crucifixion, Resurrection, 
and Ascension. It is throughout characterized by a 
buoyancy and fascination of style, and sprightliness and 
originality of thought, that interests the reader of every 
age, and fixes the barbed arrows of truth deep in the 
heart, ere the more heedless reader is aware that it con- 
tained any message particularly adapted to himself. 



60 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

STANDARD SPIRITUAL WORKS 

OF THE EIGHTEENTH AND THE PRESENT CENTURIES. 



DODDRIDGE'S RISE AND PROGRESS. 

Dr. Doddridge, who died in 1751, had the counsel and 
prayers of Dr. Watts and other eminent Christians in the 
writing and revision of this work, which, his biographer 
well says, " is indeed a body of practical divinity and 
Christian experience, and contains, as it were, the sub- 
stance of all his preaching." It was designed to show 
" tlie rise and the progress " of the work of divine grace 
in the soul of man, from the first awakening of the care- 
less sinner to conviction of sin, a sense of just condemna- 
tion, and of the need of mercy in Christ and the assist- 
ance of the Spirit, and the beholding of Christ by faith 
and self-dedication to Him ; with directions for the Chris- 
tian life, in prosperity and in adversity ; warnings against 
temptations and spiritual decays ; helps to growth in 
grace, joy in God, active usefulness, and preparation for 
death and the judgment. The work was written under a 
deep sense of the responsibility assumed in thus attempt- 
ing to guide sinners to Christ ; every line was carefully 
weighed ; and though the author cautions against the 
idea tliat the Spirit's operation is similar in all cases, yet 
very many, in the serious and prayerful reading of this 
book, have found tlieir hearts accompanying the author 
in the several stages of tlie work, and have been brought 
to the saving knowledge of Christ 

Of tlic works issued by the Society, the Annual Reports 
contain more testimonies to the blessing of God on this 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 61 

than on any other, except it be the Call to the Uncon- 
verted. Those testimonies fill many pages, and are most 
cheering. Printed 110,000. 

The Rev. Dr. M'Cartee says, " I well remember when two 
young lawyers, both far from God and engaged in the pursuit 
of the luxuries and wealth of this world, met in the city of 
New York, when, as one took some legal documents from 
his pocket, the other, to his surprise, discovered among them 
The Rise and Progress of Religion in the Soul. Nor was 
the surprise of the first any the less, when he discovered lying 
on the table, at the hand of his fellow, Baxter's Saints' Rest. 
Each appeared at first confused and ashamed at the discovery, 
for they had not yet learned to glory in the cross. But a few 
moments, however, had elapsed, when they mutually found 
that the attention of each had been powerfully arrested by 
those volumes, and that each was deeply anxious for the sal- 
vation of his soul. Together they sought the Lord ; and 
agonizing to enter into the kingdom, they both, at about the 
same time, were enabled to hope in the mercy of Jesus 
Christ for eternal life. One of them, having fought the fight 
and kept the faith, has long since gone upward — the other 
still lives to proclaim to dying sinners, in his native city, 
salvation through the blood and righteousness of the blessed 
Redeemer." 

Another clergyman said publicly, " Had it not been for 
Doddridge's Rise and Progress, I should have been, to all 
human view, a lawyer. My father had made arrangements 
for my studying law, when that book was put into my hands, 
and was instrumental, as I trust, in my conversion." 

This work, taken from the bookcase by a young man in 
New Hampshire, was blessed to his conversion, which wag 
followed by the conversion of three brothers, and more than 
twenty souls in the neighborhood. 

Vol. Cir. 6 



62 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

A young man in C , N. Y., was requested to read a 

portion of this work publicly in a prayer-meeting. He con- 
sented — began to read — ^his heart was touched — he resolved 
not to betray his emotions — he proceeded — but at length 
melted into tears, and was obliged to stop and cry for mercy. 
The leader of the meeting offered prayer for him, and that 
very night witnessed his surrender to God. He is now a 
faithful, laborious clergyman ; and from that hour a work of 
grace commenced in the neighborhood, in which 20 souls 
were hopefully born again. 

A young lady at the South, w^ho promised to read the Rise 
and Progress, became deeply interested, and followed the 
writer with little opposition till she came to the 17th, which 
is styled " the self-dedication chapter." While transcribing 
this chapter, as the author advises, to make it .her own act, 
she hesitated, but soon resolved to give up all for Christ, and 
united with the church. 

A clergyman of Virginia says, that in the winter of 1828, 
five individuals, to whom this book was lent by a school- 
teacher, were all brought to renounce the world and profess 
their faith in Christ. 

The superintendent of a Sabbath-school in Providence, 
R. I., who presented a copy to each of ten young ladies, ob- 
tained satisfactory evidence, that, in connection with other 
means, it was blessed in leading them all to the Saviour. 

The librarian of a college at the West, during a revival of 
religion, remarked that this work was apparently the means 
of spiritual good to every inquirer who gave it a serious 
perusal. 

The Rev. Dr. John H. Rice sent a copy of this work to a 
sick lady. It became the means of the conversion of a 
mother and daughter, and a number of other persons, of 
procuring the preached Gospel, and establishing a flourishing 
church. 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 63 

EDWARDS' HISTORY OF REDEMPTION. 
This great work embraces a compendious history of 
the world from the creation to our times, and then, as 
drawn from prophecy, to the final conflagration. It is 
founded on the only just principle, that God is in His- 
tory, and shows how the rise and fall of nations, and all 
the events of the successive periods of time have fuilhered 
the plan of Redemption. It is thus a universal history, a 
church history, a Bible history, an unfolding of the ways 
of God in giving his Son to die, and an inculcation of 
the practical and saving truths of the Gospel, which are 
not found combined in any other human production. He 
that trembles for the ark of God, fearing that infidelity, 
or formalism and superstition, arbitrary power civil or 
ecclesiastical, false religions or paganism, will prevent 
the advance and triumph of the Redeemer's kingdom, 
may here learn, that " the church is safe ;" that the ways 
of God are not as our ways ; that he who controls all 
events is mighty, and will fulfil his own designs of love. 
An able divine states that, on his first reading this work, 
it so enlarged his conceptions of the works and ways of 
God, that he felt as if he had hitherto "been living in a 
nutshell." Printed 40,000. 



PRESIDENT EDWARDS ON REVIVALS. 
This work was written amidst those glorious revivals 
of religion which President Edwards was permitted to 
■witness and record, occurring about the year 1740, after 
a period of great spiritual dearth. He was made a prom- 
inent instrument of those revivals, in which the church 
for which he labored was peculiarly blessed ; and his 



64 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

object is to vindicate the genuine work of the Spirit, on 
the one hand from tlie opposition of formalists, and on 
the other from perversions by enthusiasts. He first gives 
a " Narrative of Surprising Conversions," as the facts 
then occurred under the dispensation of the Spirit ; and 
proceeds to show the discriminating marks or evidences 
that such a work is " a glorious work of God ;" the obli- 
gations of all to rejoice in it and promote it ; the danger 
of opposing such a work ; characteristics of a true revival 
for which those laboring in it should not be censured ; 
injurious errors which should be avoided ; and what is to 
be done to promote such a work. 

This is tlie standard treatise on the subject of revivals 
of religion, adapted to be permanently useful, both as a 
means of quickening the churches when in a state of 
spiritual declension, and guiding tlie laborers in the work 
of God where it is specially revived. 

" Nowhere in the English language, or in any other 
language, even within the compass of many volumes, can 
be found so much heavenly wisdom and experience in 
the work of God. The book is one which ministers and 
private Christians may study with advantage. Nowhere, 
that we know of, do the excellent qualities of Edwards' 
own mind and heart, under tlie training, instruction, and 
sanctifying influences of the Holy Spirit, appear more 
conspicuous. Every page of tlie book is full of heavenly 
wisdom." 



EDWARDS ON THE AFFECTIONS. 
This treatise is considered by many, the best of Presi- 
dent Edwards' productions, and is almost universally re- 
garded as a great standard work on Christian experience, 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 65 

and the evidence of saving conversion. It was wholly 
re-written by Ellerby, who ascribed to it his own con- 
fimied hope in Christ, from a belief that, by presenting 
the precise tlioughts of the author in a less cumbrous and 
more modem style, and with considerable abridgrnent, it 
miijht obtain a wide additional circulation. " I am 
pleased," writes Rev. Seth Williston, "with this edition 
of so valuable a work, and hope it may be the means of 
promoting genuine religion. There is nothing more 
ruinous than false experiences." 

The author first shows that true religfion consist<» 
chiefly in the affections, or in other words, is a religion 
of the heart. He then lays down twelve marks of char- 
acter or experience, which afford no decisive evidence 
either that the affections are, or are not, truly sanctified ; 
and adds more fully twelve " distinguishing signs of 
truly gracious and holy affections." It would seem that 
no one, on a candid and prayerful study of this treatise, 
can reasonably mistake as to the question of his own 
acceptance with God. Printed 60,000. 



VENN'S COMPLETE DUTY OF MAN. 

This " System of Doctrinal and Practical Christianity," 
by Rev. Henry Venn, written about the year 1763, is a 
well-lmown standard work, presenting, with great rich- 
ness, originality, and force of thought, the high tliemes 
of salvation by the cross, and shoAving the utter futility 
of any other system of morals. The existence in Eng- 
land of a work with nearly the same title, which gained 
a wide circulation, and vainly essayed to guide to " the 
whole duty of man" without duly honoring redemption as 

Vol. Cir. " 



66 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

the foundation of all his attainments or hopes, gave rise 
to the preparation of tlie present treatise, " which, as well 
as the evangelical preaching of its author, largely con- 
tributed to revive the then slumbering spirit of the Refor- 
mation ;" and kindled a light which has been continued in 
the labors of Simeon, Newton, Scott, and otliers, and it 
may be hoped will never be extinguished. Beginning 
with tlie excellency of the Soul, the autlior treats of God, 
of JMan, of the Law, of Faith in Christ, of the Holy Spirit, 
of Repentance, of the Christian Graces and Dispositions 
towards God and towards men, of Relative Duties, of 
Self-denial in the restraining of all unholy passions, of 
Prayer, of the Scriptures, and closes witli Christian Joy, 
which is sought in vain from any other foundation than 
tliat is laid, even Christ and his saving benefits. The 
Committee cannot but hope that this work, which was 
read with deep interest by some of themselves when in- 
quiring for the way of life, may be blessed to thousands 
in the various channels now providentially opened before 
tliis Society. 



MASON'S SPIRITUAL TREASURY. 

Tliis work, which was written towards the close of the 
last century, consists of a Meditation for each Day in the 
year upon Texts of Scripture, selected from the morning 
and evening meditations of this devout author, each occu- 
pying a little more than one 12mo page. These medi- 
tations were '" humbly intended to establish the faith, 
promote the comfort, and influence the practice of the 
followers of the Lamb ;" and none familiar with their 
contents will doubt then- general adaptation to so high 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 67 

and sacred an end. Without prolixity, or the introduc- 
tion of irrelevant matter, the author condenses tlie spiritual 
and practical thoughts growing out of the inspired pas- 
sage, furnishing the reader with materials for reflection 
on topics immediately connected with our eternal inter- 
ests. Many, botli clergymen and laymen, regard tliis 
work with " a strong and grateful attachment," as the 
means of guiding their own inquiries for salvation, and 
aiding them in tlie Christian life. It is believed that tliis 
volume, comprising a meditation for each day, chosen out 
of those prepared by the author for both morning and 
evening, will prove eminently a "devotional assistant," 
especially to the exercises of the closet and of family 
worship. 



PIKE'S PERSUASIVES TO EARLY PIETY. 

This work is written in a style of tender entreaty, 
while, in its solemn and moving appeals, it has been 
thought more to resemble the writings of Baxter than any 
other work written in the present age. It presents the 
fallen and guilty state of man ; the nature of real relig- 
ion ; the' delusive supports on which the soul is prone to 
rest; the love of God and the Lord Jesus Christ; the 
advantages and pleasantness of early piety ; the happiness 
it produces at tlie close of life and in eternity ; warnings 
ao-ainst ingratitude to God and the attractions of the 
Avorld ; the hard way of transgressors, in the present and 
future life ; with answers to the usual objections to early 
piety, and earnest appeals to make no delay in yielding 
tlie heart to God. It has been blessed to the salvation 
of many. Printed 65,000. 



68 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

A clergyman reports that a young lady, by reading this 
work, " was deeply convinced of her guilt and danger, and 
found no rest till she was brought to believe in the blessed 
Saviour. She recommended it to all her young associates, 
and some of them became alarmed at their condition, and 
have expressed hope in Christ. I think it will be found in 
the day of judgment," he says, " that this one copy was a great 
blessing to these souls." 

A lady in Philadelphia stated, that four members of her 
own family had been hopefully converted from sin to God, by 
reading this publication. 

A respected clergyman in C county, N. Y., stated that 

it was Pike's Persuasives that led him to Christ and to the 
ministry. 



PIKE'S GUIDE TO YOUNG DISCIPLES. 

A delightful work to accompany the author's " Persua- 
sives to Early Piety :" presenting the perfections of God : 
the work of Christ and of the Holy Spirit; the life of 
faith and prayer ; Christian holiness, mortification of sin, 
humility, patience; the government of tlie temper, tlic 
thoughts, tlie lips, and conduct; recreations, choice of 
companions, family duties ; the Sabhatli, study of the 
Scriptures, the Lord's Supper, doing good, love to ene- 
mies, spiritual conflicts and sorrows in tlie Christian pil- 
grimage, and consolations and encouragements in lilt- 
and in death. The author has been peculiarly happy in 
thus furnishing a compendium of Christian truth and 
duty, in a serious yet clear and attractive form, which 
has proved not only a cherished " Guide to Young Disci- 
ples," but has led many Avandering souls from the dark- 
ness and unbelief of sin to God. Printed 65,000. 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 69 

PIKE'S RELIGION AND ETERNAL LIFE. 

" Religion and Eternal Life, or Irreligion and Perpet- 
ual Ruin, the only Alternative for Mankind," by the 
author of the "Persuasives" and "Guide" just noticed, 
" addresses its readers as fallen and dying, yet immortil 
beings, who need eternal salvation. It aims humbly to 
follow in the track of tliose ' Calls ' and ' Alarms ' to the 
unconverted, by which Baxter, and Doddridge, and Al- 
leine, and others ' being dead yet speak.' " Printed 
45,000. 

JAMES' ANXIOUS INQUIRER. 

This work is written in a modern, attractive style, 
which may gain tlie attention of many who would neglect 
the works of some of the old writei-s, while it presents, 
with great seriousness, the reasonableness of anxiety on 
the subject of salvation ; the importance of gaining scrip- 
tural views of truth ; the nature of repentance and faith ; 
and guards against mistakes, perplexities, and discourage- 
ments, which may attend the commencement of the Chris- 
tian course. The respected author, in a cordial commu- 
nication expressing his joy in the prospect of the circu- 
lation of the work among the millions of our growing 
country, stated that between two and three hundred thou- 
sand copies had been circulated in Great Britain ; and 
that it had been translated into the Welsh, French, 
Gaelic, and German, and was about to be translated into 
Swedish. 

A clergyman in Pittsburg writes, '•' The Lord has been 
pleased to give us another reviving from his presence. Most 
of the converts are young men and women ; and it is a re- 
markable fact, that nearly all who were hopefully converted 



70 CIIARArrER OF VOLUMES. 

were more or less benefited by the perusal of James' Anxions 
Inquirer. As new cases of interest occurred from day to day, 
I was frequently asked by the officers of the church whether 
these persons also ' had that little book ;' and in nearly every 
instance I had already placed James in their hands. Oh 
what a high and glorious reward its author will have in the 
day of the Lord !" Printed 30,000. 



GURNEY ON LOVE TO GOD. 
This essay on tlie Habitual Exercise of Love to God 
considered as a Preparation for Heaven, by Joseph John 
Gurney, of the Society of Friends, author of the Tract on 
Redemption and other valuable works, is a calm, able, 
and evangelical presentation of an important practical 
subject; showing the necessity of meetness for heaven, 
and then proceeding to the contemplation of God, not 
only in nature and providence, but more fully as Father, 
Son, and Spirit in Redemption ; together with the sub- 
jects of communion with God, submission to his will, 
conformity to his attributes, and consequent love towards 
men. 



SHERMAN-S GUIDE TO ACQUAINTANCE WITH 

GOD. 
This serious and attractive work by the successor of 
the Rev. Rowland Hill, in London, is founded on the 
text, " Acquaint now thyself with God, and be at peace ; 
thereby good shall come unto thee." It shows tlie nature 
of acquaintance with God, or true religion ; the essential 
means of this high attainment, namely, the mediation of 
Christ, and faith in Him ; the influences and work of the 
Holy Spirit ; the preached and written word, prayer, 
meditation, and holy walking witli God ; the best season 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 71 

for commencing acquaintance with God, in which the 
present time is urged by many affecting considerations ; 
closing with a view of the advantages attending this high 
and sacred duty. 

HENRY ON MEEKNESS, 
This treatise by Rev. Matthew Henry, author of the 
Commentary, who died 1714, illustrates the nature and 
excellency of that " meek and quiet spirit which is, in the 
sight of God, of great price ;" with the various encourage- 
ments to its exercise. It may profitably be made a 
manual by all, and is well adapted to allay the agitations 
which so often disturb tlie harmony and ueace of the 
churches. Printed 35,000. 



ANDREW FULLER'S BACKSLIDER. 
This is a short but able and practical treatise, exhibit- 
ing tlis general nature and different species of backslid- 
ing, its symptoms, dangers, and the means of recovery. 
The present edition has a brief preface by Rev. Mr. 
James, of Bmningham. 



HELFFENSTEIN'S SELF-DECEPTION, 
This treatise has grown out of the lamentable state of 
many individuals and churches, maintaining the outward 
forms of religion, while they give sad evidence that their 
lieart is not right witli God. It points out the nature and 
forms of self-deception ; the danger and consequences of 
being self-deceived, and the liability that the mistake 
will be one for eternity, and then directs to the only and 
never-failing remedy. 



72 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

ELEGANT PRACTICAL WORKS. 

The works under this head are valuable spiritual trea- 
tises, written in a more elegant and polished style than 
some of the preceding, and which may commend them- 
selves to particular classes of minds. 



WILBERFORCE'S PRACTICAL VIEW. 

This Practical View of Christianity has long been re- 
garded as a standard work, and has exerted a powerful' 
moral and religious influence among the higher classes 
in Great Britain. Its style is elevated ; and it so en- 
forces the necessity of vital godliness, that it would seem 
no intelligent reader can deem himself a Christian while 
having the fonn only. Within a few days after its first 
appearance it was out of print, and witliin half a year 
five editions, 7,500 copies, had been called for. The 
autlior received tlianks and congratulations on the issuing 
of the book, from many honored names, including lords 
and bishops ; and the Rev. John Newton said, " I deem 
it the mast valuable and important publication of the 
present age." " I am filled with wonder and with hope. 
I accept it as a token for good ; yea, as the brightest 
token I can discover in this dark and perilous day." 

The Rev. Legh Richmond, autlior of tlie Dairyman's 
Daughter, writes, "I feel it to be a debt of gratitude 
which I owe to God and to man to state, that to the un- 
sought and unexpected introduction of ]\Ir. Wilberforce's 
book on Practical Christianity, I owe, tlu-ough God's 
mercy, the first sacred impression wliich I ever received 
'it being after he had entered tlie ministry) as to the 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 73 

spiritual nature of the Gospel system, tlie vital character, 
of personal religion, the corruption of the human heart, 
and the way of salvation by Jesus Christ." 

Soon after this work was issued by the Religious Tract 
Society in London, an unknown English Christian was 
so deeply impressed with its worth, that he committed to 
that Society sufficient funds to enable them to distribute 
3,000 copies gratis among the nobility and the higher 
classes. 

A respected clergyman, being at tlie mansion of Mr. 
Wilberforce, told him that he received his first religious 
impressions from the Practical View ; and that to him he 
was indebted for all the light he had received, and all the 
good accomplished by his ministry. Mr. Wilberforce, 
-deeply affected by the recital, kept exclaiming, as the 
tears rolled down his face, " Give God the praise, sir ; 
give God the praise — the man is a sinner." The pious 
clergyman and his spiritual benefactor wept together, 
and rejoiced together over ail the goodness and the 
mercy which tlie Lord had made to pass before thsm. 



HAXNAH MORE'S PRACTICAL PIETY. 
" Practical Piety, or the Influence of Religion on the 
Mind and Heart," is a standard work of this favorite 
author, who began her efforts in defence of vital Chris- 
tianity against infidelity and formalism as early as the 
commencement of tlie present century, and who coope- 
rated with Wilberforce with a spirit kindred to his. This 
work, like Wilberforce's View, is adapted to the taste 
and refinement of those moving in tire higher walks of 
life, while yet, in every chapter, it discusses topics uivolv- 
ing tlie salvation of the soul; as prayer, a devotional 

Vol, Cir. * 



74 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

spirit, the love of God, holiness of heart, self-examination^ 
duties of Christians to the irreligious, watchfulness, holi- 
ness of life, and the temper and conduct of the Christian 
in sickness and death. In these discussions she wields, 
with heaven-directed skill and energy, those arrows of 
divine trutli, that, with the blessing of the Spirit, pene- 
trate the heart, open the ejes of the spiritually blind, and 
subdue and humble tlie soul. 



ELIJAH THE TISHBITE. 
This work, by Rev. F. W. Krummacher, D. D., of the 
valley of Barmen, Prussia, was translated from the German 
for the Religious Tract Society in London. It is emi- 
nently evangelical, and written with great power, bearing 
tlie reader forward by its richness, beauty, and force of 
illustration, and revealing mines of divine instruction from 
the dispensations of God and the displays of his grace in 
and by tliat wonderful and favored prophet, who was never 
called to taste of death, and was honored to appear with 
Christ in glory on the mount. 



ABBOTT'S YOUNG CHRISTIAN. 
This attractive work is not so much a discussion of the 
doctrines of the Bible, as an illustration of Christian duty 
and practice, founded on the plan of salvation by Christ 
and the renewing of the Spirit. After treating of the 
confession of sin, Christ as a sympathizing fi-iend, prayer, 
the consequences of neglecting duty, and the danger of 
being only almost a Christian, the author illustrates some 
of the difficulties of religion, the evidences of Christian- 
ity, tlie stud}^ of the Bible, the Sabbath, trial and disci-, 
pline, and personal improvement. A number of cases 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 75 

have been reported of a blessing attending the reading 
of this book. 



JAY'S MORNING EXERCISES. 
These Exercises for tlie Closet, for every day in the year, 
two volumes in one, embracing about 600 full pages 12mo, 
have been so extensively introduced into Christian fam- 
ilies, that his peculiarly happy style of presenting relig- 
ious truth is well known. It is " clear, simple, pointed, 
and forcible ; but its greatest excellence is the appropri- 
ate and beautiful illustrations from the Scriptures, with 
which his works everywhere abound." There is a sweet- 
ness and sprightliness tliat sustains the interest of the in- 
dividual reader, or the family circle, while they feel that 
their minds are under the direction of a master-spirit 
which has drawn deep from the fountains of divine 
truth, and brings them into a communion with God that 
shall be renewed and perfected in that brighter world to 
which the author allures and leads the way. 



JAY'S CHRISTIAN CONTEMPLATED. 
This work exliibits " the mellowness of age, in addition 
to tlie tastefulness and beauty which characterize his 
other works." It contemplates the Christian, in Ch -ist , 
in the closet, the family, tlie church, and the world ; ii 
prosperity, in adversity, in spiritual sorrows and spirit la I 
joys ; in death, the grave, and heaven. 



NEVINS' PRACTICAL THOUGHTS. 
These Practical Thoughts consist of forty-six articles, 
on prayer, praise, professing Christ, duties to Sabbath- 
schools, the monthly concert, the conversion of tlie world, 



76 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

violations of the Sabbath, liberality, man's inconsistency, 
the pity of the Lord, Christian duty, death, etc., the last 
of which are, "Heaven's Attractions " and "The Heavenly 
Recognition," closing with the words, " By the time we 
have done what I recommend, we shall be close upon the 
celestial confines — perhaps within heaven's limits." * * 
Here the author laid down his pen, leaving the article un- 
finished, and went, none can doubt, to enjoy the blessed 
reality of tlie scenes he had been so vividly describing. 
The articles combine great simplicity, attractiveness, and 
vivacity of thought and style, with a spiritual unction 
rarely to be found in any writer. Thousands of minds 
were impressed with them as they first appeared ; they 
reproved the inconsistent Christian, roused the slumber- 
ing, and poured a precious balm into many an afflicted 
bosom. Wliile writing them, the autlior buried a beloved 
wife, and had daily more and more sure indications that 
the hour of his own departure was at hand ; and God en- 
abled him, from the depths of his own Christian experi- 
ence, to open rich fountains of blessing for others. 



MELVILL'S BIBLE THOUGHTS. 
The Rev. Dr. Milnor, who selected these Thoughts 
from the published discourses of Melvill, says, " The 
author is one of the most able and eloquent of the evan- 
gelical clergy of the Church of England. He is constantly 
listened to with breathless attention, by crowded and in- 
telligent audiences ; and though sometimes, in the fervor 
of a wann imagination and glowing religious affections, 
he may be considered as somewhat transcending the limits 
of a pure and chastened style, it is believed all who pos- 
sess any measure of that spirit by which the preacher ap- 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 77 

pears to be actuated, oiust admire and be profited by his 
pulpit efforts. No doubt those who have the means of 
access to the original sermons, will desire to peruse them 
at large ; but it was thought, that a collection of a portion 
of his beautifully expressed thoughts on particular topics 
would be an acceptable present to those who may not 
possess them in full, and that the passages which are here 
presented are calculated to promote the interests of evan- 
gelical truth and righteousness. They are sent forth with 
the prayer, that the divine blessing may attend tlieir pe- 
rusal, and make them instrumental in exciting increased 
reverence for the holy Scriptures as a divine revelation, love 
to God their Author,/ai7/i in the adorable Redeemer, attach- 
ment to the great doctrines of salvation, and a sacred re- 
gard to that holiness of heart and life which is the only 
decisive evidence of their sanctified impression on the 
soul of the believer." 



EVIDENCES OF CHRISTIANITY. 

OLINTHUS GREGORY'S EVIDENCES. 
This work consists of familiar " Letters to a Friend on 
the Evidences, Doctrines, and Duties of the Christian Re- 
ligion." " It is very possible, and indeed very common 
for men to be Christians in name and in theory, and infi- 
dels in practice; to profess a belief in Christ, and in heart 
to deny him ; to avow the warmest admiration of the New 
Testament, and to despise and ridicule every thing in it 
which is characteristic and peculiar, and wliich constitutes 
it a summary of that ' truth ' which alone can ' make us 
free ' from the dominion of sin and the punishment due to 

Vol. Cir. * 



78 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

it." This state of mind the author of tliis work has en- 
deavored to meet, and " to exhibit, in a small compass, a 
view not merely of the evidences, but of the distinguish- 
ing doctrines and principal binding duties of the Chris- 
tian religion." Tlie aspect of the work is kind, the train 
of thought clear, scriptural, and conclusive, and it is one 
of the best of books on the evidences. It was gi-eatly 
blessed in promoting the Avork of grace in the Military 
Academy at West Point, by which several cadets were 
brought to Christ, in connection with the labors of Bishop 
Mcllvaine, while he was there stationed. 

The Rev. Robert Hall said of this work, "Dr. Gregory 
has united, with extraordinary attainments in the severer 
sciences, the art of recommending his sentiments with the 
most impressive eifect; and though he is above solicitude 
respecting the minuter graces of finished composition, he 
exhibits, in an eminent degi-ee, the most important ingre- 
dients of good writing. He is correct and luminous, and 
often rises to the tone of tlie most impassioned feeling. 
His language is eminently easy, flowing, and idiomatic. 
We earnestly recommend this work to the attentive pe- 
rusal of yoimg persons whose minds have been cultivated 
by science and letters ; and must be permitted to add, that 
we are acquainted with no book, in tlie circle of English 
literature, which is equally calculated to give persons of 
that description just views of the evidence, tlie nature, and 
the importance of revealed religion." 



THE BIBLE NOT OF MAN. 

This is an argument from the Internal Evidence, drawn 
with a masterly hand. The train of thought is clear and 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 79 

convincing, adapted to young men of our colleges, and 
to the ministry generally, while the style is attractive, and 
tlie argument intelligible to the common mind. The work 
has a directness and force, which may be in part account- 
ed for from the fact that it had its origin in the doubts of 
an accomplished scholar, who frankly stated to the autlior 
that no proofs of Christianity were satisfactory. The au- 
tlior presented the Bible itself as the best of all arguments, 
and found it carried conviction to the acute mind of the 
inquirer as nothing else did — the Bible itself, which, when 
fully examined, is seen to be an effect as truly superior to 
every human cause, as is the sun in the heavens ; display- 
ing intellect above the human intellect; its spirit a super- 
human spirit ; its standard of moral rectitude above any 
mere human standard ; its peculiar doctrines above human 
systems ; its religion unearthly ; its harmony, or agreement 
with itself, though written by various authors and at dis- 
tant periods, above human productions ; its adaptation to 
the wants of man in all his relations, such as man could 
not have devised ; its consonance with reason ; and its 
actually havmg its counterpart in the experience of men. 
Yet, adapted as the work is to carry conviction to the in- 
tellect and reason, it has a higher excellence. It ad- 
dresses the conscience, and unfolds those characteristics 
of the Bible which the unsanctified mind would never 
discern, but which, to the spiritual Christian, carry con- 
viction so sure that persecution and death cannot shake 
it. Other evidences may lie buried in distant centuries, 
or in the infinitude of God's works. The most powerful 
of all evidences every one may have in his hand, in the 
Bible itself; and this work helps him to discover and ap- 
preciate them. 



80 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

NELSON'S CAUSE AND CURE OF INFIDELITY. 

Dr. Nelson was once an infidel physician, and he has 
here embodied " a notice of his unbelief, and the means 
of his rescue." The work is written from the heart, and 
reaches tlie heart of the reader. It is especially adapted 
to the state of many intelligent and active minds tainted 
with scepticism, who are not accustomed to read the grave 
and excellent treatises extant on the subject. There was 
needed, says the president of a western college, a work 
on the evidences, " adapted to excite curiosity, awaken 
attention, and sthnulate inquiry ; which should bring down 
abstruse argument to the apprehension of men in general, 
and present striking facts to arrest the attention of the 
indifferent and the sceptical. Facts, drawn from history, 
science, and observation, are here placed in a strong and 
often startling light ; and there is an earnestness, a per- 
sonality, a warm life's-blood of reality, running through 
the whole, which gives to the written argument much of 
the interest and power of an oral address." 

Mr. W. of S states, that his son was led to see the 

folly of Universalism by reading this book. He has since 
been hopefully converted, and is studying for the ministry. 

Mr. S. Wells says, " Judge , who was hopefully con- 
verted by a blessing on the perusal of Nelson's Cause and 
Cure of Infidelity, loaned it to two sceptical lawyers, who 
were also hopefully converted. They were men of influence, 
and established meetings at two different points, in connection 
with which some two hundred individuals were hopefully con- 
verted, and have been gathered into the church. A former 
member of Congress is among the converts." 

A Christian friend in New Jersey loaned this work to a 
leading Universalist. lie read it eagerly; his attention was 
arrested ; he was soon found in the company of Christians, 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 81 

seeking an interest in their prayers, and is now a praying 
man. His conversion was the beginning of a revival of re- 
ligion, during which nearly seventy were added to the church. 

Rev. Mr. W of the Lutheran church, Penn., says, 

" This is a splendid work. It is the best thing I ever saw on 
the subject. The style is fresh, vigorous, and racy ; it is a 
Saxon production throughout: the arguments, especially on 
the fulfilment of prophecy, are actually irresistible. No rational 
man can read this work and continue to be an infidel. If I 
were rich I would have that book stereotyped by your Society, 
and sent to every nook and corner of our republic. I hope 
some wealthy and benevolent patriot and Christian will give 
you two or three thousand dollars for this very purpose. May 
God open the hearts of some of his children to do it. The 
earl of Bridgewater has immortalized his name and memory 
by his munificence in bequeathing £8,000 for the treatises that 
bear his name. Might not some wealthy follower of Jesus 
Christ immortalize his name in both worlds by sending forth 
10,000 or 20,000 copies of the ' Cause and Cure of Infidelity,* 
to combat the hundreds of deistical works that are now cursing 
our land V 



VOLUME OF SELECT TREATISES ON INFIDELITY. 
This volume on Infidelity, or Evidences of Christianity, 
comprises several standard treatises on the Evidences, 
and replies to some of the most able and injurious 
infidel publications. The treatise on the Internal Evi- 
dence by Soame Jenyns, was considered by Paley so 
masterly a production, that, in the corresponding part 
of his Evidences of Christianity, he says, " I should will- 
ingly, if the nature and limits of my work admitted of it, 
transcribe the whole of what this author has said on the 
morality of the Gospel ; because it perfectly agrees with 



82 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

my own opinion, and because it is impossible to say the 
same things so well." To Leslie^s Method with Deists no 
infidel is known yet to have even attempted a reply. The 
observations of Lyltelton on the Conversion of Paul form 
at once a brief, attractive, and triumphant argument for 
the truth of revelation. The treatises of Bishop Watson 
in reply to Gibbon and Paine, are masterly and unanswer- 
able productions, outliving many contemporaneous trea- 
tises ; opposing the shield of truth to tlie polished and 
malignant shafts of the one, and vindicating the word of 
God from the shameless vulgarity and wilful or ignorant 
perversions of the other — too sad an impress, it is but 
truth to say, of the character of the unprincipled, lasciv- 
ious, and, in his last years, habitual drunkard, that gave 
them birth. The notice of Hume's sophism on miracles is 
chiefly from Starkie's able treatise on Evidence, and 
though brief, is entirely conclusive ; and the extract from 
Gilbert West on the Resurrection, simply gives the order of 
events deduced by him from the several evangelical nar- 
ratives, and by which all are so satisfactorily explained. 

The Rev. Dr. A. Alexander says of Jenyns on the Internal 
Evidence, " I have heard it asserted, and never contradicted, 
that the late Patrick Henky, the celebrated orator of Virginia 
and of the American revolution, had been in early life scep- 
tical, but was fully satisfied of the truth of the Christian relig- 
ion by this little treatise of Soame Jenyns. It is a well-known 
fact that the work was reprinted while he was governor of 
Virginia, and was widely circulated through the state, and, as 
was said and believed, under his auspices." The Rev. T. P. 
Hunt, observing the above, says, " I know this to be a fact. I 
resided in the family of one of the daughters of Patrick Henry 
for upwards of a year, and frequently heard her mention it. 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 83 

The work was published at his expense, and he distributed 
many copies of it among his friends. He dreaded Infidelity- 
more than he did all the armies of the world, against the 
liberty of his country." 

The writer knew a Virginia infidel into whose hands the 
treatise of Jenyns fell, who, on reading it, said to himself, 
" Here is such proof that the Gospels could not have been in- 
vented by fishermen, that I must yield to it, or renounce the 
use of my reason." He received the Bible as true, Christ as 
the only Saviour, and humbly trusted in him alone for mercy. 

" It is stated by Rev. T. T. Biddolph, that Lord Lyttelton 
and his friend Gilbert West, Esq., both men of acknowledged 
talents, had imbibed the principles of Infidelity fi-om a super- 
ficial view of the Scriptures. Fully persuaded that the Bible 
was an imposture, they were determined to expose the cheat. 
Lord Lyttelton chose the Conversion of Paul, and Mr. West 
the Resurrection of Christ, for the subject of hostile criticism. 
Both sat down to their respective tasks full of prejudice ; but 
the result of their separate attempts was, that they were both 
converted by their efforts to overthrow the truth of Christi- 
anity. They came together, not as they expected, to exult 
over an imposture exposed to ridicule, but to lament over 
their own folly, and to felicitate each other on their joint con- 
viction that the Bible is the word of God. Their able 
inquiries have fiirnished two of the most valuable treatises in 
favor of revelation, one entitled ' Observations on the Conver- 
sion of St. Paul,' and the other ' Observations on the Resur- 
rection of Christ.' " 



PALEY'S NATURAL THEOLOGY. 
Tills treatise is not only a most masterly exliibition of 
the argument proving the existence of God from the 
marks of design in his works; but in showing these 



84 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

marks of design by an induction of particulars, it intro- 
duces the reader to a delightful acquaintance with the 
wonderful works of God in the visible universe. It is 
thus a storehouse of knowledge as to the natural world, 
exhibiting tlie goodness as identical with the wisdom of 
God in his handiwork — in the structure of the vegetable 
and animal kingdom ; the human frame, the bones, joints, 
and muscles ; the perfection of the animal structure ; 
peculiar organizations ; instincts, insects, the astronomi- 
cal world, etc., and out of all deducing tlie personality, 
attributes, unity, and goodness of God. A clergyman 
says, " The reading of tliis work when a youth, not only 
charmed me v/ith the clearness of the author's style and 
argument, but opened my eyes to the beauties of nature, 
and gave me new delight in the happiness of the animal 
kingdom and especially of the young, which God has 
everywhere diffused. I have ever since been a happier 
man, and delighted more in the happiness of all the crea- 
tures of God." 



BOGUE'S EVIDENCES OF CHRISTIANITY. 

This Essay on the Divine Authority of the New Testa- 
ment presents, with great richness and condensation of 
thought, in a clear and simple style, the prominent facts 
and arguments constituting tlie evidences of Christianity, 
admirably blended with tlie mellowing and hallowed influ- 
ence of vital godliness. The internal evidence of the 
truth of religion, breathing from tlie pages of the book 
itself, has carried conviction to minds unaffected by other 
treatises on this great subject. 

Rev. C H states, that when in a very sceptical 

state of mind, he read aU tlie prominent treatises on the 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 85 

evidences of Christianity within his reach without satis- 
faction, hut the spiritual unction and tlie unanswerable 
arguments of Bogue convinced his mind, and in the Ser- 
mon on the Mount he found Christian joy. 

The Rev. William Nast lent this work in German to a 
leading infidel in New York. He afterwards says, " You 
can imagine my feelings when a few weeks ago I read 
Dr. F.'s public recantation of infidelity, in which he men- 
tions, among other means by which it pleased the Lord 
to convince him of his evil way, the reading of Bogue I 
Surely this is great encouragement — the Goliath of Ger- 
man infidelity on his knees, a weeping penitent. What 
a powerful besom may your Bogue prove in the hand of 
the Lord, to sweep from this land the mass of infidelity 
which is constantly imported from Germany !" 



MORISON'S COUNSELS TO YOUNG MEN. 
These Counsels to Young Men on Modern Infidelity 
are written in a rapid, glowing, attractive style, adapted 
to fasten the attention ; and contain a conclusive exhibi- 
tion of the evidences, botli external and internal. 



KEITH'S EVIDENCE OF PROPHECY. 
This little work comprises the substance of the excel 
lent work of Rev. A. Keith, showing the literal fulfilment 
of prophecy, particularly as illustrated by the history of 
the Jews, and the discoveries of recent travellers. 



PLUMER'S BIBLE TRUE. 
This treatise comprises a summary of all the principal 
arguments in support of Christianity, plainly and briefly 

8 



Vol. Cir. 



86 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

Stated, for the use of those who are prevented from exam 
ining- larger works. 



UNIVERSALISM NOT OF GOD. 

What Nelson has done for Infidelity, it remained for 
the writer of this book to do for Universalism. The 
autlior, like Nelson, knew from bitter experience the 
evils of the system he exposes ; and by mingled narrative, 
argument, and expostulation, *seeks to warn the commu- 
nity of the dangers of a seductive system of error, and to 
lead its votaries from their delusion to the truth as it is in 
Jesus. He gives the nan*ative of his own experience for 
twelve years as a preacher of Universalism, and the state 
of his mind in relinquishing that cherished system for 
faith in Christ. He presents the difliculties of Univer- 
salism, examines its arguments, shows its destructive ten- 
dencies and influences, and proves its inconsistency with 
the truth of tlie Bible. 

While Universalism has apparently been waning in 
gome parts of the country, in others it threatens to be- 
come the absorbing error. We know of no better means 
of counteracting its mischiefs than the circulation of this 
work. 



D'AUBIGNE'S 

HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 

This History of the great Reformation in the sixteenth 
century, by Rev. Dr. Merle D'Aubign6, in four volumes, 
averaging 457 pages each, is a new translation by Dr. H. 
White, of Trinity College, Cambridge, carefully revised 
by Dr. D'Aubign«^, who has also made various additions 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 87 

not before published, and inserted an elegant preface. It 
contains a portrait of the author and of Luther, and a 
certificate presenting a fac-simile of the author's hand : 
the stamps on the backs of tlie four volumes in cloth show- 
ing Luther finding the Bible in the monastery, climbing 
Pilate's staircase, nailing tlie theses to the church door, 
and at the Wartburg translating the Bible into tlie ver- 
nacular German. It gives a condensed history of the 
nominally Chi'istian world from the birth of Christ to the 
sixteenth century ; the birth of Luther in 1483, his youth, 
and early labors ; and then the great events which ushered 
in the Reformation, under tlie general topics of the In- 
dulgences and the Theses ; Luther before the Legate ; the 
Leipzic disputation ; the Papal bull ; the Diet of Worms ; 
the Swiss ; the first reforms ; agitation, reverses, and prog- 
ress ; divisions, Switzerland and Germany ; tlie French ; 
the protest and the conference ; the Augsburg confession; 
Switzerland, conquests ; Switzerland, catastrophe. A 
learned professor has well said, tliis is " one of the most 
timely and useful works of the present century. It is in- 
deed the only history that opens to the French or English 
reader any thing like an interior view of tliat great work 
of God, the Reformation in the sixteenth century ; tlie 
style is graphic and full of life, and a delightful spirit of 
evangelical piety pervades the whole." If the reader would 
have an intellectual treat ; if he would have a graphic and 
authentic history of the period more full of interest and 
incident than any other of modern times ; if he love racy 
anecdote and brilliant biographical sketches ; if he would 
draw spiritual refreshment from the delineation of such 
great truths as are associated witli the doctrine of the Ref- 
ormation, justification by faith; if he would know popery 



88 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

as it was, and is, and would trace its likeness to otlier 
systems of formalism and error, let him read this book. 
And if he would aid liis neighbor in all these respects, 
let him procure it for him or lend it to him. 

Perhaps no uninspired work is better adapted for gene- 
ral circulation, at the present time, in every part of our 
country, unfolding the wiles of popery, and showing what 
that true, spiritual religion is, for which rivers of blood 
have flowed, and without which none can be saved. We 
bless God for this work, and commend it to the prayers of 
his people, and their active efforts for its wide diffusion. 



THE REFORMATION IN EUROPE. 
This work embraces a history of the Reformation in 
Great Britain, Holland, Sweden, Poland, and other coun- 
tries not embraced in the first four volumes of D'Aubign^, 
exhibiting tlie fidelity and the sufferings of the followers 
of Christ, with a chronology of the Reformation. 



ROMANISM. 

NEVINS' THOUGHTS ON POPERY. 

The fifty-eight short articles which compose this work 
exhibit the sprightliness, distinctness, and originality, 
which characterize the author's style, while the facts and 
conclusive arguments carry conviction to the mind of the 
unbiassed reader. Item by item, the delusions and super- 
stitions of popery are exposed, under the heads of the suf- 
ficiency of the Bible, the nine commandments, mortal and 
venial sins, infallibility, idolatry, relics, the seven sacra- 
ments, penance, the mass, celibacy of the clergy, pur- 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. ^ 89 

gatory, canonizing saints, Lafayette not at rest, the Leo- 
pold reports, supererogation, convents, etc. Perhaps noth- 
ing has yet been issued, which so lays open the deform- 
ities of popery to common minds, or is so admirably adapt- 
ed to save our country from its wiles, and to guard the 
souls of men from its fatal snares. 

"Perhaps nothing has appeared. on the subject of popery 
which arraigns it before the tribunal of common sense and the 
Bible, and convicts it of falsehood and absurdity, more tri- 
umphantly than these articles. The style is unique and sim- 
ple, the argument scriptural and logical, and a cheerful piety 
is diffused through the whole book, such as might be expected 
from one who eminently ' died the death of the righteous.' " 



THE SPIRIT OF POPERY. 
This " Exposure of the Origin, Character, and Results 
of Popeiy " is written in tlie form of letters from a father 
to his children, and ornamented witli twelve beautiful en- 
gravings. In a kind and pleasing style it presents almost 
all the prominent peculiarities of Romanism ; its stealthy 
inroads upon the chmxhes, and various false assumptions ; 
the pomp and unmeaning ceremonies at Rome ; tlie re- 
semblance of popery and heathenism ; the confessional ; 
the mass ; worship of saints ; purgatory ; taking the veil ; 
English monasteries ; the Inquisition ; mode of making 
proselytes, etc. 



THE COLPORTEUR AND ROMAN CATHOLIC. 

This dialogue, by the Rev. Dr. Archibald Alexander, 
is written in a spirit of the utmost kindness and deep 
anxiety for the salvation of the blinded Catholic ; and 
while, in the course of the conversations, it confutes his 



Vol. Cir. 



8* 



90 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

principal errors, it gradually unfolds to him, in a more 
masterly manner than any thing else we have seen, ivhat 
true relif^ion is, which allies the heart to Christ, and se- 
cures a happy eternity. 



BIOGRAPHY. 

" Faithful Christian biograpliy has at once its sanction 
and model in the word of God." He that is a man can- 
not fail to feel an interest in the dealings of God with a 
man like himself, in life and in death ; and he that would 
live the life of a Christian cannot but be instructed and 
benefited by learning the errors into which otliers in- 
dulging the same hopes have fallen, and how the grace of 
God enabled them to conquer sin, and to labor, and suffer, 
and die for Clirist. 



MEMOIR OF ISABELLA GRAHAM. 
This is well known as one of the best female biogra- 
phies of any age. Combining uncommon brilliancy and 
power of intellect with a warm, gushing heart and untir- 
ing energy, exhibited in their various actings through a 
long and chequered life, and in a rich Christian experi- 
ence — uniting unshaken reliance on God tlirough her Re- 
deemer's righteousness, and trust in his word and promises, 
with an active, self-denying, practical benevolence that 
has scarcely a parallel — the life of this excellent woman 
is adapted to interest and profit every class of readers. 
This edition is enriched by her own affecting narrative of 
her husband's death and other correspondence, selected 
from the published volume of her letters and a memoir 
issued in Scotland, tlie committee having had the aid of 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 91 

the surviving author of the original memoir in revising 
and preparing for the press the present standard edition. 



MEMOIR OF DR. PAYSON. 

The biography of this man of God opens before the 
reader a rich fountain of Christian experience. The pow- 
ers of his mind and imagination were brilliant, while tlie 
work of divine grace in his soul humbled him in the dust, 
and gave him a clear and practical apprehension of the 
great truths and doctrines of the Bible, every line of 
which he had studied with prayer for divine illumination. 
Sometimes prostrated with a sense of his unworthiness, 
and again exalted to the heights of Christian joy — richly 
blessed in his ministry, and then crushed by disease — his 
varied life and triumphant death fill up a memoir of un- 
usual worth in the church of God. 

Said one of the clergymen in P , to his congregation, 

" Last summer was a season of great declension in religion. I 
took up the memoir of Payson and read it. Its influence on 
my mind led me to consecrate myself anew to God — anew to 
the holy service of the ministry. I felt difierently, prayed dif- 
ferently, preached differently, and from that day God began to 
turn our captivity ; the church were revived, and sinners were 
converted to him. I trace that revival, by the blessing of God,, 
to the reading of that work." 



MEMOIR OF JAMES BRAINERD TAYLOR. 
This memoir presents a character combining, in an un- 
common degree, sprightliness and vivacity with a glow of 
piety towards God and burning zeal and activity for the 
salvation of men ; forming an admirable pattern, at once 
for the pastor of the church, the student, and candidate 



92 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

for the ministry, and the common Christian ; and setting 
before the impenitent sinner a living illustration of the 
trutli and excellency of religion, which must carry convic- 
tion to tlie candid mind that it is "the one thinir needful." 



MEMOIR OF HARLAN PAGE. 
This memoir is designed to illustrate a single point, the 
power of prayer and personal effort for the souls of individ' 
uals ; showing the singleness of aim and skill with which 
a humble Christian labored, for twenty years, to glorify 
God in promoting the spirituality of Clu*istians, and the 
conversion of the impenitent, of every age and in all cir- 
cumstances, to whom he had access — in his own family — 
in his large Sabbath-school — in tlie Bible-class — in re- 
ligious meetings — in tlie Tract and Bible houses — by 
seeking out the destitute in their own places of abode — by 
private correspondence — together with tlie signal blessing 
of God upon his efforts — and his most happy and trium- 
phant death. It is hoped this example may encourage thou- 
sands of Christians in duty. A distinguished clergyman 
in New York city recently expressed to the author his 
gratitude for the aid he had derived from this work in in- 
citing him to pastoral labors, and assisting him to render 
them tlie means of good to individual souls. 

Rev. Mr. C of New Hampshire says, " It is a common 

remark to me, that it seems to be the design of providence, by 
raising up such men as Harlan Page, to show the members 
of the church how much each Christian can do, with the di- 
vine blessing, to convert the world." 

A clergyman in Missouri says, " I never saw before such a 
practical illustration of the precept, * Be instant in season and 
out of season.' Never — no, not even in the lives of such men 



i 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 93 

as Payson and Baxter — have I read of a man who seemed to 
make it so completely the business of his life to effect the 
salvation of men. He seems not to have omitted one single 
opportunity of personal opplication to his impenitent fellow- 
men, in behalf of God and their own souls ; and his efforts 
were invariably accompanied with his prayers for their suc- 
cess. The memoir of Page ought to be read, nay, it ought to 
be the text-book of every layman in the church." 

A devoted pastor in New York city writes, " A short time 
since, I took up the life of Harlan Page. I had read, thought, 
and preached much on personal obligation to labor in the work 
of saving souls, but never did my own individual responsi- 
bility and that of my church press upon me as when I arose 
from the perusal of that precious little volume. I saw my 
errors, I wept, and renewedly consecrated myself to that cause 
in which brother Page had so humbly, silently, and yet suc- 
cessfully labored ; and resolved, that, if possible, every member 
of the church of which I am pastor should possess a copy. 
At my weekly prayer-meeting, and from the desk on the Sab- 
bath, I recommended it strongly to the church, and requested 
that every member should obtain a copy. The request was 
not in vain : within a few weeks the whole church, (of more 
than 300 members,) with a few exceptions, were furnished 
with a copy. The effect of so general a circulation, I need 
scarcely add, has already been most delightful. The interest- 
ing and almost universal inquiry was immediately excited, 
' Lord, what wilt thou have me to do V " 

" Think you," says the Hon. Theodore Frelinghuysen, " that 
Harlan Page ever knew a regret because of his toils in this 
blessed service? It was the glory of his life ; it was the joy 
of his dying hour ; it will be his bright and imperishable crown 
for ever. And when that blessed spirit shall meet the goodly 
number whom he turned to righteousness, as they strike their 
harps together in the new song of praise to the Lamb that 



94 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

was slain, then, and for endless ages thereafter, he will begin 
to learn of the heights and depths of the recompense that 
grace awards to those who have done good to souls. He has 
furnished a new chapter on Christian faithfulness. Every 
follower of Christ should study his life, should tread closely in 
liis footsteps, should covet such blessed gifts of the Spirit." 



LIFE OF BAXTER. 
The life of this eminent servant of God abounds with 
striking incidents, and is adapted to be useful to all. The 
reader is struck with his extraordinary reliance on the 
efficacy of prayer ; his abundant labors as a pastor ; tlie 
rudeness, ignorance, and persecuting spirit of the age in 
which he lived ; his zeal for the spread of the Gospel at 
that early period of modern missions ; the great variety 
of works he was enabled to write, though in a very low 
state of health ; and the wonderful degree to which the 
powers of his mind were sustained under the multiplied 
infirmities of agfe. 



"to" 



LIFE OF MATTHEW HENRY. 
Matthew Henry, the commentator, was born in 1662, 
memorable for the act of Non-conformity, by which his 
distinguished father, the Rev. Philip Henry, suffered. The 
son visited Baxter when in prison, and drank deeply of 
the spirit of tlie Puritans. The history of his life, his 
correspondence and his writings, many valuable portions 
of which are embraced in tlie memoir, are of uncommon 
interest to all classes of readers. 



LIFE OF ARCHBISHOP LEIGHTON. 
Leighton died in 1684, and was contemporary with 
Baxter. In tlie troublous times in which he lived, he was 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 95 

an advocate of forbearance and peace ; meek and humble 
in the ecclesiastical preferment, which he reluctantly re- 
ceived and formally resigned ; faithful to the souls under 
his oversight ; a profound student of the Scriptures, the 
evangelical power and spirit of which he deeply imbibed ; 
a man of retirement and devotion, who lived above the 
world and " walked with God." 



LIFE OF JOHN NEWTON. 
Written by himself to the year 1763, and by Cecil con- 
tinued to his death in 1807. From the depths of darkness 
and sin, while wandering on the ocean and engaged in 
the slave-trade in Africa, and after a chequered and mis- 
erable life for twelve years, the prayers of his mother 
were answered, and he became one of the brightest orna- 
ments of the church of God, distinguished for devotional 
piety, ripeness of Cliristian character, and usefulness as 
a minister of the Gospel, and an author of practical works 
and hymns of praise which have embalmed his memory 
in the hearts of evangelical Christians. Scarcely an ex- 
ample of such humble, mature, and cheerful piety is to be 
found in the history of good men. 



LIFE OF REV. SAMUEL KILPIN. 

This memoir presents the life of a humble Christian 
and godly minister, burning with zeal to be instrumental 
in bringing multitudes to God ; laboring " in season and out 
of season" with great skill and success, and "ceasing not 
to warn every one, night and day, with tears." Perhaps 
there is no more striking example of a pastor successfully 
blending personal efforts for the souls of men, like those 
of Harlan Page, with fidelity in the pulpit, and the adop- 



96 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

tion of all other means to reach those in the highways 
and hedges of sin, and bring them to Christ. As his la- 
bors were permanently blessed among those living in open 
neglect of the Gospel, so his own life was a pattern of 
Christian devotion and zeal. 

A letter from Mrs. Kilpin of Exeter, England, says, " You 
have perceived that the same spirit which has produced the 
revivals in your highly favored country, dwelt richly in my 
beloved husband's heart, and produced similar fruit — a sur- 
render of the soul with its mighty powers to the living God. 
Perhaps few, very few ministers of Christ reaped a larger 
harvest of souls for the Redeemer's kingdom whilst on earth ; 
but the good seed, which he was ever scattering in all direc- 
tions, had taken root, and was producing the peaceful fruits 
of righteousness to a much greater extent than he had imag- 
ined. The intense desire for souls which he habitually felt, 
was the sure precursor of success eventually ; and being dead, 
he yet speaketh. His little unpretending memorial has been 
employed by the Lord the Spirit, to arouse, awaken, stimu- 
late, cheer, and comfort many a sleepy, weary pilgrim ; and I 
have the consolation of seeing orphan-houses, day-schools, etc, 
springing up around me through the influence he exerted." 



MEMOIR OF HANNAH HOBBIE. 
She was remarkably disciplined for a long course of 
years by distressing sickness, in which the meekness, pa- 
tience, and triumphs of true religion were signally ex- 
hibited. Her religious exercises were very rich and in- 
structive, being mingled all the way with efforts for the 
good of others — in her letters, conversation, and even the 
teaching of a Sabbath-school, who assembled in the room 
of her confinement to hear from her lips the words of 
eternal life. 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 97 

MEMOIR OF NORMAND SMITH. 

" A very striking exemplification of tlie usefulness of 
an intelligent Christian serving God in his business — con- 
secrating his substance, from principle, to the spread of 
the Gospel ; and at the same time bearing the fruits of 
piety in a devout, prayerful life of useful effort for the 
souls of men." 



MISSIONARY MEMOIRS. 

The Rev. Dr. Alexander, in the conclusion of tlie Soci- 
ety's edition of the Memoir of Buchanan, speaks of tlie gen- 
eral influence of Missionary biography as follows : " This 
volume, with the biography of Brainerd, Pearce, Martyn, 
Carey, and others, we trust will be tlie means of elevating 
the views and giving impulse to the pious feelings of many 
a youthful mind. There is no stronger encouragement to 
benevolent effort than observing the efficacy which God 
has graciously given to the example of such a man as 
David Brainerd, who spent his life in the deepest ob^ 
scurity, in the dark bosom of the forest, among the un- 
tutored savages ; but liis memory is now embalmed, and 
he, being dead, yet speaketh. May some of the same 
blessed fruits attend the reading of this memoir of Bu- 
chanan. English literature is now rich in evangelical 
biography, and the stock is increasing every day." " Had 
not Melville Home with trumpet tongue," said the Rev. 
Dr. Porter of Andover, " aroused the energies of a slumber- 
ing church, and Buchanan lifted tlie pall which covered 
the millions of India, your missionaries would never have 
set foot upon pagan ground." 

Vol. Cir. 9 



98 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

LIFE OF DAVID BRAINERD. 
Perliaps in no other uninspired man have the fervor of 
personal piety and devoted missionary zeal been so emi- 
nently united. His memoir being mainly extracted from 
his diary, a great part of which was written as a private 
record of God's dealings with his own soul, presents his 
true character, and is a burning fire, from which Henry 
Martyn and thousands of others have lit a flame that has 
blessed the world. 



MEMOIR OF REV. DR. BUCHANAN. 
This is the memoir by Pearson, in some parts consid- 
erably abridged, and in others much enlarged from Dr. 
Buchanan's "Christian Researches in Asia." Though 
Dr. Pearson felt constrained to omit all tliat was contained 
in the " Christian Researches," which were published by 
Dr. Buchanan, and doubtless form the most interesting 
portion of his biography, yet the memoir comprises about 
450 large 12mo pages. By the careful hand of an able 
and discreet tlieological professor, tliose parts of the me- 
moir "which cannot be of permanent interest in this 
country " were erased ; " the nan*ative of Dr. Buchanan's 
life after his return to England, comprising 100 pages of 
Pearson, condensed into one short chapter," and " the 
most valuable portions of the Christian Researches in- 
serted in the order of time," with tlie addition of brief 
concluding remarks. The whole was then carefully re- 
vised under tlie direction of tlie committee. " It is be- 
lieved," in the concluding words of the preface, " that 
every thing of permanent value in the memoir by Pearson 
is retained, and that the additions from the Researches 
in Asia render tliis volume more valuable tlian the orig- 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 99 

inal ; anJ, indeed, in relation to Eastern missions, one of 
the most instructive and useful works that have been 
written." 



MEMOIR OF HENRY MARTYN. 
The immediate cause which led this accomplished 
scholar to relinquish his flattering prospects in England, 
and devote himself as a missionary to tlie heathen, was, 
in the language of his biographer, " hearing the Rev. Mr. 
Simeon remark on the benefit which had resulted from 
the services of Dr. Carey in India ; soon after which, pe- 
rusinof the life of David Brainerd who finished a course 
of self-denying labors for his Redeemer with unspeakable 
joy, his soul was filled with a holy emulation of that ex- 
traordinary man ; and after deep consideration and fervent 
prayer, he was at length fixed in a resolution to imitate 
his example." The flame thus kindled in his heart ex- 
pired not till he yielded up his soul to God on tlie sultry 
plains of Persia. His memoir is one of deep interest, 
whetlier regard be had to the spirit of self-consecration 
with which he thus early devoted himself; the conscien- 
tious cultivation of piety in liis own heart ; his abundant 
and successful labors in India and Persia; his intercourse 
witli leading pagans and Mahommedans ; his translations 
of the Scriptures, or the various incidents through which 
he passed, till " dying, weary and alone, after the severest 
struggles and most self-denying exertions," he was called 
to rest in the bosom of his Lord. 



MEMOIR OF HARRIET WINSLOW. 
Mrs. Winslow having been for thirteen years an active 
member of the mission in Ceylon, this memoir is valuable, 



Kfi^ C^ ^ £~%U Ti 



lOQ CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

not only as presenting- the character of an accomplished 
young lady consecrating herself to the welfare of tlie 
heathen, when the flame of missionary zeal had scarcely 
begun to burn and almost all around her frowned upon 
the enterprise, but as intelligently and happily introducing 
the reader into the daily trials and enjoyments, the hopes, 
labors, and disappointments of missionary life. In an 
introduction by the Rev. James H. Evans, to one of the 
two reprints of this work in England, from which it has 
also been translated into French, he justly notices the 
mass of missionary intelligence it comprises ; the ease 
and simplicity of its style and narrative of occurring 
events ; the example it affords of early consecration and 
patient self-denying activity and perseverance in the ser- 
vice of Christ ; the illustration of the usefulness, respon- 
sibility, and encouragements of Christian mothers, and 
especially the wives of missionaries ; the value to those 
abroad of mutual confidence, watchfulness, and fidelity ; 
tlie riches of divine grace bestowed on the prayers and 
labors of faith and love ; and the exhibition it contains of 
the true principles of missionary effort, on tlie success of 
which depends, under God, the hope of millions throng- 
ing the pathway to eternal perdition. 

The Rev. Dr. Anderson says, " I do not know a biog- 
raphy, male or female, which, all things considered, gives 
so good an illustration of missionary life. The mission 
to which she belonged was among tlie best constituted, 
best tempered of missions among the heathen ; and she 
was amonof its fairest ornaments. I would that all wives 
of missionaries were like her, in their endeavors to be 
useful beyond the sphere of their own families. Her 
memoir is of great value, as furnishing an example of 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 101 

Tvhat female missionaries ought to be ; and it gives an 
admirable view of the mission, which cannot fail perma- 
nently to interest Christians of every grade of intelli- 
gence. It unfolds the true theory of missions, in a course 
of practice which, if carried into all nations with the 
same devout, humble, zealous spirit, will not disappoint 
the hopes of the people of God." 

An able writer says, " In Mrs. Winslow we have decided 
piety and the public profession of her faith at the early age of 
thirteen ; the period of youth improved amidst the social en- 
joyments and benefits of an accomplished circle of young 
ladies, and employed in forming the first Sabbath-school in 
her native town, and in all the deeds that give a charm to 
female piety ; early consecration to the missionary work, 
while almost all around her hesitated or opposed ; the descent 
of the Holy Spirit on the ship's company in which she sailed ; 
thirteen years of well-directed, prayerfiil, faithfiil labors, in a 
united and successful mission ; her superintendence of the 
large native female school at Oodooville, from which it is re- 
markable that no pupil was regularly discharged who had not 
publicly prof essed faith in Christ ; her character as a mother, 
committing some of her children to the dust in Ceylon, and 
sending her only son to die almost as soon as his feet were 
planted on her native shores ; her kind and attractive influ- 
ence exerted in journal letters to her friends, which led three 
of her sisters to follow her to India, and which constitute a 
valuable history of the mission ; and her eminent preparation 
for death, as if she had known that her Lord would come sud- 
denly, ' as a thief in the night.' " 



MEMOIR OF MRS. SARAH L. H. SMITH. 

Mrs. Sarah Lanman Huntington Smith, late of the 
American mission in Syria, was a young lady of superior 

Vol. Cir. 



9* 



102 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 



accomplishments, who early devoted herself to the service 
of Christ. Iler benevolent and sympathizing heart was 
first moved to labor for the Mohegan Indians in her own 
vicinity, and she then became tlie wife of the Rev. Eli 
Smith, missionary in Syria, where she early fell a martyr 
to her excessive labors in a debilitating climate. She 
combined in a very uncommon degree the charms of in- 
tellectual, moral, and social refinement, and presents a 
model of female excellence worthy of imitation by all the 
daughters of our land. 



1 



LIFE OF SCHWARTZ. 
Previous to the commencement of American foreign 
missions, Schwartz labored nearly fifty years in India, 
from 1750 to his death in 1798. He was meek and gen- 
tle, and by the prevalence of Christian love, with forbear- 
ance, a deep discernment of character, true intellectual 
greatness, and steadfast singleness of purpose to benefit 
the heathen, he acquired the unbounded confidence, not 
only of the masses of the people, but of their pagan 
rulers, and of evangelical Christians in Great Britain, on 
the continent of Europe, and in America. 



LIFE OF REV. SAMUEL PEARCE. 
Pearce was the companion of Carey and Thomas, in 
establishing missions in India in 1793, and but for the 
conscientious interposition of his brethren, would have 
been the companion of their toils among tlie heathen. 
There is exhibited a sweetness in his character and piety ; 
a spirit of self-sacrifice for the salvation of men ; a di- 
rectness and skill in his laborious efforts ; and an expan- 
sion of views, grasping at nothing less tlian the conver- 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 103 

sion of the world to Christ, which renders the memoir at 
once highly attractive and adapted to be useful. 



MISCELLANEOUS. 

SACRED SONGS FOR FAMILY AND SOCIAL 

WORSHIP. 

This book of hymns with music has proved to be 
among the most acceptable and useful of the Society's 
publications, " affording a much greater facility for culti 
vating and sustaining this delightful part of worship in 
the family tlian has hitherto been enjoyed." The Hymns 
are of that standard, evangelical character, which has 
stamped with immortality the productions of Watts, Dod- 
dridge, Newton, Cowper, Steele, and kindred poets ; and 
the tunes those adapted for general and permanent use ; 
omitting, on the one hand, those ungrammatical in their 
composition or offensive to musical taste ; and on the 
other, those too delicate and refined, or more exclusively 
adapted to the worship of the great congregation. The 
music has been selected and adapted by Thos. Hastings, 
Esq. of New York, with the counsel and aid of Lowell 
Mason, Esq. of Boston, Messrs. Pond of New York, 
Kingsley of Philadelphia, and others, tlie kind and gene- 
rous cooperation of all of whom the Committee would 
gratefully acknowledge. It is hoped that these " Sacred 
Songs" will be blessed of the Holy Spirit, in promoting 
individual, family, and social piety ; in refining and en- 
nobling the taste of the young, so as to supersede the 
relish for vulgar amusements and pursuits ; in endearing 
the parental roof to children, and in quickening the atten- 



104 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

tion and enlivening the affections of domestic circles, as 
tliey read tlic word of God and bow around the family 
altar. 

The Hymns to this work are published separately. 



HYMNS FOR SOCIAL WORSHIP. 
This selection was occasioned by a demand for a man- 
ual of Hymns adapted for use in neigliborhood and other 
social meetings, embracing individuals under the various 
operations of the Holy Spirit ; and by Christians of differ- 
ent denominations, whose efforts are in many cases hap- 
pily united for the salvation of men. In its preparation 
the love of novelty and of change has been suppressed, 
while the most devout and spiritual effusions of Watts, 
Newton, Cowper, Doddridge, Steele, and others, adapted 
equally to the learned and the unlearned, have been 
sought; and notwithstanding the variety of readings 
which have been extensively spread before tlie public, it 
is hoped that most Christians will, in this, as in tlie 
"Sacred Songs," find the hymns in tlie same form in 
which they have committed many of them to memory, and 
been accustomed to employ them in their songs of praise. 



ANECDOTES FOR THE FAMILY AND SOCIAL 

CIRCLE. 

This book contains 308 anecdotes, arranged under the 
heads of delightful discoveries, providential deliver- 
ances, irreligion and sins, reproofs, instruction, conver- 
sions, religion, love, duties, intercourse, kindness, and 
deaths in the family and social circle ; each conveying 
some valuable lesson, and almost all having a decidedly 
religious bearing. Being in an attractive form, amusing 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. ]05 

the most tlioughtless by their incident, " teaching Provi- 
dence " to the most grave and reflecting, and instructing 
all by the facts of real life, it promises to be extensively 
useful. 



MAMMON. 

This prize essay by Rev. John Harris, D. D., has com- 
manded a wide circulation both in England and America, 
and produced a deeper impression, probably, than any 
other work on this important subject. The style is ele- 
gant, adapted to the most refined taste, and pervaded by 
high Scriptural sentiment, while the current of thought 
flowing through the book is of surpassing richness and 
power. 

" If any book has been published for twenty years," writes 
a valued friend, " which is worth the careful reading of every 
Christian in our land, 'Mammon' is surely that book. In 
addition to the pleasing fact that twenty editions of 1,000 each 
have been circulated in England, and many thousand copies 
in America, I see it stated that the sum of ^1,000 has lately 
been contributed to the cause of missions by a single individ- 
ual, who was made sensible of his duty by a perusal of this 
eloquent and soul-stirring work." 



ABBOTT'S MOTHER AT HOME. 
This work, which is written in a chaste and attractive 
style, was designed for the benefit of " mothers in the 
common walks of life," to aid them, by familiar illustra- 
tions of maternal duty, in the fulfilment of their arduous 
trust. The various topics are arranged under the heads 
of responsibility ; maternal authority; the mover's difli- 
culties ; faults and errors ; religious instruction, and re 



106 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

suits. It has proved highly acceptable to mothers, coming 
directly home to their hearts, in the business of training 
their little ones. The mother sees the high standard be- 
fore her, in reference to her efforts for tlie welfare of her 
cliildren botli in this life and that to come. She feels 
new courage in her endeavors ; and regrets that she can- 
not retain the kind and sympatliizing author longer than 
to his closing paragraph. Let this book be universally 
obeyed, and the coming age will be trained for the mil- 
lennium. 



JAMES' YOUNG MAN FROM HOME. 
This work is written in an attractive style with pater- 
nal affection, and is well adapted to guard the young who 
are away from the restraints of home, against the snares 
and temptations by which tliey are surrounded, especially 
in larger cities and towns. 



MASON ON SELF-KNOWLEDGE. 

This work, which ably discusses the nature and im- 
portance of self-knowledge, its benefits, and the various 
means by which it may be attained, was first published 
in 1745. It not only guides the mind to an acquaintance 
with itself, but to the cultivation of such habits of self- 
examination and reflection as are likely to fit for the 
duties and relations of life; and at the same time, by 
showing our unworthiness and ruin by sin, to make us 
feel the need of a Mediator, tlirough whose atonement 
and merits alone we can ever be found accepted with 
God. 

The late Hon. Thomas W. Gilmer, Secretary of the 
Navy, stated to Mr. S. B, S. Bissel, that when he was in 



CHARACTER OF VOLUIVIES. J 07 

Washin^on, prosecuting some business before one of the 
committees of Congress, time hung rather hearvy upon his 
hands, and he went into a bookstore to procure a novel, 
or some otlier light work, to drive away the ennui. As 
he was looking over tlie titles of various works, his eye 
was arrested by that word, ^Self-knowledge.'' He took 
down the book — read a brief portion — became more and 
more interested — purchased and earned it to his room, 
and was permitted to thank God, very soon after, that it 
was the means of acquainting him, not only with himself, 
but also with the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom 
to know is life eternal. He then proceeded to speak of 
other instances of good effected by means of that book, 
through his own and other instrumentalities. 



DIBBLE'S THOUGHTS ON MISSIONS. 

This is one of the most powerful, impassioned, and soul- 
stirring appeals for missions, that has been written : dis- 
cussing the subjects of the true spirit of missions ; Chris- 
tian stewardship ; the guilt of neglecting the heathen ; 
the Saviour's last command ; laymen called to the field 
of missions; claims of missions on ministers of influence ; 
import of tlie great commission ; trials to be met. It has 
an additional interest as being a voice from the tomb ; 
the self-sacrificing and devoted author having been called 
to enter into rest soon after it was prepared for the press. 

The Rev. Dr. Wayland, of Providence, R. I., expressed 
his earnest desire that this work should be published, as 
preeminently adapted to enkindle a missionary spirit ; and 
the Rev. Dr. Tucker says of it, " It is a wonderful book. 
It stirred my soul like the sound of a trumpet Having 
been on the ground, where the Spirit of God was poured 



108 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

out more copiously than in any place since the great re- 
vival at Jerusalem, he wrote under the influence of the 
same Spirit, No man who had not been baptized from 
above could have Avritten such a book." 



SCUDDER'S REDEEMER'S LAST COMMAND. 
This is a bold and stirring appeal in behalf of the 
millions of perishing heathen, addressed to all Christians, 
and more especially to mothers, ministers. Sabbath-school 
teachers, laymen, pious young men, pious physicians, 
and theological students. It is an appeal from a glowing 
heart, made after twenty-five years' service in India, and 
just as the author was about to return to his field of labor 
at Madras, where his eldest son was already laboring as 
a missionary, and to which field his second son was about 
to accompany the father, and his third son was expecting 
soon to follow them. We know not who could more ap- 
propriately address the churches on this subject. 



SCUDDER'S APPEAL TO MOTHERS. 
This appeal in behalf of the heathen portrays the mise- 
ries of the pagan world, and the blessings which the Gos- 
pel brings to females, with cogent motives to mothers to 
train their sons for the missionary work. 



THE WITPIERED BRANCH REVIVED. 
A beautiful and authentic narrative of a young lady, 
(Miss Malcom, of New York,) who became pious under 
the faithful labors of the author; but was enticed into 
fashionable amusements until she became a " withered 
branch ;" and tlien, by the grace of God, was " revived," 
and won back again to honor Christ in her life and death. 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 109 

BEECHER ON INTEMPERANCE. 

Showing the nature, occasions, signs, evils, and remedy 
of Intemperance. Though written at the commencement 
of the Temperance reformation, these discourses, in por- 
traying the various bearings of the sin, and in powerful 
appeal, equal any thing that has since appeared. 



DR. EDWARDS' TEMPERANCE MANUAL. 
The author of this standard treatise was one of the first 
movers in the Temperance reformation, and has been fa- 
miliar with its history to the present time. At its com- 
mencement he labored seven years, visiting different 
parts of the country, and spreading out the reasons why 
all men should abstain from the use, as a beverage, of 
intoxicating liquors, and from the traffic in them. He 
also collected numerous facts, which were embodied in a 
volume of " Permanent Temperance Documents," which 
has been widely circulated, and translated into seven of 
th^ languages of Europe. The Manual is a dense con- 
centration of the principles and facts on the subject of 
Temperance, as adapted to the present tmie; showing, 
with great clearness and force, the immorality of the use , 
of intoxicating liquors as a beverage, and of tlie traffic in 
them for that purpose. No family or young man in the 
United States should be without it. 



DR. EDWARDS' SABBATH MANUAL. 

The first Part of this work shows that the sabbatical 
arrangement has its foundation in the nature and relations 
of things, and that the fourth commandment is an expres- 
sion of the moral obligation which thence arises, and is 

Vol. Cir. 1 



110 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

binding upon the whole human family. The second Part 
shows that the day which has ordinarily been kept by the 
Cliristian church as the Sabbath, is tlie day which God, 
in his word and his providence, has clearly shown that it 
is his will should be so kept by all people to tlie end of 
the world. The third Part exhibits the Sabbath as a 
Family Institution, and shows its influence upon children 
while under the care of their parents, and on young men, 
in that most dangerous of all periods, from the time they 
leave their father's house to the time they become heads 
of families. The fourth Part shows the proper mode of 
keeping the Sabbath, in respect to business, travelling, 
and tlie various ways in which men are tempted to pro- 
fane the day. 



BURDER'S SERMONS TO THE AGED. 
Twelve sermons, in large type, on topics specially ap- 
propriate to the spiritual benefit and consolation of those 
in advanced years. * 



THE BOATSWAIN'S MATE. 

A work adapted to gain the attention of seamen, in the 
form of dialogue and narrative, and which has been in 
demand among that large class of readers. 



THE SET OF BOUND TRACTS. 
Every one of the more than five hundred treatises em- 
braced in these neat and attractive volumes has been 
selected and prepared with great care. They contain 
the most able discussions of important topics throughout 
the whole range of practical truth and duty ; tlie most 



I 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. Ill 

touching and instructive authentic narratives, and portions 
adapted to all ages and classes of readers, embodying an 
amount of mature and condensed thought probably not to 
be found, on kindred subjects and within the same com- 
pass, in the works of any one author of any age. This 
set forms an invaluable library for a family, the children 
of which will be found repairing to it from week to week, 
and year to year, as if it contained mines of entertain- 
ment that could never be exhausted. 



VOLUMES FOR THE YOUNG. 

Among the most responsible and useful departments 
of the Society's labors is the providing of books for the 
young, which shall interest and instruct, without cherish- 
ing those delusive views of human life which unfit them 
to meet its trials and discharge its duties. This is the 
more necessary, as the adversary, through wTiters, pub- 
lishers, and venders, heedless of the welfare of men and 
pandering to a corrupt taste in many cases first created 
by themselves, is filling the land with high- wrought infidel 
and licentious fiction, inflaming the young mind with 
dreams of unreal bliss, rendering the endearments of 
home insipid, and even the word of God and the Gospel 
of Christ too tame and spiritless to have their regard. 
The numbers, especially in our cities and villages, who 
are thus ensnared and unfitted to live or to die, are lam- 
entably large, and the evil demands the united efforts of 
the friends of truth and soberness, as far as possible to 
preoccupy minds not yet diverted from the love of truth 
and fact, and to supplant injurious works by providing 



112 CHARACTER OF VOLTTMES. 

books in all respects adapted to gain the attention and 
win the understanding and the heart 

" If Hie young," says Mr. Gallaudet, " read nothing but 
story-books, intended almost entirely to entertain them ; 
or, if they read so many of these books as to dislike to 
read those of a more serious and instructive kind, then 
there is venj great danger of their acquiring a strong dislike 
to the reading oftJie Bible. For the Bible is very far from 
being a book of mere entertainment. It is full, indeed, 
of interesting things ; but to understand them, and to get 
good from them, requires patient thinking and serious feel- 
ing. Let parents and teachers beware lest, by indulging 
children too much in the perusal of books of mere amuse- 
ment, tliey acquire such a fondness for fiction, that it wjll 
be difficult for them to read any thing tliat demands at- 
tention, and tends to produce serious thoughts. Should 
this lead to their considering it an irksome and disagree- 
able task to sit down, at suitable times, to tlie faitliful 
perusal of the sacred Scriptures, what an error in their 
education has been committed — what a tremendous evil 
has been incurred ! The influence of fiction is, just now, 
immense. It sways the minds of the rising generation, 
who have access to books, to a vast extent. It is mould- 
ing their intellectual habits. It is forming their taste. It 
is influencing tlieir moral feelings. It is training them 
up, in too many instances, to a loose, desultory, luxurious, 
and disconnected kind of reading, which will render to 
them, in maturer life, all our standard u'oi'ks of religious 
truth, by which the souls of English and American Chris- 
tians of earlier days were nurtured to deep thought and 
a vigorous faith, insipid, irksome, revolting." 

" It is painful," says Mrs. Hutchings, " to see tlie child 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 113 

that has acaiiired a taste for fictitious readino^, even 
though of a religious cast, turn away dissatisfied from 
truthful narrations of real life. Well may it excite pa- 
rental anxiety to see the young reader rush eagerly through 
one fiction after another, impatient of the delay interposed 
by the moral of the tale, dashing aside every sober senti- 
ment, imbibing the stimulus, rejecting the nourishment, 
till the mind, exhausted and craving, is unfitted for the 
persevering effort so essential to the acquisition of useful 
knowledge, or for the performance of tlie common, unex- 
citing, but peremptory duties of life. There is, it may 
be, a class of fictions not highly Avrought, but tinged in 
the staid coloring of nature. While in interest these 
cannot compete with true narrative, do we not usually 
find them stamped with the peculiar and biassed conceits 
of the mind that invented them, rather than with those 
lessons of wisdom and instruction which Providence inter- 
weaves in the thread of all actual human experience ?" 

The following criticism by the distinguished Rev. Rob- 
ert Hall, even if it censures too severely the writings 
of Miss Edgeworth, presents, nevertheless, the most val- 
uable and discriminating thoughts applicable to a large 
class of semi-religious fiction. 

" She is the most irreligious writer I ever read ; not so much 

from any direct attacks she makes on religion, as from a uni- 
versal and studied omission of the subject. In her writings 
you meet a high strain of morality. She delineates the most 
virtuous characters, and represents them in the most affecting 
circumstances in life — in distress, in sickness, and even in the 
immediate prospect of eternity, and finally sends them off the 
stage with their virtue unimpaired — and all this without the 
remotest allusion to religion. She does not directly oppose 



Vol. Cir. 



10* 



114 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

religion, but makes it appear unnecessary, by exhibiting a 
perfect virtue without it. No works ever produced so bad 
an effect on my own mind. I did not expect to find any irre- 
ligion in Miss Edgeworth's writings. I was off my guard — 
their moral character disarmed me. I read nine volumes of 
them at once ; but I could not preach with any comfort for 
six weeks after reading them. I never felt so little ardor in 
my profession, or so little interest in religion. She was once 
called to account for the character of her works, and asked 
her reasons for representing a mere ideal morality, without 
attributing any influence to religion. She said that if she had 
written for the lower classes, she would have recommended 
religion ; but that she had written to a class to whom it was 
less necessary. How absurd ! She seemed to think that the 
virtues of the higher orders of society needed no assistance 
from religion, and that it was only designed as a curb and 
a muzzle for the brute." 

Of the novels of Walter Scott, which are acknow- 
ledged to be among the least injurious of this class of 
Avritings, an able writer in the London Christian Guar- 
dian, after presenting a clear view of their influence, 
says, 

" I would raise my voice, however feeble, against their ad- 
mission into Christian families, and I do most earnestly en- 
treat of Christian parents who wish to preserve their chil- 
dren's minds in a pure and healthy state, and who desire to 
keep them ' unspotted from the world,' and to bring them up 
in ' the nurture and admonition of the Lord,' to beware how 
they put such works into their hands ; as I am well persuaded, 
alas, by personal experience, that the evil effects arising from 
the perusal of one novel, counteract the good effects of twenty 
sermons : the novel reader lives in a fancied world of hia 
own, without sorrow and without pain, where all is happiness 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 115 

and peace ; and consequently, when real misfortune drags 
him down from his visionary world, and compels him to view 
things as they really are, and reminds him that he is but a 
man, he murmurs against the providence of God, repines at 
his station, becomes irritated with all around him, neglects 
the duties which he owes to his God, his country, and to liim- 
self ; lives in misery, and ofttimes dies in woe." 

It is most clear, that the tremendous influence of tlie 
public press in our country may not he left solely to the 
operation and influence of sales for tlie purposes of gain. 
The most valuable books must be prepared in an attractive 
style, and furnished at the lowest rates, and Christian efforts 
must be put forth all over the land to place them in tJie 
hands of the people — by sale, if it can be done ; gratui- 
tously, if it cannot 



GALLAUDET'S SCRIPTURE BIOGRAPHY. 

Vol. 1, Adam to Jacob. 

Vol. 2, Life of Joseph. 

Vol. 3, Life of Moses, Part 1. 

Vol. 4, Life of Moses, Part 2. 

Vol. 5, Joshua, Judges. 

Vol. 6, Ruth and Samuel. 

Vol. 7, Life of David. 
The cordial acceptance with which, for a course of 
years, these volumes have met from parents and children, 
is the best evidence that the talents and sldll of the ac- 
complished and benevolent author have been wisely em- 
ployed. In founding and for several years successfully 
conducting the American Asylum for the deaf and dumb, 
he was led patiently to analyze tlie process by which 
truth is received into the opening mind, and thus acquired 



116 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

a skill m presenting truth to the young which few other 
men possess. 

The above works are designed and adapted, among 
other important objects, to lead the attention of the young 
to Bible histoiy ; to fasten doctrinal and practical truth 
upon the mind, b}'^ interweaving it inseparably with narra- 
tive and facts in natural science ; to explain difficult 
Scripture topics ; to induce the habit of close and contin- 
vous thought ; to furnish an example of the best methods 
of imparting religious instruction ; and, above all, to guide 
the youthful mind to Christ. 

The author, with his characteristic fidelity, clearness 
of thought, and simplicity of style, has so presented the 
important facts of sacred history, that they cannot but 
make a lasting impression on the youthful mind ; while 
the various, and in some cases tragic, and very difficult 
scenes he has been called to record, have been spread 
before the reader, accompanied with such guards and 
reflections as are adapted at once to prevent injury and 
secure a good moral impression. There can be no hesi- 
tation in saying, that the volumes of this series of Scrip- 
ture Biography constitute some of the most attractive and 
yet safe Scriptural and valuable reading now extant for 
the young. 

" Said a young man who bought a set of these volumes, 
' Before I read the first volume through, I commenced a life of 
secret prayer ; before I finished the set, I found peace in be- 
lieving ; and I ascribe my conversion, under God, to the read- 
ing of these books.' When I saw him about two months 
since, he was ardently engaged in a revival, and may become 
a preacher of the Gospel. He bids fair for high usefulness." 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 117 

THE HISTORY OF JONAH.— THE HISTORY OF 

JOSIAH. 

These works resemble the preceding volumes of Chris- 
tian Biography, and may yet be substantially embodied 
in that series. 



GALLAUDET'S YOUTH'S BOOK OF NATURAL 

THEOLOGY. 

This standard work, in its familiar and attractive illus- 
trations, conveys, even to an intelligent child, clear con- 
ceptions of the nature and conclusiveness of the argument 
by which the being, wisdom, power, and goodness of God, 
are proved from his works ; and in doing this it opens 
upon the young mind a view of the wonders of nature, in 
tlie nautilus ; the arm, wrist, and hand ; the bones, joints, 
muscles, tendons, and nerves ; the eye and expression of 
the countenance ; the elephant and other animals, and in- 
sects ; the bee and caterpillar, the chrysalis in connection 
with the resurrection ; instincts ; proportion and adapta- 
tion of one part of the works of God to others, etc., thus 
drawing the mind to the Creator thi'ough the wonderful 
works of his hand. " The author cannot but tliink," he 
says in the preface to this work, " that the evidences of 
the existence of God, are quite too much overlooked in 
tlie early religious education of children and youtli. He 
could wish, for one, that they might forai a part of the 
reo-ular course of instruction in Sabbatli-schools, and of 
tlie religious reading in families. The subject may be 
made deeply interesting. Many of the fads connected 
with it, are as really entertaining as most of the incidents 
in the books of religious Jidion, with which children have 



118 CErARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

been so extensively supplied. They are vastly more 
instructive ; and tend, too, to form a taste for useful know- 
ledge, which, if confirmed into a habit, is of unspeakable 
value." 



THE CHILD'S BOOK ON REPENTANCE. 

In this treatise the Scripture view of this great subject 
is, by a skilful, anal3^tical, and inductive process, ^adu- 
ally and clearly unfolded to the minds of the young; 
while the truths involved are equally important to all, 
since one only method of salvation is revealed. Various 
practical difficulties are discussed and explained ; and an 
earnest personal application made to the conscience and 
the heart of the reader. 



ABBOTT'S CHILD AT HOME. 
This book is for the child, what the Mother at Home, 
by the same author, is for the mother — full of interesting 
and instructive incident, presenting disobedience and vice 
in their true repulsive forms, and throwing a chann around 
filial duty and true piety calculated at once to soften, 
impress, and refine the heart. The main topics of thought 
are arranged under the heads of responsibility ; decep- 
tion ; obedience ; religious truth ; piety, and traits of 
character. 

Mr. J. C. Meeks says, " In the same house with a child 
who had this work, was a young man very much opposed to 
religion, so much so that he would leave the room and sit out 
of doors at the time of family worship. He could not be pre- 
vailed upon to attend upon the preaching of the Gospel or 
read the Bible. ' The Child at Home ' fell into his hands. 
He became interested in it ; as he read it his heart began to 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 119 

melt and break, until, completely subdued, he thinks he gave 
himself to Christ. He appears well, and attributes his change 
of feeling, under the grace of God, to the reading of that 
book." 



THE CHILD'S BOOK ON THE SABBATH. 
This book was written with " the design of employing 
such language and modes of illustration as shall render 
the subject not only intelligible but interesting to the 
young, and be at the same time instructive and profitable 
to persons of more advanced age." All the prominent 
arguments, from the original institution of the Sabbath 
in Paradise, and its necessity to the welfare of the body, 
of the mind, and of society, are clearly presented ; its 
perpetuity shown ; the proper manner and imperative mo- 
tives for its observance enforced ; and its violations and 
the dangers that threaten it faithfully and solemnly ex- 
hibited. 



FOSTER'S APPEAL TO THE YOUNG. 

This appeal by the Rev. John Foster, author of the 
Essay on Decision of Character, is written with great 
ability and earnestness, adapted to gain the attention of 
the intellectual and refined, and impress them with the 
trutJis of salvation. 



NEWTON'S LETTERS TO AN ADOPTED 
DAUGHTER. 

These letters by the Rev. John Newton, are a happy 
specimen of the author's epistolary writing. There is a 
sweetness and playfulness in them which renders them 



120 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

attractive to tho young, while tliey embody the most val- 
uable and instructive hints for guiding the life and secur- 
ing eternal happiness. 



THE RAISING OF LAZARUS. 

A vivid and impressive narrative of the scenes attend- 
ing the raising of Lazarus from the dead, drawn from the 
Scripture history, with much richness of evangelical 
thoudit and instruction. 



THE PEEP OF DAY.— LINE UPON LINE.— 

PRECEPT UPON PRECEPT. 

These three volumes, from the gifted pen of an evan- 
gelical lady of the church of England, consist simply of 
Bible histoiy, brought down in the most familiar manner 
to the capacities of young children, many of whom have 
been charmed by the narrative and tlirough it learned the 
way of eternal life. " The Peep of Day" is a minute 
history of our Lord, from his birth to his ascension. 
"Line upon Line" begins with the creation, and proceeds 
with the Old Testament history to the death of Joshua ; 
and "Precept upon Precept" takes up the narrative at the 
birth of Samuel, carrying it to the close of the Old Tes- 
tament liistory. We regard these three works as standing 
at the head of all others in making divine truth clear 
and attractive to little children. The Biblical Repertory 
says, "We have difficulty in expressing all tlie admiration 
and love we feel towards the Peep of Day series. After 
using tliem with children, we are prepared to set them 
above any thing of tlicir class we have ever seen." 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 121 

VOLUMES OF NARRATIVE TRACTS. 

The following eight volumes, 18mo, consist of select 
narrative Tracts, printed in an open type, with neat en- 
gravings, three Tracts, with one exception, being em- 
braced in each volume. They contain the most interest- 
ing and instructive reading, and in this form have proved 
highly acceptable to the young. 

THE dairyman's DAUGHTER, YOUNG COTTAGER, AND 
AFRICAN SERVANT. 

Three Tracts by Rev. Legh Richmond, universally 
known and admired, being the same which, in a some- 
what more extended form, constitute his Annals of the 
Poor. 

THE SPOILED CHILD, DAVID BALDWIN, AND 

general's W^IDOW. 

THE VILLAGE IN THE MOUNTAINS, CONVERSION OF PETER 
BAYSSIERE, and HISTORY OF A BIBLE. 

LITTLE HENRY AND HIS BEARER, THE AMIABLE LOUISA, 
AND ANN ELIZA WILLIAMS. 

THE widow's son, WATCHMAKER AND HIS FAMILY, 
' AND 'tis all FOR THE BEST. 

ELIZA CUNNINGHAM, DINAH DOUDNEY, AND THE CHILDREN 

OF THE forest; 

THE SHEPHERD OF SALISBURY PLAIN, MOUNTAIN MILLER, 
AND GEORGE VINING. 

PUTNAM AND THE WOLF, THE FOOL's PENCE, THE POOR 



Vol. Cir. 



man's HOUSE REPAIRED, AND JAMIE. 
11 



122 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

MEMOIRS OF THE YOUNG. 

CLEMENTINE CUVIER. 
Amid llie gay scenes of Paris, this only daughter of the ^ 
celebrated Baron Cuvier devoted herself to Christ and 
faitlifully exemplified the piety of the Gospel. A brief 
sketch of her life and early death, by the Rev. Mark 
Wilks, is here beautifully amplified by tlie Rev. John 
Angell James, constituting this a most attractive and 
acceptable memoir to all classes of readers. 



HENRY OBOOKIAH. 

A native of the Sandwich Islands, whom Providence 
brought to our shores, and who, under the kind care of 
the Rev. Samuel J. Mills and others, was brought to the 
saving knowledge of Christ. He adorned his profession, 
and was prepared to return as a missionary to his own 
people, when he was cut down and departed in the tri- 
umphs of faith. 



CHARLES L. WINSLOW. 

This lovely youth, son of the Rev. Miron and Mrs. 
Harriet L. Winslow, missionaries in India, died a few 
days after his arrival in this country. His life has been 
re-written, revised, and enlarged, by Mrs. Elizabetli C. 
Hutchings, whose residence in India has eminently quali- 
fied her for the service. It is a pleasing illustration of 
consistent early piety, and the gracious rewards of parental 
faithfulness. The young have here " an illustration of 
a confiding, filial, affectionate, and obedient temper, and 
the blessing of having pious parents. They will learn. 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 123 

too, their own obligation to an oveiTuling Providence, 
from seeing how this child was watched over, guarded, 
and preserved amid threatening dangers." 



AMELIA, THE PASTOR'S DAUGHTER. 
A narrative, with a preface by Rev. Mr. James of Bir- 
mingham, of a young lady who exhibited delightful evi- 
dence of piety ; was ready to devote herself to foreign 
missions, but was early called to the rest above. This is 
in all respects a pleasing and delightful memoir. 



ELIZABETH BALES. 

By her pastor, the Rev. Mr. James of Birmingham. 
She was a suffering, but highly useful female Christian, 
and her narrative furnishes a cheering example of what 
one with a debilitated frame may accomplish in Sabbath- 
schools, Tract distribution, and by other methods of use- 
fulness. 



CAROLINE HYDE. 
In a comparatively humble sphere, she abounded in 
labors for the temporal and eternal welfare of children, 
of the poor, the sick, and suffering ; and to few, from the 
time of her conversion till her death, have the words of 
tlie Saviour been more applicable, " She hath done what 
she could." 



EMILY MARIA. 
A narrative of another young female, the charm of the 
family circle and the ornament of the church of God, but 
who in early youth was called from time. 



124 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

NATHAN W. DICKERMAN. 
In the character of this lovely child, who died at the 
age of eight years, as presented by the Rev. Gorham D. 
Abbott, witli strict adherence to facts, there appear very 
remarkable evidences of true conversion, and a ripeness 
and sweetness of Christian character, showing how out 
of the moutlis of babes God will perfect his praise. 



JOHN MOONEY MEAD. 

A striking memoir of a child of five years, who gave 
evidence of faith in Christ, and whose life is filled with 
pleasing incidents, illustrating the fact that children may 
be early converted, and the duty and encouragement of 
parents to seek this, to labor for it, and to expect it under 
the grace and blessing of God. 



MARY LOTHROP. 

An accurate delineation of facts by the wife of Rev. 
Dr. Anderson, of Boston, " adding another to tlie bright 
pictures set before children to allure them into the paths 
of piety, and before parents to encourage and stimulate 
them in the religious education of tlieir children." The 
devoted piety of the little sufierer magnifies the riches of 
divine grace, and her simple and pleasing story has been 
told in several languages into which it has been trans- 
lated. 

Mr. Swift says, " A young miss of a cultivated mind be- 
came deeply affected with the contents of this little work, and 
was led to exclaim, ' Should little Mary give her heart to the 
Saviour, and love his service so, and should I live at enmity 
with God until I am thirteen years old V After passing sev- 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 125 

eral days of sadness, and as many almost sleepless nights, she 
gave her heart to the Saviour." 

" I have just been reading Mary Lothrop," says a devoted 
mother, " and have been very much interested and affected by 
it. I could not help going to God to thank him for the privi- 
lege of reading it, and to ask him that my own dear child 
may be like her in spirit ; and I would not except her suffer- 
ing and early death, if she must otherwise grow up in sin, an 
enemy to God, and finally go down to eternal woe. It ought 
to be in every mother's library, as well as in every child's." 



ROLLS PLUMBE. 

An authentic memoir of a child, who beautifully exem- 
plified the influence of love to Christ, by Rev. Andrew 
Reed, D. D., of London. It is written in a style adapted 
to interest tlie young, and adds another testimony to the 
evidences of early conversion. 



BOOKS WITH NUMEROUS ENGRAVINGS. 

TREES, FRUITS, AND FLOWERS OF THE BIBLE. 
This work is in a neat, attractive style, the result of the 
careful study of the history of each tree or fruit described, 
and is a valuable help to an acquaintance with this part 
of the sacred Scriptures. 



THE SCRIPTURE ANIMALS. 

Like the " Trees, Fruits, and Flowers," this little book 
presents a careful and accurate vie^v of the principal ani- 
mals named in the Bible, thus assisting the young to an 
acquaintance with tlie sacred oracles, and enriching tlieir 

Vol. Cir. 



11* 



126 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

minds with facts and illustrations connected with this 
department of the Creator's works. 



THE CHILDREN OF THE BIBLE. 

" The Children of the Bible, as examples and as warn- 
ings," in poetry, presents the history of Ishmael, Moses, 
Samuel, Joash, Josiah, Timothy, and others, in a form 
adapted to interest the young, and by the influence of 
their example to guard against sin and allure to the patlis 
of heavenly wisdom. 



CHILD'S BOOK OF BIBLE STORIES. 

Ten stories on the Fall, by Rev. Mr. Gallaudet, each 
so illustrating a great truth involved, as to be intelligible 
to a child. 



FEET'S SCRIPTURE LESSONS. 

The author's experience in reaching the opening minds 
of the deaf and dumb has given him skill in imparting 
knowledge to the young. In this work he. begins with 
tlie most simple instructions to a child in reference to 
God, the soul, and the creation ; and then presents a brief 
Scripture biography, from Adam to Christ and the apos- 
tles and fh'st martyrs, including a notice of tlie crucifixion 
and the resurrection. 



LETTERS TO LITTLE CHILDREN. 
A father here relates a series of interesting incidents, 
interweaving information and counsel beneficial to a 
child in reference both to tlie present and a future life. 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 127 

GREAT TRUTHS IN SIMPLE WORDS. 
Consisting of forty-five short chapters, or portions, each 
illustrating the existence, the works, or the providence of 
God ; or presenting some truth of the Bible, connected 
with tlie plan of salvation by Christ, and our duties to 
God and men. 



AMOS ARMFIELD. 

" Amos Armfield, or tlie leather-covered Bible," con- 
sists of conversations by a shrewd, good-natured man, 
with children who clustered around him, all of them il- 
lustrating some narrative from tlie Bible ; the tendency of 
the whole book being to commend the inspired volume to 
the attention and acceptance of the young. 



THE CHILD'S HYMN-BOOK. 
Containing 235 chaste and carefully selected h3rmns, 
embracing many pieces not found in any other collection, 
some of them adapted to young children, and others that 
will gratify the cultivated taste of those in more mature 
years. 

THE TRACT PRIMER. 
Prepared with great care, with multiplied engravings, 
containing alphabets, spelling lessons, simple reading in 
prose and poetry, portions of Scripture history, and every 
variety of matter appropriate to a primer, with an admi- 
rable Catechism the answers to which are in the lan- 
guage of the Bible. This attractive little work has been 
prepared not only for the children of our land generally, 
but with a special reference to tlie benefit of families 



128 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

reached by colporteurs in which parents or children are 
unable to read. 



DR. WATTS' CATECHISMS. 

Containing his Catechism of Scripture names, his first 
and second Catechisms, and his Preservative from the 
Sins and Follies of Childhood and Youth. 



WATTS' DIVINE AND MORAL SONGS. 

A little work which has been more blessed than almost 
any tiling- else within so small a compass. Issued sepa- 
rately, and also bound with Dr. Watts' Catechisms. 



SERIES OF CHILDREN'S BOOKS BOUND. 

BOOKS FOR SMAIiL CHILDREN. BOOKS FOR CHILDREN. 

BOOKS FOR THE YOUNG. 

These volumes contain a great variety of reading, in 
successive numbers of books for children, each book or- 
namented with neat engravings. 



POCKET MANUALS. 

CLARKE'S SCRIPTURE PROMISES. 
This collection of Scripture promises, which has cheer- 
ed so many of the people of God amidst the various trials 
and duties of life, in sickness and the approach of death, 
is here issued in a convenient form to be a companion at 
home or abroad ; guiding our feet by the light of inspira- 
tion itself, and affording refreslmient from the Bread of 
Life. 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 129 

DAILY SCRIPTURE EXPOSITOR. 

A text for each day in the year, with a brief and strik- 
ing commentary selected from some standard author. 



CECIL AND FLAVEL'S GIFT FOR MOURNERS. 

Cecil's "Friendly Visit to the House of Mourning," 
and Flavel's " Token, or Gift for Mourners," two of the 
most eminently rich and spiritual works of this character 
that have been produced by men uninspired ; drawing 
deep from those eternal fountains whence alone consola- 
tion and support can be derived. 



ADVICE TO A MARRIED COUPLE. 
To the well-known treatise of Bean, an evangelical 
letter of the Rev. Henry Venn is added, rendering this 
a highly appropriate and acceptable manual. 



CECIL'S REASONS FOR REPOSE. 
The substance of a morning conversation by the Rev. 
Richard Cecil with a Christian who was disturbed by in- 
fidel doubts. An able writer on the evidences of Chris- 
tianity justly says, " It would be difficult to find so many 
strong arguments in so small a space." 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. THi; BOOK OF PROVERBS. 



GEMS OF SACRED POETRY. 
An accomplished writer says it embraces more selec- 
tions of real poetical beauty and merit than any other 
collection of equal compass which he has seen. 



130 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

MASON'S CRUMBS. 
" Crumbs from tlie Master's Table ;" or select passages 
filled with tlie marrow of the Gospel. 



1 



TEXTS FOR EACH DAY IN THE YEAR. 

DAILY TEXTS. 

A text of Scripture and verse of a hymn for each day. 

DIARY. 

The Daily Texts interleaved for the insertion of memo- 
randa. 

DAILY FOOD FOR CHRISTIANS. 

A text, a verse of a hymn, and a Scripture promise for 
each day. 

HEAVENLY MANNA. 

A Scripture prayer and promise for each day. 

MILK FOR BABES. 

A text and verse of a hymn for each day. 

DEW-DROPS. 

A text for each day. 



VOLUMES IN GERMAN. 

TRANSLATIONS OF ENGLISH VOLUMES ABOVE 

NOTICED. 

Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, . . See page 53 

Baxter's Saints' Rest, • • • « « 45 

Baxter's Call to the Unconverted, " " 47 

Doddridge's Rise and Progress, . " " 60 

Nelson's Cause and Cure of Infidelity, " " 80 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 131 

Bp. Watson's Reply to Paine and Gibbon, see page 82 

Bogue's Evidences of Christianity, . 

Keith's Evidence of Prophecy, 

Lyttelton's Conversion of St. Paul, 

Memoir of Harlan Page, 

Nevins' Practical Thoughts, 

Abbott's Mother at Home, 

Abbott's Child at Home, 

Dr. Edwards' Sabbath Manual, 

Dr. Ebwaiids' Temperance Manual, 

Dr. Beecher on Intemperance, 

The Peep of Day, (for children,) . 

Memoir of Mary Lothrop, 

The Scripture Animals, (Avith cuts,) . 



a 


a 


84 


a 


li 


85 


li 


11 


82 


li 


u 


92 


u 


li 


75 


a 


11 


105 


ii 


a 


118 


li 


(( 


109 


a 


ii 


109 


u 


11 


109 


li 


li 


120 


a 


(( 


124 


i( 


li 


125 



GERMAN TRANSLATIONS OF LARGE TRACTS. 

ANDREW DUNN. 

The history of a convert from popery, showing the 
various processes through which his mind was led, and 
the various reasons which induced him to relinquish a 
false religion of forms, for the true spiritual religion of 
the Gospel of Christ. 

the false claims of the pope. 

This is Tract No. 432, written by the Rev. H. G. O. 
Dwight at Constantinople, to warn the Armenians against 
the papal system. It is an able argument, conclusively 
sustained by the facts of history and the word of God. 

THE LIFE OF COL. GARDINER. 

The well-known history of this decided convert, writ- 
ten by the Rev. Dr. Doddridge, being Tract No. 135. 



133 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

LITTLE HENRY AfU) HIS BEARER. 

Showinnr the conversion of a native of Hindoostan 
through the influence of the child who was committed to 
his care, being Tract No. 107. ^ 

THEOPHILUS AND SOPHIA. 

A pleasing narrative, being one of the Society's books 
for the young, series 4, No. 25. 






ORIGINAL GERMAN WORKS. 

ARNDT'S TRUE CHRISTIANITY. 
The Rev. Dr. Krummacher, in his preface to a late 
edition of Arndt's True Christianity, says, no religious 
book in Germany has been more universally circulated 
and prized, or more extensively blessed from above. For 
two centuries new editions have been issued almost every 
year, and it has been translated into almost all the other 
European languages. It clearly presents man's natural 
depravity ; salvation by tlie merits of Christ, and the 
sanctifying influences of the Holy Spirit ; justification by 
faith alone ; forgiveness to the true penitent solely by the 
blood of tlie Redeemer ; and the word of God, under the 
teaching of tlie Spirit, as the only rule of faith and holy 
living. " I know not what work can be compared with it. 
The style is forcible, and breathing the consecrated oil 
of the sanctuary ; and the thoughts like fresh healing 
waters flowing from a deep and divine fountain of life. 
Nothing is superficial ; all is original, bearing the stamp of 
the inmost vital experience. Thousands have been blessed 
by this book. Thousands will be blessed. May it bring 
peace and joy to the families whose doors it shall enter." 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES 133 

ELIJAH THE TISHBITE, BY KRUMMACHER. See page 74. 



HOLLATZ' METHOD OF GRACE. 

This work has proved very efficient, and instrumental 
in bringing multitudes of souls to conviction of sin, and 
a sense of the willingness of Christ to receive the return- 
ing prodigal. The author lived more than a hundred 
years since, in Pomerania, Prussia ; and the book has 
been much esteemed and widely circulated in Gei*many. 
In a dialogue between a Teacher and an Inquirer, the 
inquirer learns that his hope has no scriptural foundation, 
and is led to relinquish his self-righteousness, and seek a 
hope that will not make ashamed. The second part of 
the book shows the way of salvation by faith in Christ 
alone ; and the tliird and fourth parts treat of groivth in 
grace, especially under trials and temptations ; and en- 
durinof unto the end. The whole book is distinafuished 
alike for plainness and force. 



LUTHER ON THE LORD'S PRAYER. 

This treatise by the great reformer presents prayer as 
the duty and privilege of every Christian, and the Lord's 
prayer as embracing the substance of all we need. He 
proceeds to consider Avhat is included in each of the 
seven petitions, as practically related to Christian doc- 
trine and duty, enlarging on many of the great topics 
involved. 



THE PRIMITIVE CATHOLICISM. 
This is an admirable treatise by Rev. John Gossner 
of BerKn, showing that the primitive or true Catholicism, 

Vol. Cir. I ^ 



134 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

taught in the Bible and received by the early Christians, 
consists in the conviction of ruin by sin, salvation solely 
through the death and righteousness of Christ, love to 
God and man, and a holy and spiritual life. The book 
makes no attack upon popery by name, but effectively 
shows its fallacy, by portraying the excellence of the 
vital religion of tlie Gospel. 



DR. BARTH'S BIBLE STORIES. 

These are 52 stories from the Old, and 52 from the 
New Testament, drawing out the substance of the Scrip- 
ture narrative in a very simple form, adapted to the minds 
of children, to whose benefit the author has for years de- 
voted his unceasing exertions. So acceptable have these 
stories proved, that hundreds of thousands of copies have 
been circulated in Germany. 



THIRZA. 
A narrative of the conversion of a young Jewess, per- 
secuted by her father, who at length listened to her read- 
ing of the New Testament, and believed in the Saviour 
it reveals. 



THE THREEFOLD CORD. 
A pocket manual of Scripture texts, containing a doc- 
trine, a prayer, and a promise, skilfully selected, for every 
day in the year. Such a scriptural portion, read on rising 
in the morning, furnishes a theme for meditation and 
spiritual refreshment that cannot be too highly prized. 



VOLUMES OF GERMAN TRACTS. 
See notice of volumes of Tracts in English, page 110. 



CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 135 

VOLUMES IN FRENCH. 

Baxter's Saints' Rest, . . . See page 45 

Baxter's Call, " " 47 

Dr. Edwards' Sabbath Manual, . . ." " 109 

THE BIBLE man's BOOK, {Colportcur BibUque.) 
An' admirable production of the Rev. Dr. De Felice, 
professor at Montauban, written for circulation in France. 
A clergyman of high standing says, " I have read this book 
a second time with renewed interest, and regard it as 
evangelical in sentiment, felicitous in manner, and admi- 
rably adapted to be useful. It is arranged under the 
heads, What is the Bible ? Why was it given us, or 
what are its practical uses ? Have you a Bible ? with in- 
ducements to purchase, and answers to objections. Do 
you read the Bible ? showing in what spirit it should be 
read, and methods of reading. Do you labor to spread 
tlie Bible ? with a solemn appeal to those who neglect it, 
or read it in a heedless and unprofitable manner." 

TEACHINGS OF ROME COMPARED WITH SCRIPTURE. 

This able treatise is extracted from the standard work 
of Drelincourt, taking up the prominent errors of popery, 
and contrasting each with the words of Scripture. It is 
justly celebrated in France as a masterly and unanswer- 
able discussion of the subject. 

DEATH OF THE ELDEST SON. 

A narrative, by Rev. Dr. Malan, of a thoughtless young 
man who was brought to serious consideration ; the in- 
structions he received from a godly minister on the atone- 
ment and justification by faith ; his conversion ; his anxiety 
for the salvation of others, and triumphant death. 



136 CHARACTER OF VOLUMES. 

DO YOU WISH TO DIE HAPPY ? 

The substance of this impassioned and soul-stirring 
discourse, by Rev. Adolph Monod, of Paris, is found in 
Tract No. 425, " Can you Die Tranquil ?" It is calculated 
to rouse the attention of the careless, and pours upon the 
inquiring mind the ricli and glorious truths of redemption 
by the Son of God. 

THE TRUE CROSS. ^JESUS OUR STRENGTH. 

Two little works — the former by Rev. Dr. Malan of 
Geneva — setting forth " Christ and him crucified " as the 
only hope of dying men. 

THE PRIMITIVE CATHOLICISM. 

Translated from the German. See page, . . 133 

FAREWELL TO ROME. 

" The Pope and the Gospel, or a Farewell to Rome," 
by a Catliolic priest, who first gives the history of his own 
conversion, and then powerfully exhibits the errors of 
Rome, from the testimony of the ancient fathers, and the 
word of God. 

VOLUME OP FRENCH TRACTS. 

See notice of volumes of Tracts in English, page . 110 



VOLUMES IN AVEISH. 

Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, . . See page 53 

Baxter's Saints' Rest, ... " " 45 

Baxter's Call, " "47 

James' Anxious Inquirer, . . « « 69 



VOLUME IN SPANISH. 
Dr. Edwards' Sabbath Manual, . See page 109 



INDEX 



AND 



PRICES OF THE VOLUMES. 



The publications marked ( f ) have steel-plate Portraits or other steel en- 
gravings. Those marked ( J ) have engravings on wood, many of them 
highly finished. Those marked ( $ ) have been abridged. 



VOLUMES 12M0. . 

fD'Aubigne's History of the Refor- m o ^^ 
matiou, a new translation revised b< o o ** 
by the Author. 4 vols., of 450 pp. 1823 1,75. . . , 

Baxter's Saints' Rest, large type, • .540. .60. .80. . 

Jay's Morning Exercises, 604. .75. . 

§ Flavel's Fountain of Life, 5.59.. 55. .75. . 

^ Flavel's Method of Grace, 560. .55. .75. . 

^ Mason's Spiritual Treasury, 528. .55. .75. . 

Hall's Scripture History, 516. .55. .75. . 

Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, 480 

Gregory's Letters on Infidelity, 480. .55. .75. . 

President Edwards on Revivals, 446. .50. .70. , 

Bp Hopkins on Ten Commandments, 442. .50. .70. . 

Memoir of Mrs. Graham, 440.. 50. .70., 

Paley's Natural Theologv, 440. .50. .70. . 

Venn's Complete Duty o'f Man, ... .430. .50. .70. . 

<S Owen on Forgiveness, Psalm 130, 429. .50. .70. . 

t Mem. of Mrs. Sarah L.H.Smith, .396. .50. .7(1. . 

t Abbott's Young Christian, 395.. ..70.. 

Sacred Songs, (Hymns and Tunes,). 380. .55. . . , 
Do. (Patent Notes,) 380. .55. . ., 

Nelson on Infidelity, 352. .45. .60. , 

Dr. Spring's Bible Not of Man, ... .319. .45. .60. . 

VOLUMES 18MO. 

t Memoir of Dr. Payson, 486. .40. .55. . 

t Memoir of Mrs. H. L. Winslow,. .480. .40. .55. . 

t Memoir of James B. Taylor, 444. .40. .55. . 

§ Memoir of Rev. Dr. Buchanan,. ..478. .40. .55. . 
^ Guide to Young Disciples, 465. .40. .55. . 

Vol. Cir. 12 



4> 

P. 



Papfe. 
86 
45 
75 
49 
49 
66 
59 
.5.3 
77 
63 
5H 
90 

8;^ 

65 

57 

101 

74 

103 

103 

80 

78 



91 
99 
91 

98 
68 



138 



INDEX ; AND PRICES OF VOLUMES. 



Pages, cl'th. gilt. pap. 

t Banyan's Pilgrim's Progress, 464. .40. .55. . 

Elijah the Tishbite, 458. .40. .55. . 

Volume on Infidelity, 456. .40. .55. . 

Doddridge's Rise and Progress, 452. .40. .55. . 

t Life of Martyn, 444. .40. .55. . 

Baxter's Saints' Rest, 444. . 40. . 55. . 

Edwards' History of Redemption,. .446. .40. .55. . 
Pike's Persuasives to Early Piety, . .438. .40. .55. . 

Reformation in Europe, 432. .40. .55. . 

Practical Piety, by Hannah More,. .412. .40. .55. . 
Anecdotes for the Family Circle,. . .408. .40. .55. . 
t Spirit of Popery, (12 engravings,). 378. .40. .55. . 

Jay's Christian Contemplated, 380. .35. .45. . 

t § Wilberforce's Practical View, . • .375. .35. .45. . 

i § Life of David Brainerd, 360. . 30. . 40. . 

Melvill's Bible Thoughts, 354. .30. .40. . 

Sabbath Manual. By Dr. Edwards, 318. .25. .35. .15 
Do. Parts 1 and 3, General Claims 

of the Sabbath, and its Relation 

to the Family Institution, 132 5 

Do. Part 4, Mode of Keeping the 

Sabbath 136 5 

Mammon. Prize Essay by Harris,. .291. .25. .35. . 

t Life of Samuel Pearce, 288. .25. .35. . 

t ^ Edwards on the Affections, 276. .25. .35. . 

TJniversalism not of God, 258. .25- .35. .15 

Slemoir of Matthew Henry, 

t Memoir of Hannah Hobbie, 252. .25. .35. . 

Bogue's Evidences of Christianity,. .252. .25. .35. . 

Religion and Eternal Life 250. .25. .35. . 

Life of John Newton, 244. .25. .35. . 

Gurney on Love to God, 242. .25. .35. . 

t Memoir of H. Page, 230. .25. 35. .15 

t Nevins' Practical Thoughts, 230. .25. .35. .15 

Dibble's Thoughts on Missions 225. .25. .35. .15 

Nevins' Thoughts on Popery, 216. .25. .35. .15 

Morison's Counsels to Young Men,. 201. .25. .35. . 

James' Anxious Inquirer, 199.. 20. .30. .10 

Mason on Self-Knowledge, 191. .20. .30. . 

James' Young Man from Home, . . .187. .20. .30. . 

t Abbott's Mother at Home, 177. .20. .30.-10 

<<, AUeine's Alarm, 190. . 15. .25. . 10 

Baxter's Call 177. .15. .25. .10 

Sherman's Guide to Acquaintance 

with God, 173.. 15. .25.. 10 

Henry on Meekness, 158. .15. .25. .10 

t Life of Rev. Samuel Kilpin, 156. .15. .25. .10 

1^ Keith's Evidences of Prophecy,. 144. .15. .25. .10 
Baxter's Life, chiefly by himself, . . .144. .15. .25. . 

Life of Archbishop Leighton, 142. .15. .25. .10 

Baxter's Dying Thoughts 132. . 15. .25. . 

Andrew Fuller's Backslider, 122. . 15. .25. . 5 

Redeemer's Last Command, 112. .15.. 20. . 5 

Beecher on Intemperance, 108. .10. .15.. 5 



INDEX ; AND PRICES OF VOLUMES. 



139 



Life of Rev. C. F. Schwartz, 

^ Flavel on Keeping the Heart,. • . 

§ Flavei's Touchstone, 

Temper. Manual. By Dr. Edwards, 
Colporteur and Roman Catholic, • . 

Dr. Plumer's Bible True, 

Memoir of Normand Smith, 

Self-Deception, 

The Withered Branch Revived,-.. 

Scudder's Appeal to Mothers, 

Social Hymns, (large 32mo,) 

Hymns to S. Songs, (large 3-3mo,) . 



Pages. 
.106. 
.108. 
..96. 
..90. 
.-84. 



cl'h. gilt. pap. 
.10. .15.. 5. 
.10. .15. 
.10. .15. 
.10.. 15. 



5 

5. 

5 



.72. 
.72. 
.72. 
.65. 
468. 
304. 



.10. .15.. 5 

.10.. 15.. 5 
.10.. 15.. 5 
,10. .15.. 5 
.10.. 15.. 5 
. 25 . . 
.20.. .. 



BOOKS FOR THE YOUNG. 

Qallaudet'' s Scripture Biography — 
Price §1 75 a set of seven vols. 

% Vol. 1, Adam to Jacob 200. .25. . 

t Vol. 2, Life of Joseph 210. .25. . 

% Vol. 3, Life of Moses, Part 1, .216. .25. . 

X Vol. 4, Life of Moses, Part 2, .268. .25. . 

X Vol. 5, Joshua, Judges, 288. .25. . 

i Vol. 6, Ruth and Samuel,. . .198. .25. . 

X Vol. 7, Life of David, 299,. 25. . 

X Gallaudet's Youth's Book of 

Natural Theology 231 . 

i Peep of Day, (for Young Children) 228. 
+ Line upon Line, do. 258. 

X Precept upon Precept, do. 256. 

Child's Book on the Sabbath, 201. 

1 Dairyman's Daughter, etc., 185. 

t Abbott's Child at Home, 173. 

Gallaudet's History of Jonah, 156. 

t do. Child's Book on Repentance, 147. 
t Mem. of Nathan W. Dickerman,.140. 

Memoir of Henry Obookiah, 124. 

Memoir of John Mooney Mead,. . .118. 

Spoiled Child, David Baldwin, etc. 117. 

X Village in the Mountains, etc., . . .108. 

Little Henry and his Bearer, etc., . 108. 

X The Widow's Son, etc., 108. 

± Eliza Cunningham, etc., 108. 

Memoir of Mary Lothrop, 108- 

Gallaudet's Life of Josiah, 108. 

Memoir of Charles L. Winslow, .... 107. . 15. .20. 
X Amelia, the Pastor's Daughter,. . .100. .15. .20. 
X Shepherd of Salisbury Plain, etc.,. .98. .15. .20. 

Clementine Cuvier, 96. .15. .20. 

t Fool's Pence, etc., 94.. 15.. 20. 

i Elizabeth Bales. By J. A. James,. .89. .15. .20. 
+ Newton's Letters to an Adopted 

Daughter 86.. 15.. 20. 

Raising of Lazarus, 80. .10. .15. 

Foster's Appeal to the Young, 69. .10. .15. 

X Emily Maria, 72.. 10.. 15. 



.25.. 35. 

.25.-35. 
.25.. 35. 
.25.. 35. 

.20 .30. 
.20.. 30. 
.20.. 30. 
.20.. 30. 
.20.. 30. 



,15. 



,15.. 25. 
.15.. 25. 
,15.. 25. 
.15.. 20. 
,15. .20. 
.15.-20. 
.15.. 20. 
.15.-20. 
.15.. 20. 



.15 

.15 

15 

.10 

.10 

.10 

.10 

.10 

.10 

.10 

.10 

.10 

.10 

10 

.10 

10 

10 

10 

5 

. 5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 
5 
5 
5 



Page. 

102 

52 

53 

109 

89 

85 

97 

71 

108 

108 

104 

103 



- 115 

.. 117 
I 120 



140 



INDEX : AND PRICES OF VOLUMES. 



Memoir of Caroline Hyde, • 
Memoir of Rolls Plumbe,. . 



Pages, cl'h. gilt. pap. 
...72.. 10.. 15.. 5. 
. . 72.. 10. .15.. 5. 



WITH NUMEROUS ENGRAVINGS. 

t Trees, Fruits, and Flowers of the 

Bible, (9 cuts,) 120. .20. .30. .10 

t Scripture Animals, (16 cuts,) 98. .20. .30. . 

The lllusl rated Tract Primer, 108 

t Letters to Little Children, (13 cuts,) 108. .15. .20. .10 

Great Truths in Simple Words 15. .20. .10 

t Peet's Scripture Lessons,( cuts). .72. .15. .20. .10 
t Gallaudet's Child's Book of Bible 

Stories, (10 cuts,) 72.. 15. .20.. 5 

t Children of the Bible, (8 cuts,) ... .52. .15. .20. . 
t The Child's Hymn Book, (32mo,) 209. . 15. .20. . 10 
J Amos Armfield, (10 cuts,) " 141.. ..20.. 

Dr. Watts' Catechisms for the Young, 

X Watts' Divine and Moral Songs, 

(32mo,) 64 3 



VOLUMES OF CHILDREN'S BOOKS. 

ILLUSTRATED. 



J Books for Small Children, 2 vols.. 



32mo. (New Series I,) 



X Books for Children, 2 vols., 32mo. 

(New Series II,) 

t Books for the Vfoung 1 vol. 18mo. 

(New Series III,) 

t Books for the Young, 3 vols., 

l8mo. (New Series IV,) 



.20.. 25.. 
.30.. 40.. 



.30. .40. 



POCKET MANUALS, 32MO 

Clarke's Scripture Promises, 280. .20. .25. . 

Daily Scripture Expositor, 286. .20. -25. . . 

I Cecil and Flavel's Gift for 

Mourners 124.. ..15.. 

J Bean and Venn's Advice to a Silk. 

Married Couple, 98 20- 

Book of Proverbs 90. .10. .15.. • 

Cecil's Reasons of Repose,(onInfidel.)64. .10. .15. . 

Pages, cloth, gilt. M.tk. 
Fook of Psalms, (48mo,) 318. . .20. . .25. . .35 . 

POCKET MANUALS, 64MO. 

Diary, (Daily Texts interleaved,) 2.56. . .15. . .20. . .30 . 

Gems of Sacred Poetry, 256. . .15.. .20. . .30 . 

Daily Food for Christians, 192. . .10. . .15. . .25 . 

Mason's Crumbs, 170. 

Heavenly Manna,.... 128. 

Daily Texts, 128. 

Milk for Babes, 128. 

Dew-Drops, a daily te.\t,(128mo,)128. 



Page. 
. 123 
. 125 



125 
125 
127 
126 
127 
126 

126 
126 

127 
127 
128 

128 



.10.. 

.10.. 

.10.. 

..10.. 



.15., 

.15.. 

.15., 

.15. 

.10., 



.25 
.25 
.25 
.25 
.20 



128 
128 
128 
128 



128 
129 

129 

129 
129 
12i) 

129 



130 
129 
130 
130 
130 
130 
130 
130 



INDEX ; AND PRICES OF VOLUMES. 141 

MISCELLANEOUS. 

VOLUMES 12M0. 

Pages, cloth, paper. PaRe« 

t The Series of 12nio Tracts, 12 

vols., 400 pp. each.with Index 

to the set 45 110 

Temperance Volume, 278... .40 

Tracts on Romanism,... 252 15 

Boatswain's Mate, 152 25 llO 

Burder's Sermons to the Aged, 148 10 110 



VOLUMES IN FOREIGN LANGUAGES. 



GERMAN, 12MO 

Sheep 
or cloth, pap. 

Elijah the Tishbite, 707.. ..75 74 

Doddridge's Rise and Progress, 441 50 60 

Nelson's Cause and Cure, 360. ...45 80 

Arndt's True Christianity, 132 

German Tracts, 4 vols., each, 400 40 110 

GERMAN VOLUMES, 18MO. 

Baxter's Saints' Rest 480... .40.. 45 

Bogue's Evidences of Christianity, .338.... 30 , 84 

Memoir of Harlan Page, 269 ...25.. ..15 92 

Nevins' Practical Thoughts, 262... .25... .15 75 

t Keith's Evidences of Prophecy,... 244.... 25.... 15 85 

t Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress 232. ...25 53 

Bp. Watson's Reply to Gibbon and 

Paine, 232.. ..25 82 

t Abbott's Mother at Home, 163... .20.. ..10 105 

Baxter's Call, 199... .15... .10 47 

Hollatz's Method of Grace 188. .. . 15. ... 10 133 

Edwards' Sabbath Manual — 

Parts 1 and 2, 160... . 15... .10 109 

Beecher on Intemperance, 118... .15... . 5 109 

Lyttleton's Conversion of Paul 108 10 5 82 

Temperance Manual, 106 10 5 109 

Luther on the Lord's Prayer, 104 .... 10 ... . 5 133 

Andrew Dunn, 84. ...10.... 5 I3l 

The Primitive Catholicism, 133 

Thirza, (a converted Jewess,) 72.... 10.... 5 134 

False Claims of the Pope, 72. ...10.... 5 I3l 

Life of Colonel Gardiner, 52. ...10.... 5 I3l 

Threefold Cord, (Daily Texts, 32mo,) 176.... 15 134 



142 INDEX ; AND PRICES OF VOLUMES. 

BOOKS FOR THE YOUNG. 

Sheep 
Pages, or cloth, pap. PaR*. 

t Earth's 104 Bible Stories, 273... .25... .10 134 

t Abbott's Child at Home, 189... .20... .10 118 

Peep of Day, (Scripture Narratives,) 184 .... 20 .... 10 120 

t Scripture Alphabet of Animals, . . . 108 .... 20 125 

Memoir of Mary Lothrop, 104 . . . . lU 5 124 

Little Henry, etc 72. ...10.... 5 132 

Theophilus and Sophia, 68. ...10.... 5 132 

FRENCH VOLUMES, 18MO. 

Baxter's Saints' Rest, 220. .. .25 45 

Call, 191. ...20. ...10 47 

The Bible Man's Book, (Colpor- 
teur Biblique.) By Dr.De Felice,. 178.... 15.... 10 135 

Teachings of Rome compared with 

Scripture 160... .15... .10 135 

Death of the Eldest Son, 105 15 5 135 

Edwards' Sabbath Manual, Part I, 86 5 109 

Farewell to Rome 76 5 136 

The Primitive Catholicism, 71 5 133 

Do you Wish to Die Happy ? 64 5 136 

The True Cross. By Dr. Malan, . . . 64 5 136 

French Tracts, 12mo, 1vol., 400. ...40 110 

WELSH VOLUMES. 

Baxter's Saints' Rest, 12mo, 431 50 45 

Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, 12mo, . 383 .... 45 53 

James' Anxious Inquirer, 189 69 

Baxter's Call to Unconverted, 18mo,166 15 10 47 

SPANISH VOLUME, 18M0. 
Edwards' Sabbath Manual, Part I, 48.... 5 109 



ALPHABETICAL INDEX. 



Abbott's Mother at Home. ....«-. 105 

ChUdatHome 118 

" Young Christian ..... . 74 

Alleine's Alarm 55 

AmeHa, Pastor's Daughter - 123 

Anecdotes 104 

Armfield, Amos >. 127 

Arndt's True Cliristianity 132 

Backslider, Andrew Fuller's 71 

Earth's Bible Stories 134 

Baxter's Saints' Rest 45 

Call 47 

Dying Thoughts 49 

Life 94 

Bayles, Elizabeth 123 

Beecher on Intemperance 109 

Bible not of Man 78 

Boatswain's Mate 110 

Bogue's Essay 84 

Brainerd , Life of 98 

Buchanan, Memoir of 98 

Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress 53 

Burder's Sermons to the Aged . . 110 

Cecil's Friendly Visit 129 

" Reasons for Repose . 129 

Children of the Bible 12G 

Clarke's Scripture Promises 128 

Colporteur and Roman Cathohc. 89 

Cunningham, Eliza 121 

Cuvier, Clementine 122 

Daily Scripture Expositor 129 

Dairyman s Daughter 121 

D'Aubigne's Hist, of Reform'n. 86 

Dibble's Thoughts on Missions . . 107 

Dickerman, Nathan 124 

Doddridge's Rise and Progress. . . 60 

Do You Wish to Die Happy 1. . . 136 

Dunn, Andrew 131 



Edwards' Hist, of Redemption. . 63 

" on Revivals 63 

" on the Affections 64 

Sabbath Manual 109 

'• Temperance Manual. . 109 

Eldest Son. Death of 135 

Elijah the Tishbite 74 

Enriily Maria 123 

False Claims of the Pope 131 

Flavel's Fountain of Life . . 49 

Method of Grace 49 

" Keeping the Heart 52 

" Touchstone of Sincerity 53 

Gift for Mourners 129 

Fool's Pence, etc. 121 

Foster's Appeal to the Young. . . 119 

Gallaudet's Scripture Biography. 11.5 

" History of Jonah ... . 117 

" History of Josiah... 117 

" Natural Theology... 117 

" Repentance 118 

" Bible Stories 126 

Gardiner, Life of 131 

Gems of Sacred Poetry 129 

Graham, Mrs ". 90 

Great Truths in Simple Words.. 127 

Gregory's Evidences 77 

Gurney's Love to God 70 

Hall's Scripture History 59 

Henry, Life of 94 

" on Meekness 71 

Hobbie, Hannah 96 

Hollatz' Method of Grace 133 

Hopkins' Ten Commandments. . 58 

Hyde, Caroline 123 

Hymns, Social 103 

and Music 103 

" ChUd'sHymn-Book.... 127 



144 



ALPHABETICAL INDEX. 



81 

69 

lOfi 

75 

75 

85 

95 

1-20 

94 

126 

]20 

Til 



Infidelity, Volnme on. 

James' Anxious Inquirer...... 

'« Young Man from Home 
Jay's Christian Contemplated.. 

" Morning Exercises 

Keith on Prophecy 

Kilpin, Life of..-- 

Lazarus, Raising ot 

Leighton, Archbis iiop 

Letters to Little Children 

Line upon Line 

Little Henry j;;^ 

Lothrop, INlary J-"* 

Luther on Lord's Prayer • 

Mammon .' ■,■■■" 1 ' 

Married Couple, Advice to 
Martyn, Life of...----- • 

Mason's Self-Knowledge 1% 

Spiritual Treasury oo 

Mead, John M • ^zj. 

Melvill's Bible Thoughts ^6 

Mote's Practical Piety '-^ 

M orison's Counsels gj' 

Mourners, Gift for -l- 

Nelson on Infidelity P'j 

Kevins' Popery 



133 

105 

129 

99 



Plumer's Bible True 85 

Practical Piety '^ 

Precept upon Precept 120 

Primer, Tract 1^7 

Primitive Catholicism !•»•> 

Putnam and the Wolf 121 

Reformation in Europe 8o 

Rome, Farewell to i^ 

" Teachings of 1"^» 

Sabbath Manna! 109 

Child's Book on 119 

Sacred' Songs' 10^ 

Schwartz, Life of 1"^ 

Scripture Animals 12» 

Seudder's Appeal to Mothers . . . lU^ 
" Red. Last Command . 108 

71 
121 



Practical Thoughts J^ 

9o 

119 

122 

57 

92 



Self-Deception 

Shepherd of Salisbury Plain- 
Sherman's Guide '" 



Smith, Snrah L. H. 
'• Nuxmaud 

Social Hymns 

Spirit of Popery ■ 



101 
97 

104 
89 

121 



Newton, Life of • ■ • • 

" to Adopted Daughter 

Obookiah, Henry 

Owen's Forgiveness 

Page, Harlan • 

Paley, Natural Theology ^ 

Pastor's Daughter 1-^ 

Payson, Life of ■^A^ 

Pearce, Life of ;^J|~ 

Peep of Day l-"l 

Peet's Scripture Lessons uo 

Pilie's Persuasives ^'. 

" Guide •••;• »? 

" Religion and Eternal Lite W\ 

Plombe, Rolls 



125' 



Spoiled Child, etc l;f l 

Spring's Bible Not of Man t» 

Taylor, James Brainerd 91 

Temperance Manual 109 

Thir/a li,* 

Threefold Cord 1-^4 

Trees, Fruits, and Flowers 12.) 

Uuiversalisra Not of God 86 

Venn's Duty of Man 6a 

Village in the Mountains 121 

Watts' Catechisms 1^8 

Divine Songs 128 

Widow's Sou, etc. 121 

Wilherforce's View ^2 

Winslow, Harriet 99 

Charles 122 

Withered Branch Revived 108 

Young Christian ••• • '^ 



fi 



JIN z 6 iyD4 



