

D 




a 

































ABSENTED BY V 

TO THE 

6MMw««' Ubrtrfi 
!pennsyl'a. training school 

Commenced Christmas, 1864. ' 

Take Rood care of this book. Read it; 
to those who cannot read themselves-- 
^Return it on Library Day. 




ICCSB tlffftARlf 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 

in 2007 with funding from 

Microsoft Corporation 



http://www.archive.org/details/clevelandsshowinOOsheliala 



THE CLEVELANDS: 



SHOWING THE 



INFLUENCE OF A CHRISTIAN FAMILY 

IN A NEW SETTLEMENT. 

BT 

MRS. E. M. SHELDON. 



Where once was heard the savage yell 
Ascends the Christian's prayer, 

And sweetly sounds the Sabbath bell 
Along the morning air. 

On Nature's charms how calmly smiles 

That hallowed morn in western wilds I 



PUBLISHED BY THE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

28 CORNH1LL, BOSTON. 



Entered, according to Act of Congress, In the year 1860, by the 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the District of Massachusetts. 



ELECTROTYPED AT THE 
BOSTON STEREOTYPE FOUNDRY. 



PREFACE. 



No element is more important to the growth and 
prosperity of a young village, in a newly- settled coun- 
try, than religion. By many this is sadly forgotten, and 
many, who in their former homes had borne the Chris- 
tian name, neglect, on removing into the wilderness, to 
carry their profession and piety with them. 

The narrative which follows (which the Authoress 
assures us is substantially true, except as to names, &c.) 
is that of a family who begun life in their new home 
as Christians. It illustrates how much may be accom- 
plished by such a family, in an unostentatious way, far 
the promotion of religion around them, and in planting 
the germs of Christian institutions in our rising commu- 
nities. It is earnestly commended to the imitation of 
all those similarly situated, whether at the East or the 

West. 

Editor. 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I. 

■HP 

The Abbival 6 



CHAPTER II. 
Seasons fob Removal 11 

CHAPTER III. 
Plans. 80 

CHAPTER IV. 
Fibst Sabbath in the Wildebness. 24 

CHAPTER V. 

Neighboely Calls. . 36 

(3) 



4 CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER VI. 
-. 

PAGE 

The Children's Party. . .•. 43 



CHAPTER VII. 
Shall we have a Sabbath School? 56 

CHAPTER VIII. 
The Sabbath School begun 71 

CHAPTER IX. 
The Prater Meeting 78 

CHAPTER X. 
Fruits 86 



THE CLEVELANDS. 



CHAPTER I. 

THE ARRIVAL. 

The ax rang sharply 'mid those forest shades 
Which from creation toward the sky had towered, 
In unshorn beauty. There, with vigorous arm, 
Wrought the bold emigrant, and by his side 
His little son, with question and response, 
Beguiled the time. 

Mrs. Sigourney's Poems. 

At the close of a lovely day in May, 18 — , 
three heavily-loaded, covered wagons, drawn 
by sturdy oxen, emerged from one of the 
dense forests, then so common in Michigan, 
into an opening made by the first settlers 
of the village of Smithton. The poor cattle 
panted with fatigue, as they dragged along 
their loads of "goods and chattels;" and 
the living occupants of the last wagon of tho 
trio were silent and thoughtful. 

1* CO 



6 THE CLEVELANDS. 

" Stop a moment, Mike, and let the oxen 
breathe," shouted Mr. Cleveland, the driver 
of the last team, to the one in advance. 
" George, my son," continued he, as they 
halted, addressing a noble-looking lad, about 
fourteen years of age, who drove the second 
team, "you look very tired: the road is 
smooth the rest of the way ; so jump on the 
wagon, and let your oxen take care of them- 
selves ; they will follow the team ahead well 
enough." 

" Not very tired, father ; it is not far now, 
and I would rather walk, if you please," said 
George, who was not a little proud of the 
dexterity with which he could guide his 
" horned horses," as he termed them. 

" Papa, papa ! where is that famous vil- 
lage ? " said a sprightly little girl of nine. 
"I have looked, and looked, till my eyes 
ache, and have finally concluded it must 
belong to fairies, who have wickedly hid it 
from poor, tired mortals like us." 

" A sage conclusion, truly," replied her 
father, smiling ; " especially when that same 
village, as Mike says, is right before you." 

" Why, papa," exclaimed the astonished 



THE ARRIVAL. 7 

child, " you don't call those four or five log 
huts a village — do you ? " 

" Certainly I do, my dear little Ella. That 
is a Michigan village. How do you like 
it?" 

" Oh Mary ! do look ! What a splendid 
place ! What a large village ! " said Ella to 
the pensive sister, two years older than her- 
self, who sat by her side ; and the merry 
little girl clapped her hands with glee, while 
her light, ringing laugh was sweet music to 
her father's ear, whose heart ached when he 
thought of the many privations to which his 
loved ones must be subjected in their west- 
ern home. 

" Now I must count the houses as we pass 
through," continued the little chatterbox; 
" so please, Miss Sobriety, don't interrupt 
me." 

" Dear mamma," half whispered Mary, 
" how different all this is from the scenery 
around our old home — that so cheerful, this 
so silent and lonely. Don't you think we 
shall all be homesick ? " 

" We shall, undoubtedly, have many trials, 



8 THE CLEVELANDS. 

my daughter," replied her mother ; " but 
you know the divine promise, ' My grace 
is sufficient for thee.' But cheer up, my 
dear, don't let papa see you sad; we will 
talk more of this another time." 

" One, two, three private dwelling houses, 

one tavern, and . Mamma, what is that 

little, low building, opposite the tavern ? " 
asked Ella, as they drove slowly through 
the village. 

" That, my dear, is a blacksmith's shop. 
Those horseshoe prints, burned on the door, 
are his sign." 

"Do see the heads at the doors and win- 
dows," said Ella, lowering her voice almost 
to a whisper. " I do believe every inhabitant 
of this extensive village is gazing at us ; 
but I don't think it very good manners to 
stare so." 

" Oh, how beautiful ! How beautiful ! " 
suddenly exclaimed Mary, as the sun, which 
had been for some time obscured by a cloud, 
burst forth in the full splendor of his setting 
rays. u Just look, mamma, Ella, and Kate — 
see how the tall trees, with their tender 



THE ARRIVAL. iJ 

leaves, the rough houses, and even the 
stumps and the ground, are deluged in a 
sea of glory! 

' These are thy works, almighty Father — these 
Are but the varied God,' " 

said the young enthusiast, reverently clasp- 
ing her hands, and raising her eyes to heaven. 
" If," murmured she, as if thinking aloud, — 
" if Michigan has many such scenes as this, 
I shall not be homesick. 'Twill be im- 
possible." 

Her mother gazed tearfully upon her dur- 
ing this burst of feeling; but the thoughts 
and attention of all were soon diverted into 
a new channel by their arrival at their long- 
wished-for home. 

" Where are we, mamma ? " said little 
Frank, who had been asleep for some time 
on a bed in the wagon, and was now aroused 
by the noisy glee of Ella. 

" We are at our new home, my little boy," 
said his father, who had just helped the girls 
from their rather high seat to terra firma, 
and now set out little Frank ; then, turning 
to his wife, he whispered, as he assisted her 



10 THE CLEVELANDS. 

to alight, " Welcome to your new home, 
dearest. Poor though it be, it is the best 
that even your husband's love can provide." 

" We shall be happy, very happy here, dear 
Edward, if you do not despond. Cheer up, 
my husband ; mutual affection will make 
this wild spot a paradise." 

By the time the older members of the 
family were ready to enter, Ella, — who was 
always foremost, — George, Frank, and even 
Mary, — who, in the novelty and excitement, 
had lost all thoughts of home-sickness, — had 
ransacked the house, which was built of logs, 
and not very spacious, and now stood at 
the door, with mock gravity, to give their 
parents, and Mike, and Kate, a gracious 
welcome. 



REASONS FOR REMOVAL. 11 

CHAPTER II. 

REASONS FOR REMOVAL. 

The good are better made by ill, 
As odors crushed are sweeter still. 

Rogers' Jacqueline. 

Edward Cleveland and Julia Westbury 
were born, educated, and married in the city 
of Boston. Their parents were wealthy ; but, 
unlike too many wealthy families, they felt 
that an abundance of this world's goods was 
no excuse for neglecting the moral culture 
of their children. Acquainted from child- 
hood, the union of Edward and Julia seemed 
more the natural result of similar tastes, 
habits, and modes of thinking, than the con- 
summation of a romantic attachment. Soon 
after their marriage they removed to New 
York, where Mr. Cleveland's father estab- 
lished him in a nourishing business. And 
now, amid the engrossing cares and alluring 
temptations of mercantile life, how often did 
he thank Heaven for those active business 
habits and the stern integrity that had been 
his daily lessons from boyhood ! 



12 THE CLEVELANDS. 

Years passed away, and the tide of their 
united life, like the tide of their early love, 
did run smooth. Four happy, blooming 
children were as olive plants around their 
table. Wealth rolled in upon them, and 
Mrs. Cleveland, as the affectionate wife, the 
fond and pious mother, amply sustained the 
fair promise of her girlhood. Nothing of 
earth could add to the happiness of this 
interesting family which was not already 
enjoyed. But a reverse came. Amid the 
commercial crash that hurled thousands from 
affluence to abject poverty, Mr. Cleveland 
found his affairs so embarrassed by the fail- 
ure of many indebted to him, that his own 
fair inheritance must be scattered to the 
winds. None but those who have passed 
through the same fiery ordeal can realize 
his distress of mind, when the painful truth 
first burst upon his bewildered senses. For 
days, he and his confidential clerk had been 
busily engaged in a thorough investigation 
of their complicated business matters ; and 
when, at last, every tiling was adjusted, and 
but a few hundreds remained, after all lia- 
bilities should be paid, is it wonderful that 



REASONS FOR REMOVAL. 13 

the strong man bowed his head, and became 
a very child again ? 

" Excuse this weakness, Morton," said Mr. 
Cleveland, as, with a powerful effort, he re- 
gained his usual composure. " You have 
been a faithful, tried friend for years ; would 
that I could reward you ; but that now is 
impossible. However, thanks to a merciful 
Providence, there is enough left to pay all 
my debts; so you will not lose your hard- 
earned wages, nor will any widow or orphans 
curse me for their distress. Stay with me, 
Morton," continued he, "till my affairs are 
settled, and my gratitude shall be for ever 
yours." 

" Mr. Cleveland," replied the young man, 
"I have received many favors from you ; and, 
were it not for my mother and sisters, what 
little is due for my services I would never 
receive ; but, for their sakes, my hand must 
accept what my heart refuses. Command 
me in all things through your coming trial, 
and I shall be but too 'happy to serve you. 
Hark ! the bells strike twelve o'clock ! Will 
not your wife be alarmed at your unusual 
absence ?" 

2 



14 THE CLEVELANDS. 

" Poor Julia ! how will she bear it ? ** 
murmured Mr. Cleveland. 

" Your wife is a woman and a Christian, 
sir," said Morton, as he bade his employer 
good night. 

"A woman. and a Christian," repeated the 
poor husband, as he walked slowly home- 
ward. " Yes, so she is, and a true one, too ; 
but she has never been poor ; she has never 
known want; it will kill her; she can not 
bear it ; and my poor children, too, what 
will become of them ? " 

Mr. Cleveland had reached home, and 
mechanically mounted the steps ; but, as he 
placed his hand upon the knob, his courage 
forsook him, and he leaned against the house 
for support. It was but for a moment. The 
quick ear of his watchful wife had long 
since learned, that 

" His very foot had music in't, 
When he came up the stairs ; " 

and she now hastened to him, and, though 
greatly alarmed, drew him gently into the 
parlor. 

" Edward ! dear husband ! " exclaimed 
she, as she gazed on his pale, haggard face, 



REASONS FOR REMOVAL. 15 

" -what is the matter ? What has happened ? 
Are you ill ? " 

" Sick ? Yes, sick at heart ! " said he, with 
a nervous start. " Julia, we are ruined." 

"Tell me, Edward, is that all? Is that 
the worst intelligence you bring ? " 

"Is not that enough?" exclaimed he, 
petulantly. 

" Edward Cleveland," replied his wife, in 
a half-reproving tone, " you profess to be a 
Christian. Shall we receive good at the hand 
of the Lord, and not evil ? Compose your- 
self," she added, tenderly, " and let us talk 
over the matter calmly. I will be with you 
again presently ; " and, taking a light, she 
withdrew to the kitchen, to which, though 
amply supplied with domestics, she was by 
no means a stranger. Here she busied her- 
self for some time in preparing some slight 
refreshments for him, whose physical powers 
were fast giving way under the intense men- 
tal excitement to which they had been so 
long subjected, and which he had made such 
efforts to conceal from his family. 

Mr. Cleveland paced the room in great 
agitation for some minutes after his wife 



16 THE CLB-VELANDS. 

left; but her words of encouragement, her 
calmness, and the expression of relief in her 
countenance, when he told her the news, — 
which he thought would quite overcome her, 
— quieted his fears, and imparted to his 
mind a tranquillity which an hour before he 
would have deemed it impossible ever again 
to possess. When Mrs. Cleveland returned, 
after an absence purposely protracted, she 
found her husband composed, willing to con- 
verse on the painful subject of their present 
embarrassments, and gathering new strength 
for future action, as he unbosomed himself 
to her who had so long enjoyed his con- 
fidence. 

" Why, Julia ! you are quite a cook ; for 
I suppose Kate went to bed long ago," said 
Mr. Cleveland, as his wife pushed back the 
table, after their midnight repast. 

" Has my husband yet to learn," replied 
she, "that my excellent mother instructed 
me not only in the superintendence, but in 
all the minutiae, of domestic affairs ? " 

" That will make poverty rather easier to 
bear," half whispered her husband, with a 
sigh. 



REASONS FOR REMOVAL. 17 

" Hush, hush," said Mrs. Cleveland, play- 
fully ; " you may be as poor as you please ; 
but while my husband and children are 
spared me, /shall be rich." 

In a few weeks Mr. Cleveland had settled 
up his business, disposed of his costly house 
and furniture, dismissed his clerks and do- 
mestics, removed his family to a small but 
comfortable cottage, just out of the city, 
which he had formerly rented, and was upon 
the eve of his departure for that El Dorado 
of the unfortunate — the "West." 

" Well, Mike," said he to an Irishman, 
who had been his porter, but who, for the 
last few weeks, had served him as man of 
all work, " you know I start for Michigan to- 
morrow ; and what can I do for you before I 
go ? The Stuarts want a porter ; would 
you like a recommendation ? " 

"And sure, Mr. Cleveland," replied Mike, 
" it's not sending me away you're going to ? " 

" I would like very much to keep you, 
Mike, but you know I am poor now, and 
can not pay you the wages I have done 
hitherto. So I see no other way than for you 
to find a more prosperous employer." 
2* 



18 THE CLEVELANDS. 

"And Kate?" 

" Mrs. Cleveland thinks she must do her 
own housework ; but the elder Stuart wants a 
housekeeper ; so you and Kate won't be sepa- 
rated. Are you satisfied, my good fellow ? " 
asked Mr. Cleveland, smiling. 

Mike shrugged his shoulders, hesitated a 
moment, and then said, " Kate and I were 
talking over that same going west last night ; 
and we thought we would like to go too. 
So, if you will buy us a lot of land close by 
your own, and give us our board, we will 
stay with you and serve you faithfully till 
this fall a year. And then," said he, " we 
will get married, and set up housekeeping 
ourselves." 

" But that will be making too great a 
sacrifice," returned Mr. Cleveland ; " you 
must look out for your own interest bet- 
ter than this, or you will never do to get 
married." 

" You was kind to me, sir, when I was a 
stranger in America," said the honest fellow, 
brushing away a tear, " and I don't like the 
leaving of you now, unless Kate and I would 
be a burden." 



REASONS FOB REMOVAL. 19 

" Many thanks for your affectionate re- 
gard," said Mr. Cleveland, with emotion : 
" stay with us ; and if we prosper, you shall 
not be forgotten." 

We will pass over the tender parting of 
Mr. Cleveland with his loving and beloved 
family ; the loneliness of his journey, which 
was not then, as now, that of a day ; the 
difficulty of selecting a location where all 
the country was so beautiful ; the building 
of his future residence ; his safe return ; 
the dull monotony of the ensuing winter, 
and the perplexities and perils of their im- 
migration, and return to our rather verdant 
*' Wolverines." 



20 THE CLEVELANDS. 

CHAPTER m. 

PLANS. 

» 
When the purposes of life 
Stood apart from vulgar strife, 
Labor in the path of duty 
Gleamed up like a thing- of beauty. 

C. P. Craxch. 

It was Monday when our immigrants 
reached Smith ton, having spent the Sab- 
bath at A , one of the oldest and most 

flourishing villages in the state ; and the 
next Saturday evening found them quite 
comfortably settled in their " log mansion," 
as Ella called it. Mr. Cleveland, George, 
and Mike had gone to look for the cattle, 
whose pasture was abundant and very ex- 
tensive, unobstructed by fences or bars. 
Kate was clearing away the tea things ; and 
the girls and little Frank had drawn their 
stools close around their mother, who sat at 
the open window, busy with her needle. 

" Mamma," said Mary, " can you tell us, 
now, what are your plans for us in the 
future ? You told us yesterday that we must 



PLANS. 



21 



adopt a regular system ; and can't we begin 
next week ? " 



^vMi 




" Heigh-ho ! I hope mamma will not in- 
stall me dish-washer," said Ella. " I don't 
like the trade at all." 

" I hope my daughters will think their 
mother knows best what will make them 
most useful and happy hereafter, and be 
willing to do as she thinks proper, even if 
the task be not quite so pleasant." 

" Oh, yes, mamma," exclaimed both the 
girls at once. " But now for those plans, if 
you please," said Ella. 



22 THE CLEVELANDS. 

"Well, then, first, — and probably most 
unpleasant of all, — Mary and you must clear 
the table and wash the dishes after break- 
fast and dinner, every day, when you are in 
health. You will pursue the same course, 
before breakfast, that you have pursued for 
a few months past. You will all spend an 
hour or two every forenoon and afternoon at 
your lessons; and after tea we will spend 
the time in music, walking, &c." 

" Will George and I have to study, too ? " 
said Frank. 

"Certainly, my son," replied his mother; 
" we live in the woods, now, where there are 
no schools suitable for George ; and you, 
Frank, are getting old enough to learn some- 
thing beside play." 

" Oh, I know a great many things now," 
said Frank. " I thought it would always 
be holiday here in the woods," added he, 
musingly. 

" I did not suppose my little boy would 
want to grow up a dunce, coarse, vulgar, 
and uneducated, if he does live in the woods," 
replied Mrs. Cleveland ; " but, Frank, you 
need not study, unless you choose." 



PLANS. 23 

" I will study, mamma ; for I want to 
know as much as any body." 

" It is Saturday night," said Mary ; " how 
shall we spend the Sabbath ? Do they have 
Sabbath schools and meetings here ? " 

" They have occasional preaching at the 
village," replied her mother ; " but there is 
no Sabbath school ; and, as there is but one 
pious family in Smith ton, there are no prayer 
meetings. There is no preaching to-morrow ; 
so we must spend the day at home ; and I 
hope it will not be entirely unprofitable." 

" Mamma, if there is no Sabbath school, 
we shall not have to learn a verse a day, in 
'addition to our morning reading; shall we?" 
said Ella. 

" Yes ; " replied Mrs. Cleveland, " for we 
shall have a Sabbath school at home." 

" But if there is one pious family to help 
us, why can't we have a Sabbath school at 
the village ? " asked Mary. 

" Perhaps we may, when the people be- 
come well acquainted with us ; but the habits 
of those who have been brought up in the 
country are very different from those of city 
people, and we must be careful not to be- 



24 THE CLEVELANDS. 

come prejudiced against each other. Here 
comes Mike with the cows ; so we must not 
talk any more now." 



CHAPTER IV. 

FIRST SABBATH IN THE WILDERNESS. 

All nature rests ; the flocks and herds, listless 
And silent, crop the needed fruit, then seek 
Repose, or gather 'neath the shady oak, 
As if they knew to-day were holy time. 

The Sabbath dawned as bright and lovely 
on the forest home of the Clevelands, as 
when its blessed light dispelled the darkness 
from their city habitation ; and to the enthu- 
siastic minds of the children it seemed more 
beautiful. The matin song of the birds 
seemed sweeter and holier than usual. The 
cattle moved quietly away to graze, and soft 
zephyrs whispered to the green leaves, " 'Tis 
holy time." 

The morning was pleasantly spent by Mr. 
and Mrs. Cleveland in reading the Scrip- 



FIRST SABBATH IN THE WILDERNESS. 25 

tures, and conversing with their children 
and domestics on the important truths and 
striking historical events, which can not fail, 
if judiciously presented to the mind, both to 
entertain and instruct. In the afternoon, 
the family formed themselves into a Bible 
class, with Mr. Cleveland for teacher ; the 
children reciting their lessons learned on the 
verse-a-day system ; then all, with open Bi- 
bles, answering in turn the questions that 
presented themselves to their teacher's mind. 
Mr. and Mrs. Cleveland were alike united 
in their views of family government and re- 
ligion. Their religion was not a Sabbath 
day's garb of holiness, but a fixed principle, 
an all-pervading sentiment, entering into and 
incorporated with their whole life. Deeming 
the Sabbath a temporal as well as a spiritual 
blessing, they strove to make it a delight to 
their household, and they, thus far, had been 
eminently successful. Never had they heard 
their young children complain of weariness, 
or exclaim, " When will the Sabbath be 
past ? " and now, when they were entering 
almost upon a new existence, they were anx- 
ious to pursue such a course that holy time, 
3 



26 THE CLEVELANDS. 

even deprived, as they were, of the privi- 
leges of the sanctuary, should be hailed as 
an inestimable blessing — a day of privileged 
enjoyment, not as one of irksome task work. 
Toward evening of this their first Sab- 
bath in the wilderness, the family were lis- 
tening to the latest missionary intelligence, 
read by Mr. Cleveland, when the attention 
of little Frank, who sat near the window, 
was attracted by three men, who came saun- 
tering up the road from the village. Their 
appearance was any thing but prepossessing. 
To be sure, their week-old beards had under- 
gone a pretended process of shaving, and 
their coarse linen was clean ; but their outer 
garments bore evident marks of long ser- 
vice ; and here a rip and there a rent showed 
the want of woman's tidy hand ; and there 
was a certain care-for-nothing air about 
them, which would very readily place them 
with the class denominated loafers. They 
continued to advance slowly towards the 
house, till they reached the rude fence that 
enclosed Mr. Cleveland's little clearing. 
Here they stopped, and seemed consulting 
together whether they should advance to 
the house or return. 



FIRST SABBATH IN THE WILDERNESS. 27 

Just then Mr. Cleveland raised his eyes, 
and, stepping to the door, invited them in. 

" Thank'ee, sir," said Mr. Smith, the tav- 
ern keeper ; " we were walking out to take 
the air, and thought it would be no more 
than friendly just to give you a call. This 
is neighbor Johnson, Mr. Cleveland ; and 
this is my son John," continued he, awk- 
wardly, pointing to the individuals as he 
spoke. 

M Be seated, gentlemen," said Mr. Cleve- 
land, after acknowledging the uncouth in- 
troduction. 

" You were reading when we came in ; 
perhaps we interrupted you," said Mr. 
Johnson. 

"Yes, I was reading some missionary 
news to my family, and if you would like 
to hear it, I will continue," was the reply. 

"Thank'ee, sir," said they all. 

After finishing the article he had com- 
menced, and reading one or two other short 
pieces, that he thought would be likely to 
interest them, Mr. Cleveland paused, made 
a few remarks on the importance and success 
of missionary labor, then, turning to his 



28 THE CLEVELANDS. 

visitors, asked them some questions with re- 
gard to their own religioiis privileges. 

" I have been told," said he, " that you 
have preaching here occasionally. May I 
ask how often ? " 

"Yes," said Mr. Smith, " there is a Metho- 
dist preacher, who comes and preaches 
once in four weeks, at the school house in 
the village. They say he preaches' very well, 
but I never heard him. I think I shall go 
next time he comes." 

"When will he preach again?" asked 
Mrs. Cleveland. 

" Next Sunday, at eleven o'clock, ma'am. 
I s'pose you and the children will come ; 
won't you?" 

" Oh, yes, if we are well. But where is 
the school house ? We did not notice it 
when we came through." 

" You can't see it from the road you came 
on, ma'am," replied Mr. Smith. "It stands 
behind a clump of trees, on the road that 
runs north of my house. Now, while I 
think of it, my wife said this morning, that 
she meant to come out and see "■you this 
week." 



FIRST SABBATH IN THE WILDERNESS. 29 

" I hope she will," replied Mrs. Cleveland. 
" I have not had the pleasure of seeing any 
of my neighbors yet." 

The men now rose to go ; and, after bid- 
ding Mrs. Cleveland good evening, they 
asked Mr. Cleveland to accompany them 
home, "just to stir his blood," as they said. 

" Thank you. Not to-day ; it is the Sab- 
bath ; but I shall be at the village to-morrow, 
and will see you then." 

"Cleveland seems to be a clever fellow, 
but I am sorry he is so dreadful religious," 
said Smith, as soon as they were out of 
hearing. " Now there's Brown, you know, 
won't never drink a drop, make a bet, nor 
do any thing that has a bit of fun in it, just 
because of this plaguy religion. I was in 
hopes we shouldn't have any more pious 
folks in Smithton." 

" I don't know what to think of this re- 
ligion," replied Johnson. " When I was a 
little child, my mother used to make me say 
my prayers every night, and in the morning 
she used to read and pray, for my father was 
dead, and though she had to work hard to 
support her children, she always seemed 
3* 



30 THE CLEVELANDS. 

happy. Brown seems to be happy ; and 
Brown gets along well, too ; better than I do, 
though he was poor when he came here ; and 
I had a good farm then, with almost as much 
improvement as I have now. Cleveland's 
family look happier than mine ; and I almost 
believe it is owing to their religion." 

" Father," said John, " did you notice 
he said he could not go with us because it 
was Sunday ? Pretty good hint for us to 
stay away ; wasn't it ? " 

"Yes, I thought so; didn't you, neigh- 
bor Johnson ? " 

" Yes ; but like enough he didn't mean 
it as a hint," was the reply. 

By this time they had reached the village, 
and the trio separated — Johnson to call up 
long-buried memories of his pious mother 
and his early childhood, during his solitary 
walk home, and Smith and his son to relate 
all they had seen and heard at the Cleve- 
lands to the little knot of loungers at the 
tavern. 

George Cleveland sat gazing abstractedly 
after the retreating visitors, till an angle in 
the road hid them from view. Starting like 



FIRST SABBATH IN THE WILDERNESS. 31 

one waking from a troubled dream, he turned 
to his father, half opened his lips as if to 
speak, then, hesitating, cast his eyes to the 
floor. 

" Speak out," said his father, with a smile, 
who conjectured what was passing in . his 
mind ; " you need not fear to place confi- 
dence in your parents." 

" I am not afraid, father ; but I did not 
know but it would be disrespectful to tell 
you what I was thinking of." 

" My children are not often disrespectful ; 
so I shall not be very suspicious. But what 
were you going to say, George ? " 

" I was thinking, if we had been in New 
York when those men called, you would not 
have invited them in ; and I could not un- 
derstand why you should do any differently 
here." 

" Professing TJhristians," said Mr. Cleve- 
land, " should always endeavor to be con- 
sistent. Different circumstances may induce 
them to pursue a course which will seem 
entirely inconsistent with their previous 
course of conduct and their avowed prin- 
ciples, when, if their motives were known, 



32 THE CLEVELANDS. 

all appearance of inconsistency would vanish. 
There is not a vagrant in the streets of New 
York who is not sufficiently well informed to 
know how Christians regard the Sabbath; 
and a call from them, or from any of our 
acquaintance, merely as a matter of cer- 
emony or friendship, would justly be con- 
sidered as an insult, and deserve to be 
received as such ; but here, my children, in 
this western wilderness, the case is different ; 
the outward restraints of religion do not 
exist ; there are but few meetings, and no 
Sabbath schools — but little to remind one 
that a seventh part of the time is Jehovah's. 
These men have been brought up in a land 
of Sabbaths, as well as ourselves, but to 
them Sunday was a day of restraint and 
weariness, and when they came to the west 
they threw off that restraint ; and now they 
• almost seem to have forgotten why the Sab- 
bath is observed." 

" Do they work on Sunday, papa ? " said 
Frank. 

" No, they do not work unless in what 
they think a case of necessity, as in securing 
their hay or wheat crops ; but they visit, 



FIRST SABBATH IN THE WILDERNESS. 33 

hunt, fish, and congregate at the tavern, 
which is far more destructive to the morals 
than mere manual labor. Yet beneath a 
rough exterior and unpolished manners may 
be concealed virtues that would do honor to 
the most refined and proudest of our coun- 
trymen ; beside, it will teach us humility, for- 
bearance, and gratitude — three lessons that 
can not be too well studied by poor wayward 
mortals like ourselves." 

" Papa, one question more," said George, 
" if you please. Is it wrong to walk out on 
the Sabbath ? " 

" That will depend on the motives we have 
in walking, where we walk, and the influ- 
ence we shall exert upon others. If we walk 
within the bounds of our own inclosure, for 
exercise, there can not any harm arise, as I 
can see, to ourselves or others, by so doing ; 
nor would there be any thing wrong, as far 
as ourselves are concerned, in wandering out 
into the forest among nature's beauties, if 
we were thus led to look from nature up to 
nature's God. But suppose, in one of these 
rambles, we should chance to meet a hunter, 
an habitual Sabbath breaker ; would he not 



34 THE CLEVELANDS. 

think himself almost justified in his course, 
if he could say, in answer to reproof, ' Why, 
Mr. Such-a-one, a very good man, walks out 
on Sunday, for I met him a week or two ago 
in the woods, as much as a mile from his 
house ' ? So, you see, an act may be innocent 
in itself, and yet hurtful in its influence upon 
others. Had I gone to the village with those 
men to-day, though I had talked all the way 
on religious subjects, my influence with them 
would have been for ever gone. The fact 
that I walked out with them on the Sabbath 
would have been to them a shield against 
reproof, whatever were my motives in going. 
And now, my children, you will doubtless 
see many things in your mother's course of 
life and my own that you may not under- 
stand. We are placed in entirely different 
circumstances from those of former years, 
and when any such incidents occur, wait till 
a proper time, then come and ask us unre- 
servedly the reasons why, as you have done 
to-day ; and may a kind Father give us grace 
so to live, that it will always be a pleasure to 
us to explain our motives to our children." 



NEIGHBORLY CALLS. 



35 



CHAPTER V. 

NEIGHBORLY CALLS. 

We pine for kindred natures 
To mingle with our own 

Mrs. Hemans. 




" Good morning, Mrs. Brown," said Mrs. 
Smith, the tavern-keeper's wife, as she un- 
ceremoniously entered the house of the 
worthy blacksmith, early the following 
Tuesday. 



36 THE CLEVELANDS. 

" Good morning," was the reply of Mrs. 
Brown, who was busy about her household 
affairs. " Won't you take a seat, Mrs. Smith ? 
You must have risen earlier than we did, to 
have your work out of the way so soon." 

" Oh, bless you, no. We haven't been up 
over half an hour ; and, to tell you the truth, 
we hain't been to breakfast yet — but I can't 
stop to sit. I come to ask you"if you wouldn't 
like to go up to Cleveland's a-visiting this 
afternoon." 

" Yes, I would like to become acquainted 
with our new neighbors. I was thinking 
yesterday whether they had been here long 
enough to get settled, so as to like to see 
company." 

" Settled ! " repeated Mrs. Smith ; " why, 
my husband was in there on Sunday, and lie 
said every thing was as neat as a pin, and 
they looked as if they had lived there a year. 
He told them I was coming up this week. 
Well, I must be going. You will be ready 
early ; won't you? " 

" As soon as I can after dinner," was the 
reply. 

" So Smith called on the Clevelands on 



NEIGHBORLY CALLS. 37 

Sunday ! I wonder how he was received, 
for they say they are pious," thought Mrs. 
Brown, after her neighbor left. " Oh, I wish 
I could find a companion and friend in Mrs. 
Cleveland ; I have been here so long shut 
out from the society of those who could 
enter into my feelings, that I earnestly desire 
one female friend to whom I can pour out 
my full soul. But Mrs. Cleveland is better 
educated, and her tastes and talents are more 
cultivated, than mine ; however, if our minds 
are similarly constituted, her superior ad- 
vantages ought not to make any differ- 
ence." 

The Brown family was vastly superior in 
mental and moral worth to the other inhab- 
itants of the village. They had never been 
wealthy, nor had the parents, when young, 
enjoyed any other advantages for education 
than those afforded by attending the district 
school a few months in a year ; but they, 
like the truly wise, sought the pearl of great 
price early in youth, and were thus kept 
from vice, and brought to seek permanent 
earthly happiness in their own mental cul- 
ture, and in training their children in wis- 
4 



38 THE CLEVELANDS. 

do ni's ways, which are indeed ways of 
pleasantness. 

During their walk to Mr. Cleveland's, Mrs. 
Brown heard from her talkative companion 
all the particulars of the Sunday visit ; and 
on their arrival, she found her flurried spirits 
suddenly reassured by the kind reception of 
Mrs. Cleveland. In the course of the after- 
noon, Mrs. Brown learned that Mrs. Cleve- 
land educated her own children, and that 
they had just resumed their studies since 
their arrival, and the desire arose in her 
mind that her only daughter might be under 
the care of such an instructress. 

" But you do not expect to complete the 
education of your children, I suppose," said 
she to Mrs. Cleveland. 

" If I live and am blessed with health, I 
hope to complete that of our daughters," she 
replied. " Our sons we wish to send to col- 
lege. George is now fourteen, and has 
nearly finished his preparatory course. His 
bachelor uncle, whose name he bears, has 
kindly offered to defray his expenses through 
his collegiate course ; and Ave hope to send 
him east next fall, or in the spring, at the 



NEIGHBORLY CALLS. 39 

furthest. Frank, our youngest, is but a little 
boy yet, and will for years be under my care, 
if his life is spared." 

" La, me," said Mrs. Smith, " I shouldn't 
think of teaching my children at home. I 
couldn't never have patience. We calculate, 
when we get a little richer, to send our two 
oldest girls away to school. As for John, 
who was here on Sunday, he says he knows 
enough without any more book learnin'. He 
can read, write, and cipher, and that is 
enough. As for the younger children, we 
shall most likely be rich enough to let them 
go to school or not, as they are a mind to. 
We mean to have them learn to read and 
write, at any rate — they can learn that at 
the district school." 

Here Kate's summons to tea interrupted 
the conversation, and the visitors soon after 
took their leave. 

" How perfectly disgusting Mrs. Smith is 
in her boast of wealth, proprietorship of the 
village, farms, &c," said Mrs. Brown to her 
husband that evening, when they found 
themselves alone. " Mrs. Cleveland is too 
intelligent not to read the character of Mrs. 



40 THE CLEVELANDS. 

Smith at once ; otherwise, she must have 
considered some of her conversation this 
afternoon really insulting." 

" Mrs. Smitli is certainly a weak-minded 
woman," replied Mr. Brown ; " but how do 
you like Mrs. Cleveland ? " 

" She appears like a lovely woman. I 
often thought this afternoon that she might 
prove just the friend I have- so long wished 
for, if she should consider me worthy of her 
friendship." 

" Worthy of her friendship ! If she is 
worthy of yours, she will not consider you 
inferior to herself. Believe me, dear wife, 
this lack of self-esteem causes you many 
unhappy moments. A virtuous, right- 
minded woman, one who tries to perform 
well the duties of a friend, a wife, and a 
mother, is not beneath any of the sex in the 
scale of worth, whatever may be her station 
in life — nor will the truly great, good, and 
lovely, of either sex, consider her so." 

Tears were in the eyes of Mrs. Brown, as 
she replied, " I acknowledge the truth of all 
you have said ; but I can not overcome that 
weakness in my character. Perhaps," she 



NEIGHBORLY CALLS. 41 

added, with a faint smile, " you will think 
me too presuming when I tell you another 
thought I had. Mrs. Cleveland educates her 
own children, and I could not help wishing 
that Clara might be under her care and in- 
struction." 

" It would indeed be very desirable," s aid 
Mr. Brown, " and when you become more 
acquainted with Mrs. Cleveland, you can tell 
how she would receive a proposition to that 
effect." 

In a few weeks Mrs. Cleveland had re- 
ceived visits from most of her neighbors, and 
commenced returning them, taking care to 
visit in the same rotation that she had 
received their attentions, that there might be 
no reason to accuse her of slight or pref- 
erence. Mrs. Smith and Mrs. Brown she 
visited on two succeeding days, the former 
lady first, as she considered her most likely 
to take offense. On her return from Mrs. 
Brown's, she told her little girls she had an 
invitation for them to vitit Mrs. Smith on the 
following day. 

" She has invited quite a party of little 
girls to meet you, and I hope you will re- 
4* 



42 THE CLEVELANDS. 

member to treat them politely. And now," 
continued Mrs. Cleveland, " I have some- 
thing of more importance than our visit to 
communicate. I have promised Mrs. Brown 
to receive her little Clara into our family 
school." 

" 0, we shall be so happy to have a play- 
mate ! " said the delighted Ella, clapping her 
hands. " How old is she, mamma ? " 

" She is about Mary's age, but will class 
with you, Ella. You will see her to-morrow 
at Mrs. Smith's ; but be careful not to show 
her any preference, nor even mention this 
arrangement, unless some one else speaks of 
it first. Now, my daughters, good night; 
for mamma is overtired." 



THE CHILDREN'S PARTY. 43 



CHAPTER VI. 



THE CHILDREN'S PARTY. 

Disgust concealed 
Is ofttimes proof of wisdom, when the fault 
Is obstinate, and cure beyo-id our reach. 

Cowper's Task. 



" Home again, and I am glad of it ! " ex- 
claimed Ella Cleveland, petulantly, as she 
ran into the house the following evening, 
and, throwing her bonnet on the table, flung 
herself into a chair. Mary followed, with a 
frown on her brow, but she was more quiet 
in her indignation. 

" Why, girls, what has happened to dis- 
turb you so ? " said their mother, looking up 
from her sewing. 

" I never want to visit any more country 
girls as long as I live," said Ella, tossing her 
head. " I never saw such an ill-mannered 
set in my life. They have done nothing but 
insult us the whole afternoon." 

" Who were they, and what did they do ? " 
asked Mrs. Cleveland, quietly. 



44 THE CLEVELANDS. 

" There was a daughter of Mr. Johnson, 
who made us the call on Sunday, two daugh- 
ters of Mr. Jones, who lives in the village, 
Clara Brown, Mr. Smith's two girls, and 
ourselves. The rest were all there when we 
came. Mrs. Smith told us to take off our 
bonnets and make ourselves at home, and we 
were left to find out the names of our new 
mates as we could. All the girls had knit- 
ting work, and they were just then very 
industrious. No one spoke to us, but they 
whispered among themselves about city girls, 
idleness — felt above work, &c. Finally 
Mrs. Smith came in, and seeing Mary and me 
look rather sad, I suppose, she proposed that 
we should walktmt to see the village. The 
girls paired off, leaving Mary and me by our- 
selves ; but Clara Brown whispered to Lizzie 
Johnson, and they came and offered to walk 
with us. We found them very pleasant 
girls, and were for a little while .quite happy. 
After we had walked about a while, the Smith 
girls proposed that we should visit the school 
house. When we got into the grove on this 
side, the girls whispered together ; and then, 
as we passed one tree after another, they 



THE CHILDREN'S PARTY. 45 

asked us what sort of wood they were, saying 
we had so much learning we must certainly 
know. When we told them we did not 
know, they laughed as loud as they could, 
and said all that book learning was good for 
was to make folks lazy, and feel above their 
neighbors. We did not say any thing ; but 
when the Jones and Smith girls had gone 
into the school house, we could not keep 
from crying. Clara and Lizzie had not 
laughed with the rest, and when they saw 
how bad we felt, they tried all they could to 
comfort us. Clara said such treatment was 
not right, and she went to the door of the 
school house to talk to the girls. In a mo- 
ment she came running back as pale as 
death. ' O girls,' said she, ' don't you think 
they have got a mock meeting there ; come 
and see for yourselves.' So we all went to 
the door, and sure enough there they were 
all kneeling, and one of them praying in a 
tone of perfect mockery. Pretty soon they 
got up, and one of the girls went behind the 
teacher's desk, and said she was going to 
preach. They asked us to come in and take 
seats, but we were too much shocked with 



46 THE CLEVELANDS. 

their impiety ; so we went back to Mr. 
Smith's as fast as we could. When we 
reached the house, we found tea ready, and 
the other girls coming soon, we took tea, and 
were very glad you told us to return early ; 
so we started for home. Clara whispered, 
as she bade us ' Good by,' that she should 
commence her lessons next week, and Lizzie 
said she should come and .see us very soon. 
The other girls said they would come a piece 
with us. We begged them not to trouble 
themselves ; but come they would, and as it 
was nearer, we took a path across the fields. 
We soon learned the object of their seeming 
kindness ; they would ask about the different 
kinds of grain that we saw growing, and 
when we confessed our ignorance of all 
kinds except corn, they would laugh and 
whisper among themselves. The last field 
we passed through was thickly covered with 
a low plant, bearing very small blue flowers. 
One of the girls asked Mary if she ever saw 
any flax growing. Mary answered, ' No.' 
'Well,' said she, 'this is flax.' 'I think 
not,' replied sister ; ' it grows too near the 
ground.' ' That is because it is young,' was 



THE CHILDREN'S PARTY. 47 

the reply. Bat no sooner had Mary broken 
off some of the plant to examine it, than 
they all burst into a loud, coarse laugh, 
called us ' little fools,' and ran for home. 

" We were glad to escape from our tor- 
mentors, and did not stop till we found our- 
selves in our own yard. Now, mamma," 
continued Ella, " this is a long story, and a 
strange one, too ; but ask Mary if it is not 
strictly true." 

" True ! jes, indeed ; only Ella could not 
tell all the significant looks, the winks, and 
sly whisperings, which are so annoying. 
Now, mamma, after being so treated, don't 
you think it best for us to drop all inter- 
course with those ill-mannered girls ? " 

" You have not been very politely treated, 
it is true, and I do not want you to be inti- 
mate with them ; but I think an occasional 
interchange of visits may be rather beneficial 
to you than otherwise." 

" Why, mamma, how can it be beneficial 
to us ? For you early taught us that evil 
communications corrupt good manners ; that 
a person is known by the company he keeps ; 
how, then, can we be benefited by such 
associates ? " 



48 THE CLEVELA.NDS. 

" Perhaps an explanation of my reasons 
would not be very agreeable, if it involved 
telling my daughters their faults," said Mrs. 
Cleveland, smiling. 

" We must try to correct our faults, if 'tis 
not quite so pleasant ; so please explain, 
mamma," said Mary, after musing a while. 

" We were created social beings," said 
Mrs. Cleveland, " and at the same time an 
all-wise Creator has given to his creatures 
different tastes, modes of thinking, and traits 
of character ; some, if we may so speak, are 
naturally amiable and virtuous ; others seem 
to delight in nothing so much as vice and 
mischief: education and example either 
strengthen or change the natural bent of the 
character. These very girls that have treated 
you so ill have undoubtedly some virtues ; 
indeed, their bad conduct may arise more 
from the want of proper culture than from 
inherent wickedness." 

" But, mamma," asked Ella, " was not 
their mock meeting very wicked — almost 
blasphemous ? " « 

" Yes, it was very wicked," replied her 
mother, " but not so wicked for them as it 
would be for you." 



THE CHILDREN'S PARTY. 49 

" How can that be ? Is not the same act as 
wicked in one person as another ? " 

" You have been taught from your infancy 
to respect religion and religious worship, and 
to speak the name of God reverently. They 
have had no such instruction ; they have 
lived here, at the west, away from Sabbath 
schools and churches, and are alike ignorant 
of the divine precepts and penalties ; and 
the Bible says, ' such shall be beaten with 
few stripes.' And now [ will tell you how I 
think you may be benefited by occasional 
intercourse even with those whose moral 
characters are not what we could wish. You, 
my daughters, have thus far been brought in 
contact' only with the refined and intelligent 
portion of the community ; your morals have 
been carefully guarded, and your young 
minds kept from the influences of bad pre- 
cept or example. While this course has had 
a happy effect in making you love all that is 
lovely, pure, and beautiful in mind as well 
as matter, it has led you into some false 
views of life, which you now have an oppor- 
tunity to correct. You, Mary, are inclined to 
a fastidiousness, a morbid sensibility, which 
5 



50 THE CLEVELANDS. 

would rather bury itself in a cloister than 
come in contact with those whose virtuous 
characters and polished manners do not equal, 
or nearly so, your beau ideal of moral loveli- 
ness. You, Ella, are differently constituted. 
You become indignant, and are inclined to 
treat with contempt all those whom you find 
below your standard of morality ; overlook- 
ing whatever is praisewortliy in their char- 
acter or conduct. Now, my dear girls, I do 
not wish you to be on more than friendly 
terms with those whom you can not respect. 
I neither wish you to imitate their example 
nor copy their manners ; but in this wilder- 
ness, shut out as we are from a choice of 
associates, and living, too, where there are 
no distinctions in society, we must not neg- 
lect the cultivation of the social principle 
implanted in our natures. Situated as we 
are, we must constantly strive to improve 
ourselves, and at the same time exercise 
patience and forbearance toward the failings 
of those around us, remembering that one 
of the best ways to prepare for future useful- 
ness is to learn, while young, to look upon 
human life, not as it might be, but as it 



THE CHILDREN'S PARTY. 51 

really is. We have talked a long while, 
and must now dismiss this subject for the 
present." 

The next afternoon, when Mrs. Cleveland 
and her daughters had taken their sewing, 
Mary resumed the conversation of the pre- 
vious day, by saying, " Ella and I found 
ourselves in quite a dilemma yesterday, mam- 
ma ; and if you are not tired of answering 
questions, we would like to have you solve 
the problem for us." 

" Your mother is never tired of answering 
questions, when her children feel disposed to 
profit by her instructions. So what was your 
dilemma, Mary ? " 

" Why, the girls asked us a great many 
questions about our domestic affairs ; among 
the rest, if we allowed Mike and Kate to eat 
with us when we lived in the city. I told 
them no. And when they wanted to know 
the reason, I said I supposed it was because 
we had such a large family. Then they asked 
us if they ate the same food in the kitchen 
that we did in the dining room ; if they 
ate with us every day now ; if you thought 
your hired help as good as yourself; and so 



52 THE CLEVELANDS. 

many more that I got tired, and told them 
they must excuse us from answering any 
more questions." 

" Inquisitiveness is called a Yankee trait 
of character, and a most disagreeable one it 
is, too," remarked Mrs. Cleveland. " But, 
Mary, you did not give the true reason 
why Mike and Kate used to eat in the 
kitchen; for you recollect "our table was 
large enough to afford room for more than 
our own family." 

" I never thought any thing about it, and 
did not know what to say ; but what was the 
true reason, mamma ? " 

" You have heard the old maxim, ' When 
you are in Rome, you must do as Romans 
do ; ' in other words, it was not customary 
there ; and our faithful Katy would have felt 
quite out of her element to have been obliged 
to come in her kitchen dress, and sit down 
to her meals with the spruce young clerks ; 
nor would Mike have been any more happy 
than she, to come in upon the carpet with 
his clothes soiled and shoes dusty. Then 
there were the chambermaid and errand boy ; 
how embarrassed and awkward they would 



THE CHILDREN'S PARTY. 53 

have appeared in such a position ! All of them 
would have felt that a crust of bread and a 
glass of water by themselves were preferable 
to the most sumptuous repast under such 
circumstances. Their food was always the 
same as ours ; and in giving them a sepa- 
rate table, we conferred a favor, rather than 
obliged them to submit to a degradation. 
Here the manners and customs are altogether 
different. All labor, all dress nearly alike, 
and the distinctions which there existed, and 
which were undoubtedly for the happiness 
of each class, are here unknown ; and it 
would be both impolitic and ungenerous to 
attempt their introduction. As to thinking 
my domestics as good as myself, the Bible 
says, that 'God made of one blood all the 
nations of men that dwell on the face of the 
earth.' Besides, I am too much of a repub- 
lican to believe in any other distinctions than 
those that naturally arise between the virtu- 
ous and vicious, the educated and unedu- 
cated, and those of different tastes and habits. 
These distinctions are not incompatible with 
Christianity ; and being productive of the 
greatest amount of happiness to all con- 
5* 



54 THE CLEVELANDS. 

cerned, can not be wrong. Is your problem 
solved, Mary? " 

" Thank you, mamma, it is, satisfactorily. 
But, now, one more question. Mrs. Smith's 
daughters boasted a great deal about their 
father's riches, saying he was proprietor of 
the village, owning all except the few lots 
already built upon, had a number of farms, 
&c. Do you know whether. Mr. Smith is 
wealthy or not? " 

" I asked your father the same question, 
after I visited there," replied Mrs. Cleve- 
land, " and he said that Mr. Smith came here 
seven or eight years ago, and located enough 
land in . the vicinity for four or five good 
farms, any of which, near a market, would 
have been valuable. But here, though good 
land and well situated, they are much less 
so. A part of the one on which he lives he 
laid out in village lots ; on the others he 
placed tenants. By tavern-keeping,, petty 
speculating, &c, he has probably become 
worth five or six thousand dollars — quite a 
fortune here, and one which himself and 
family deem inexhaustible; but his neigh- 
bors begin to fear that his rum-drinking 



SHALL WE HAVE A SABBATH SCHOOL? 55 

propensity, his wife's slatternly mode of 
housekeeping, — though she is a hard-work- 
ing woman, — and the habits of idleness and 
ignorance in which they are training their 
children, will reduce them to poverty, if not 
to pauperism. You can see, my dear chil- 
dren, in the case of this family, — acknowl- 
edged by all to be the most wealthy in 
the vicinity, — how little of true respect the 
possession of wealth will command, un- 
less accompanied by intelligence and moral 
worth." 



CHAPTER VII. 

SHALL WE HAVE A SABBATH SCHOOL ? 

Are there for feeble lambs 
No shepherds ? None to guide to living waters — 
To break the bread of life to those that hunger, 
Or pour the oil of joy into the stricken heart — 
To touch the springs of feeling, and gently lead 
The trembling penitent to Mercy's fount ? 

E. M. S. 

What can be done for the religious welfare 
of this community ? was a question which 



56 THE CLEVELANDS. 

often arose in the minds of Mr. and Mrs. 
Cleveland, especially on the Sabbath. Very 
seldom was there preaching of any kind, and 
when a minister of the gospel did visit the 
place, there was so much irreverence man- 
ifested by a large share of the audience, that 
no good effect seemed to be produced. 

Yet these occasional Sabbath services were 
the means of bringing the "people together 
for miles around, and the Clevelands were 
much gratified to find that a number of the 
families were refined, intelligent, and ed- 
ucated people, driven west by the same com- 
mercial misfortunes which had affected them- 
selves ; but alas ! all were destitute of the 
pearl of great price — the only enduring 
riches. 

In the village, Mr. and Mrs. Brown were 
the only professing Christians, and the two 
families soon became much attached to each 
other. 

"We are alone," said Mr. Cleveland one 
day while conversing with Mr. Brown ; " we 
are the only representatives of our Master ; 
are we doing all we can for this perishing 
people ? " 



SHALL WE HAVE A SABBATH SCHOOL? 57 

" I wish we might establish a Sabbath 
school. I can not think of any thing else 
that we could do," replied Mr. Brown. 

" Mrs. Cleveland and I have often spoken 
of the same thing," said Mr. Cleveland ; 
" suppose we make the attempt. Your wife 
would be a teacher ; would she not ? " 

" Yes, gladly ; she has longed for some 
work to do for, Christ ever since we came 
here." 

" And she has done good service in the 
quiet influence of a holy life," remarked Mr. 
Cleveland. 

" Yes, you can not imagine what a bless- 
ing she has been to me ; I fear I should have 
wandered far away but for her," said Mr. 
Brown, with much feeling. " Yet my wife 
says a Christian's duties extend beyond her 
own family circle, and I believe she is right." 

" Certainly she is," replied Mr. Cleveland, 
" and it becomes us all to ask ourselves why 
Providence has placed us in this community, 
and to inquire of the Lord what he will 
have us to do. We may as well talk a little 
about that Sabbath school now as any time, 
if you are at leisure." 



58 THE CLEVELANDS. 

" Yes, I can spare an hour as well as not, 
and the sooner the work is commenced the 
better.'' 

" It seems to me that all we have to do is 
to give out notice in the district school that a 
Sabbath school will be commenced next Sab- 
bath," said Mr. Cleveland. " We will talk 
about the advantages of such a school with 
all we happen to meet duriiTg the week, then 
come together on the Sabbath, and organize 
the school with such materials as Providence 
may send. We shall meet with some oppo- 
sition, I presume, but I do not apprehend 
any thing serious ; do you ? " 

" There may be some difficulty in obtain- 
ing the use of the school house," replied 
Mr. Brown. 

" You are one of the directors, are you 
not ? " asked Mr. Cleveland, with surprise. 

" Yes, but Mr. Smith and Mr. Johnson 
are the other two, and they are not very 
favorable to any religious movement," said 
Mr. Brown. " Besides, Mr. and Mrs. Smith 
are not pleased because Clara takes lessons 
with your children," he added, hesitatingly. 

" Will it not be best for me to go and see 



SHALL WE HAVE A SABBATH SCHOOL? 59 

the other directors before we do any thing 
more?" asked Mr. Cleveland. "I suppose 
you are willing we should occupy the school 
house," he added, laughing. 

" Yes, I believe so," replied Mr. Brown. 

" I have a little leisure to-day," said Mr. 
Cleveland, "and will go and see them at 
once, and report to you on my return." 




" Good morning, Mr. Smith ; a very fine 
morning, sir," said Mr. Cleveland, stepping 
up to a railing in one corner of the bar 
room, behind which Mr. Smith was perform- 
ing the duties of postmaster. 



60 THE CLEVELANDS. 

" Good morning, sir, good morning ; glad 
you've come ; here's two letters and a heap 
of papers for you," said Mr. Smith. " Guess 
if you should move out of town we should 
have to shut up the post office ; " and he 
laughed uproariously at his attempt at witty 
compliment. 

" Oh, not quite so bad as that," said Mr. 
Cleveland, smiling. " I haye a little busi- 
ness with you as soon as you are at liberty," 
he added. 

" I believe I am through now till some one 
else comes in," said Mr. Smith, turning 
around from the row of shelves filled with 
letters and papers, and leaning lazily against 
the railing. 

" I came to inquire if you have any objec- 
tion to the school house being occupied two 
hours every Sabbath by a Sabbath school ? " 
asked Mr. Cleveland. 

" I don't suppose the young ones would 
hurt the school house any, but seems to me 
five days and a half is quite as much time as 
children ought to he kept in school, and I 
should think the teacher would want to rest 
over Sunday, too," said Mr. Smith. 



SHALL WE HAVE A SABBATH SCHOOL? 61 

" Oh, you know a Sabbath school is ex- 
pressly for studying the Bible, and any one 
who lores that holy book can be a teacher. 
I suppose you were accustomed to Sabbath 
schools when you lived at the east," said Mr. 
Cleveland. 

" No ; I have always lived in a new coun- 
try — was born in the Genesee Valley when 
it was all woods, and came here as soon as 
the land was for sale ; so, you see, I don't 
know much about religion, and all those 
new-fangled notions." 

" I think you would like to have your 
children attend the Sabbath school," said 
Mr. Cleveland, " and you would look in upon 
us occasionally." 

" Well, I don't know ; I shouldn't like to 
give my consent to have the school house 
used unless I knew who would be the teach- 
ers*, and what they would charge." 

" I shall be one of the teachers, and Mrs. 
Cleveland another, and we hope a number 
of others will volunteer ; perhaps you would 
be one," said Mr. Cleveland. " As for the 
price, we do not want any pay ; it will be a 
6 



62 THE CLEVELANDS. 

great privilege to teach the dear children the 
way to heaven." 

" I guess I wouldn't do for a teacher, 
then," remarked Mr. Smith, "for I don't 
know tire way myself; but, as you say, 
I would like to have my children learn ; so 
you may have the school house, for what I 
care. I suppose you've got Brown's consent ; 
he's a wonderful pious man, you know." 

" Yes, and I hope he will be one of the 
teachers ; you consider him a Christian, do 
you not ? " asked Mr. Cleveland, a little 
anxiously. 

" Oh, yes, I guess so ; though I never could 
Understand how he should be so quiet and 
submissive, I believe you call it, when little 
Annie died ; I should have raved like a 
madman. She was the sweetest little thing 
I ever saw ; they hadn't been here more than 
three months when she died." 

" That is just what religion is good for," 
said Mr. Cleveland ; " it helps us to bear 
every affliction patiently, knowing that ' our 
Father doeth all things well.' " 

" I don't know any thing about it, but you 
can have the school house," said Mr. Smith. 



SHALL WE HAVE A SABBATH SCHOOL? 63 

" Good morning, Mr. Simpson ; glad to see 
you." And Mr. Smith went behind the bar 
to wait on a rum customer with the air of 
a man glad to be released from an unpleas- 
ant position. 

" I think I will go right down and see Mr. 
Johnson," said Mr. Cleveland. " Good 
morning." 

" Good morning, sir, good morning," 
replied Mr. Smith, rubbing his hands and 
nodding. 

Mr. Johnson's farm was a mile from the 
village, and the sun was becoming uncom- 
fortably warm, — for it was now ten o'clock 
in the morning of a sultry day in July, — and 
Mr. Cleveland felt the depressing effect both 
of the weather and the interview. " Desola- 
tion, desolation ! " he exclaimed, as he turned 
away from the door of that miserable tavern ; 
" to think of bringing up my children amid 
such influences ! " and for a moment the 
earthly father's heart rebelled against that 
heavenly Father whose providence had 
placed them there. 'Twas but for a mo- 
ment. " Oh, forgive me, for I have sinned, 
and help me to say, ' Even so, Father, for so 



64 THE CLEVELANDS. 

it seemeth good in thy sight,' " was the sweet 
outbreathing of an obedient spirit ; and all 
again was peace. 

Most of the way lay through a dense for- 
est, with only a wagon track marked out by 
blazed trees, and the cool shade of the thick 
canopy of green above him was very grateful. 
The morning song of the birds had ceased, 
but they flitted hither and thither among the 
green boughs, and he heard now and then a 
loving twitter over some late nest of fledg- 
lings. Nimble squirrels ran up the trunks 
of the trees, or chattered saucily from the 
overhanging boughs, and the timid rabbit 
leaped nervously away from the approaching 
footsteps. All nature was in the maturity 
of its summer glory, and Mr. Cleveland soon 
found his own spirit attuned to the harmony 
of nature. " O Lord, I will not distrust 
thee," he exclaimed ; " hast thou not said, 
' The wilderness and the solitary place shall 
be glad for them, and the desert shall rejoice 
and blossom as the rose ? ' Surely, I came 
here because thou hast a work for me to do ; 
give me grace to do thy holy will." 

Mr. Johnson's house and farm had an 



SHALL WE HA YE A SABBATH SCHOOL? 65 

appearance of greater thrift and comfort 
than Mr. Cleveland had expected ; the fences 
were in good repair, and he noticed with 
peculiar pleasure that shade trees had been 
left standing ; in the front yard and along 
the path to the gate were well-kept beds of 
flowers. Near the house, on the right, a 
small orchard waved its young boughs cheer- 
ily, and on the left a field of wheat, almost 
ready for the harvest, nodded in golden 
glory. Further in the distance, fields of corn 
and potatoes looked green and promising. 
Opening the rnde gate, he slowly approached 
the house, vainly scanning the fields, to dis- 
cover their owner. All was still ; the chil- 
dren, he knew, were at school, and doubtless 
Mrs. Johnson was busy with her domestic 
affairs. He reached the house, and rapped 
on the open door. 

" Come in," said a feeble voice. 

Mr. Cleveland entered, and was surprised 
to see Mr. Johnson attempting to rise from a 
bed which stood in one corner of the room. 

" Oh, good morning, Mr. Cleveland," said 
he ; "I am glad to see you ; walk in, and 
help yourself to a chair." 
6* 



66 THE CLEVELAND3. 

" Why, I am surprised to find you sick," 
exclaimed Mr. Cleveland, stepping forward 
and shaking hands with the sick man. 

" Only the ague, I think," said Mr. John- 
son, " but it affects me worse than it ever 
did before ; I have been sick only a few days, 
yet I am very weak ; " and he sank back on 
his pillow. 

" Only the ague ! " repeated Mr. Cleve- 
land ; " what would you have worse ? I 
think it one of the worst diseases I ever saw, 
though I never suffered from it." 

" Yes, it is bad enough, but you know it 
don't kill people ; so a man never gets pitied 
if he has it ever so hard." 

" The rest of your family are all well, 
I hope." 

" Yes, quite well, I thank you." 

Mrs. Johnson now came in, and was in- 
troduced to Mr. Cleveland. Her manners 
were quiet and pleasing, very unlike those 
of Mrs. Smith, with whom Mr. Cleveland 
had unconsciously associated her. After a 
few minutes spent in conversation, Mrs. 
Johnson withdrew to attend to her household 
duties. 



SHALL WE HAVE A SABBATH SCHOOL? 67 

" I have called on two of the directors to 
got their permission to open a Sabbath school 
in the school house, and came to get your 
consent also," said Mr. Cleveland. 

" I shall be very glad to have a Sabbath 
school established ; my poor children are 
growing up. like the heathen," said Mr. 
Johnson, with emotion. 

" Will you not help us in the good work 
when you get well ? " asked Mr. Cleveland. 

"I — I help you? Why, Mr. Cleveland, 
don't you know I am a wicked man ? I 
don't know the way myself; how then can I 
teach others ? " 

"First learn the way yourself. Do you 
not feel the need of an all-sympathizing 
Friend, now in your illness ? " asked Mr. 
Cleveland. 

" Yes, indeed," replied Mr. Johnson ; 
" the subject has scarcely been out of my 
mind since I called at your house that first 
Sabbath after you came, and I have not pat- 
ronized Mr. Smith's tavern since. I have 
longed to come and tell you my feelings, but 
could not muster the courage. I want to 
become a Christian, but do not quite under- 
stand what I am to do." 



68 THE CLEVELANDS. 

" The gospel plan is so simple that we can 
scarcely believe it," remarked Mr. Cleveland. 
" Repentance toward God, and faith in our 
Lord Jesus Christ, are the only conditions of 
our pardon and acceptance with him." 

" I know it all seems very simple, but 
after all I can't quite understand it," said 
Mr. Johnson, with a sigh. 

" Perhaps I can help your-some," said Mr. 
Cleveland, tenderly, for he knew how thick 
seems the spiritual darkness when the 
soul first begins to feel its necessities. " Re- 
pent; be sorry, really sorry that you have 
sinned, and resolve, with God's help, to for- 
sake all your sinful course, and live a life of 
obedience to the precepts of the gospel. 
Believe that Jesus died to save you, not only 
from the penalty of God's broken law, but 
from your own sinful self, and that he is will- 
ing and waiting to adopt you into his family, 
and finally to give you a crown of glory in 
heaven." 

" But must not I pray a great deal, and 
read the Bible, and do all I can to make 
myself better, before I believe ? " asked Mr. 
Johnson. 



SHALL WE HAVE A SABBATH SCHOOL? 69 

" No ; you must believe now, at once ; 
give yourself right up to him, sins and all, 
just as you are, and let Christ forgive you 
and save you. You can not make yourself 
any better — you do not feel that you are 
any better than you were when you first 
began to think of this subject; do you? 
And yet I presume you have read the Bible, 
and prayed a great deal ; have you not ? " 

" Yes, I have read, and prayed, and 
thought, till I have been almost discouraged, 
for I seem to be growing worse and worse, 
more and more wicked every day," said Mr. 
Johnson, with a sigh. 

" Then you feel more and more the need 
of one who will redeem you from all this 
sin and wretchedness," said Mr. Cleveland. 
" Jesus came to save sinners — not the right- 
eous. Can you not give yourself up to him 
to be saved in his own way ? " 

" I will try. Will you pray with me, Mr. 
Cleveland ? " asked Mr. Johnson, in an im- 
ploring tone. 

" Gladly," was the reply ; and Mr. Cleve- 
land knelt by the sick man's bedside, and 
poured out his soul in prayer for the con- 



70 THE CLEVELANDS. 

version of the soul, and for the speedy re- 
covery of the bodily health. 

" Amen ! " was the heartfelt response of 
the sick man, when the prayer was ended. 

" I have made you a long visit," said Mr. 
Cleveland, after a few minutes' conversation ; 
" let me beg you to adopt the language of 
these beautiful lines as your own resolve : — 

1 Just as I am, without one plea 
But that thy blood was shed for me, 
And that thou bidd'st me come to thee, 
O Lamb of God, I come ! ' " 

• Just as I am, and waiting not 
To rid my soul from one dark blot, 
To thee, whose blood can cleanse each spot, 
O Lamb of God, I come ! ' " 

" I am so thankful you came ! " said Mr. 
Johnson, grasping Mr. Cleveland's hand : " a 
kind Providence sent you, I am sure." 

" Not a sparrow falls to the ground with- 
out his notice ; and will he not direct us, if 
we only submit ourselves to his guidance ? " 
said Mr. Cleveland. " Give yourself en- 
tirely into his hands ; trust him fully ; ' only 
believe.' " 



THE SABBATH SCHOOL BEGUN. 71 

With a light step, and a heart full of 
prayer and praise, did Mr. Cleveland wend 
his way homeward. He had caught a glimpse 
of the loving Father's purpose in bringing 
him hither. Oh, if he might be the means of 
leading souls to Jesus ! With tearful eyes 
he related to Mr. Brown the success of his 
interviews, and with warmly-clasped hands, 
they mutually pledged themselves to prayer 
and unwearied effort for the salvation of the 
community in which God had placed them. 



CHAPTER Vm. 

THE SABBATH SCHOOL BEGUN. 

See those who are by grace made free 

Bend o'er each class with soul-lit eye, 
Point to the Lamb of Calvary, 

And speak of hopes which cannot die ; 
While answering look and heaving breast 
Assert the truth received with zest. 

E. M. S. 

The news that there was to be a Sabbath 
school organized the next Sabbath had been 
most industriously circulated by the children, 



72 THE CLEVELANDS. 

and variously discussed by their elders, dur- 
ing the week ; and when Saturday night 
came, many bright eyes were scanning the 
sky for weather-signs for the morrow. 

Sunday morning dawned at last, bright and 
beautiful. As there was to be no preaching, 
the Sabbath school meeting had been ap- 
pointed at the usual hour of morning service. 
Long before the time, parents, with children 
of all ages, from overgrown school girls, 
and great, awkward boys, to " toddling wee 
things," — for it had gone forth that there 
would be an infant class, — were seen emer- 
ging from the forest in every direction ; and 
when the Cleveland family arrived, prompt 
to the hour, they found the rather capacious 
log school house well filled. 

Mr. Brown rose, and stated the object for 
which they were assembled, and called on 
Mr. Cleveland to conduct the exercises as he 
thought proper. 

Mr. Cleveland took a Bible from his pock- 
et, and read the Saviour's invitation to little 
children. He then asked the children if any 
of them could sing " Happy Land." Half a 
dozen little hands were raised, and with the 



THE SABBATH SCHOOL BEGUN. 73 

aid of a few Sabbath school hymn books, the 
song which every child loves was very well 
sung. In simple and appropriate language, 
Mr. Cleveland then besought the divine 
blessing on this attempt to serve Him, and 
most fervently did he implore the descent of 
the Holy Spirit, with its reviving influences 
and converting power. He then gave a brief 
history of the rise, progress, and design of 
Sabbath schools, and closed by asking the 
question, " Shall we to-day organize a Sab- 
bath school, and will we mutually agree to 
help sustain it and give it interest? " Call- 
ing for free remarks from all present, he 
then took his seat. 

A few expressed their gratification that 
their children would again enjoy the privi- 
lege of religious instruction, and a total 
silence ensued. 

Close by the door sat Mr. Smith. At 
length he arose, and, wiping his forehead 
with a large red bandana, said he had no 
objections to the school, if it would pay its 
own way. " For my part," said he, " I 
think the day school is enough; and I am 
sure the school taxes are high enough. 
7 



74 * THE CLEVELANDS. 

I know the teachers are not paid, and we 
give the use of the school house ; but there 
must be some expense somewhere. Now I 
should like to know just what it is, before I 
vote for the school." 

" I am very glad you mentioned the sub- 
ject," said Mr. Cleveland; "and I should be 
happy to tell you beforehand all I know of 
the matter. To have a first-rate school, we 
shall need a Sabbath school library, costing 
seven or ten dollars, and Testaments and 
singing books, costing about seven more ; 
then every year we shall need about five 
dollars' worth of new books, to keep up the 
interest of the children. If we continue the 
school during the winter, it will take one or 
two loads of wood. I do not know of any 
other expense." 

" Well, I should think that was enough. 
Fourteen dollars, at least, to begin with. I 
wonder who has that amount of money to 
give! I'm sure I have not;" and, seizing 
his hat, he pushed it down over his eyes, 
and walked out. 

" The difficulty of raising money is obvi- 
ated for the present, at least," said Mr. 



THE SABBATH SCHOOL BEGUN. 75 

Cleveland, addressing the audience. " The 
Sabbath school with which I was connected 
in New York gave me a complete library, 
to be used in the village where I should 
reside ; and I hope by next year we shall 
love the Sabbath school so well, that its 
necessary expenses will seem rather a pleas- 
ure than a burden. The children are getting 
restless. Shall we try that same song again, 
children ? " 

There was a fine show of little hands, and 
" Happy Land" was sung with greatly in- 
creased zest. 

" Shall we now take a vote on the organi- 
zation of the school ? " asked Mr. Cleveland. 
A motion was made by Mr. Brown, that a 
Sabbath school be organized and sustained. 
The motion was supported by Mr. Dascomb, 
a new settler, who lived about two miles dis- 
tant, and the affirmative vote was unanimous. 
Mr. Cleveland was then elected superintend- 
ent, Mr. Brown assistant, and Mr. Dascomb 
librarian. 

Mr. Cleveland briefly thanked his neigh- 
bors for the honor conferred, and pledged 
himself, by divine assistance, to be faithful 
to the spiritual interests of their children. 



76 THE CLEVELANDS. 

With Mr. Brown's assistance, he then pro- 
ceeded to classify the scholars. This portion 
of the work was soon accomplished. Teach- 
ers were provided as far as they could be 
obtained; Mrs. Cleveland being duly installed 
over the infant class, whose long, low seat 
was placed across the capacious fireplace ; 
and more than one little face was upturned 
to catch a glimpse of the blue sky through 
the broad top of the stick chimney. 

The lesson for the next Sabbath was given 
out, and the teachers spent a little time in 
hearing their classes read, making such 
changes in the first arrangement as seemed 
necessary, and explaining the lesson as an 
assistance to the undisciplined minds of the 
little ones. Mrs. Cleveland chatted pleas- 
antly with her little flock, and completely 
won their hearts by telling of the dear Sa- 
viour's love for little children. 

The school was then closed by singing a 
doxology, and the assembly quietly dis- 
persed. 

" Now, if we could only have a prayer 
meeting, to ask the blessing of God upon 
these efforts, I should feel that we were really 



THE SABBATH SCHOOL BEGUN. 77 

getting into something like working order," 
said Mr. Cleveland, as he and Mr. Brown 
were slowly walking homeward. 

" I wish your family would come to my 
house at five o'clock this evening," said Mr. 
Brown ; "we might have a meeting large 
enough to claim the promise." 

"Thank you; we will if Mrs. Cleveland 
is not too much fatigued. I was quite sur- 
prised to meet with so little opposition to-day. 
Didn't you expect more ? " 

" Yes ; but the greatest trial-time has not 
yet come," was the reply. "When the nov- 
elty wears off, there will probably be a re- 
action." 

" Unless, by the blessing of God, some of 
these hearts should become enlisted in his 
service. Oh, let us pray earnestly for this," 
said Mr. Cleveland, with emotion. 

" We will ! " was the earnest response ; and 
these two laborers, to whom God had given 
this great field of missionary effort, sought 
each his home and his closet. 
7* 



78 THE CLEVELANDS. 

CHAPTER IX. 

THE PRAYER MEETING. 

Still on beyond time's utmost bounds 
Around the throne of God in heaven 

Their reunited praise resounds 
For grace received and sins forgiven ; 

And 'mong the gifts of priceless worth 

Was named the Sabbath school on earth. 

E. M. S. 

" Mother, mother ! I guess we can have a 
Sabbath school, if we do live in the woods," 
said little Lottie Dascomb, clapping her 
hands joyfully, as she ran into the house. 

" Gently, gently, my child you will wake 
the baby," said her mother, smiling at the 
child's enthusiasm. " Put away your bon- 
net, my dear, and then come and tell me all 
about the new school." The delighted child 
skipped away, and the mother was soon 
listening to a minute account of the whole 
meeting. " And father was chosen libra- 
rian. What is a librarian, mother?" asked 
Lottie, with a puzzled look. 

" A librarian is one who takes care of the 



THE PRAYER MEETING. 79 

books, and gives them out to the children," 
replied her mother. 

" But he does not give them to us to keep ; 
does he, mother ? " 

" No ; he numbers them all ; then, when 
you take one, he writes down the number 
opposite your name, and when you bring 
that one back he crosses off that number, 
and puts down the number of the new book 
which you take. Do you understand it ? " 

" Oh, yes," said Lottie. " I am so glad we 
have a Sabbath school! 1 guess I shall not 
grow up a heathen, i£ I do live at the west. 
Cousin Lucy said I would." 

" I hope not," replied her mother, smiling. 

Mr. Cleveland's children were almost as 
enthusiastic as little .Lottie, and their tongues 
ran merrily for a time. 

" Mamma, I think you had more than your 
share of scholars to-day," said Ella ; " and 
they were not all quite of an age, either." 

" Not very much difference in age, I think," 
said Mrs. Cleveland ; " and you know the 
infant class should be large. I thought there 
were quite too few." 

" Ella refers to that long seat full of 



80 THE CLEVELANDS. 

young men, who sat right behind you, and 
would not join any class," said Mary. 

" They were very attentive listeners," re- 
marked Mr. Cleveland ; " and if they will 
come even to hear what you and others say, 
it may do them good." 

" Certainly," said Mrs. Cleveland ; " but I 
should have been embarrassed if I had known 
they were there. However, I will try to be 
prepared for it now. Having the children 
sit in the fireplace is a nice arrangement for 
me," she added ; " I am not compelled to 
face the audience." 

" But it is so funny to see the children 
looking up the chimney! " said Ella. 

" Mr. Brown invited us to come to his 
house this afternoon for a little prayer meet- 
ing. Shall we go ? " said Mr. Cleveland, 
addressing his wife. 

" Oh, yes ; I should like it very much," 
was her reply, in a glad tone. 

" May we go, too, papa ? " asked Mary. 

'* Yes, as many of you as wish," said her 
father. 

That afternoon a prayer meeting was es- 
tablished in Smithton. 



THE PRAYER MEETING. 81 

" father, father ! I wish you and moth- 
er had been at the Sabbath school to-day, we 
had such a nice time," said Fannie Johnson, 
a child five years old, as she threw her weary 
little self into a chair, and leaned her head 
down on the side of the bed. 

Mr. Johnson passed his hand caressingly 
over the little head wet with perspiration. 
" Did you have a pleasant time, too, Lizzie ? " 
said he, addressing his oldest daughter. • 

" Yes, father ; and I hope you and mother 
will both be able to go next Sabbath. I 
think you will like it." 

" Who is your teacher, little puss ? " asked 
the father, patting Fannie's head. 

"Mrs. Cleveland," replied the child; "and, 
O father," she exclaimed, starting up, "she 
told us such a pretty story about Jesus! She 
said he loved little children, and even wicked 
men and women, so well, that he came clear 
down from heaven to die for them, so that 
they could go to heaven and live with him 
for ever. And now, she said, any body who 
would only love the dear Saviour, would 
certainly go to heaven ; children, too ! just 
think of it ! Did you know that, father ? " 



82 THE CLEVELANDS. 

' ; Yes, my child ; I was told that when I 
was a very little boy." 

" But you never told me, father." 
" No, my child, and I am very sorry." 
" Do you love that dear Jesus, father ? " 
" I hope I do, my daughter," said Mr. 
Johnson, with emotion. " I have only just 
begun to love him, and I want so much to 
get well, and then we can all read the 
•Bible and pray together, morning and night. 
Would you like that, Fannie ? " 

" Yes, indeed ! and I guess mother would 
like it, too. Wouldn't you, mother ? " 

" Certainly, I should have no objections," 
replied Mrs. Johnson, coldly. Rising im- 
mediately, she passed into the kitchen to 
prepare a lunch for the tired children. 

Poor Mr. Johnson ! This was the first time 
he had dared to confess his love for the Sa- 
viour. It had been a great cross ; and now, 
she, who, of all others, he thought would 
rejoice most, had chilled him to the soul. 
Why was this ? She was a professing Chris- 
tian when he married her. Had she learned 
the fallacy of her own hopes, and so felt 
saddened that he had fallen into the same 



THE PRAYER MEETING. 83 

snare ? His nerves were weakened by sick- 
ness, and this sudden reaction was too much ; 
the tears rolled down his cheeks, and his 
breast heaved with emotion. 

" Don't cry, father ; " whispered little Fan- 
nie, wiping away his tears with her apron. 
" It isn't wrong to love Jesus. I wish I loved 
him, too. Will he really help me to love him, 
if I ask him, as Mrs. Cleveland said ? " 

" Yes, darling. Now run away a little 
while, and let father think." 

" And pray in your heart, too, I guess." 
And the little one kissed him, and quietly 
slid down, and ran out into the yard. 

Mrs. Johnson's mind was in a perfect 
tumult. Her husband converted while she 
had been a wanderer ; scarcely praying, even 
in form, either for him or for herself. He 
was a Christian. Was she one ? Dared she 
hope, when she had so sadly neglected a 
wife's holiest duty? She could not weep; 
she dared not pray ; and, calling her children 
to their lunch, she was just passing out of 
the door to get away from human sight for 
a time, when she heard her husband call- 
ing her. 



84 THE CLEVELANDS. 

" I think Mr. Cleveland's visit was greatly 
blessed to me. Will you forgive me for not 
telling you sooner?" said Mr. Johnson, as his 
wife approached the bed-side. " You are 
glad I love the Saviour; are you not ? " 

" Yes. But, James, I need to ask your 
forgiveness and the forgiveness of my Father 
in heaven," exclaimed Mrs. Johnson, burst- 
ing into tears ; " I have been so unfaithful 
as a professedly Christian wife and mother." 

" You had no one to help you along, dear 
wife, and it is very hard for a loving woman 
to go on alone ; rather a dangerous experi- 
ment to marry an irreligious man, as you 
did ; but I will try to help you now ; and 
He who has so freely pardoned me will also 
forgive you, and bless us both in his service, 
I trust." 

The children now came running in ; and, 
with a significant look, Mrs. Johnson rose 
and left the room. 

When she returned, an hour later, her 
face bespoke that peace which the world can 
not give, and the last rays of the Sabbath 
sun rested on no happier earthly abodo than 
that rude forest home. 



FRUITS. 85 



CHAPTER X. 

FRUITS. 

Still on it creeps, 
Each little moment at another's heels, 
Till hours, days, years, and ages are made up 
Of such small parts as these, and men look back 
Worn and bewildered, wondering- how it is. 

Joanna Baillik's Rayneb. 

We will pass over an interval of ten years, 
equal in the growth of western cities and 
villages to a century of olden time. 

Smithton is now a large, populous town, 
with no other marks of its identity than are 
to be found in the older, yet familiar faces 
of its early inhabitants. 

The clatter of machinery, the hum of 
many mills, the thronging teams, and the 
ringing tread of rapid footsteps assure you 
of its business prosperity ; while that large, 
well-built Union school house, and those four 
commodious churches, show that the mental 
and moral wants of the community are by 
no means overlooked. 
8 



86 THE CLEVELANDS. 

Our old friends are all here — all, save the 
proprietor of the village, poor Mr. Smith. 
For a few years he annoyed by his petty per- 
secutions those who sought to promote the 
best interests of himself and his children, 
his course constantly tending more and more 
rapidly downward, till at last he sank, past 
recovery, into the pit he had digged for the 
unwary ; a few days he raved in wild de- 
lirium, and passed into a hopeless eternity, 
another victim to rum. His children grew 
up miserable spendthrifts, and all that pa- 
ternal inheritance, which seemed so inex- 
haustible, now has other ownership, and they 
are thriftless leeches on an industrious com- 
munity. 

That first Sabbath school passed success- 
fully through the trials and vicissitudes of 
the first winter, and has never for one Sab- 
bath been omitted. And that little prayer 
meeting in Mr. Brown's parlor became the 
birthplace of many precious souls. They 
assemble in the church now, and Mr. John- 
son's voice is often heard in prayer and ex- 
hortation. Lottie Dascom's father is one of 
the deacons, and she has consecrated her 



FRUITS. 87 

young, beautiful life to the service of her 
Redeemer. 

Our first friends, the Clevelands, are pros- 
perous and happy ; all their children are 
gathered into the visible church, and re- 
joicingly the parents are laboring on in the 
service of Him who has signally proved him- 
self a covenant-keeping God. 

The broad and beautiful west, with all its 
moral desolations, is the subject of much 
prayerful thought to their oldest son, George, 
and the parents fondly hope he may be a 
chosen laborer in this part of the Saviour's 
promised inheritance. For here, as every 
where, — 

*' The harvest dawn is near, 
The year delays not long, 
And he who sows with many a tear 
Shall reap with many a song. 

M Sad to his toil he goes, 

His seed with weeping leaves ; 
But he shall come at twilight's close, 
And bring his golden sheaves." 



UCSB LIBRARY 



■unSSU95 M *i«Miiv 




A 000 667 766 



