lus:^: 






iii 






si>mm 





ss E^o l 



Book ■ C (^ 



THE 



COLOR-BEAEER 



FRANCIS A. CLARY. 




PUBLISHED BY THE 
AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

150 NASSAU-STREET, NEW YORK. 



■ C (^'l 



Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1864, by the 
American Tract Society, in the Clerk's Oflace of the District Court 
of the United States for the Southern District of Ne'v York. 






CONTENTS 



CHAPTER I. 
Earliest Years - - 5 

CHAPTEE n. 
Plans for Enlistment - 10 

CHAPTER m. 
Leaving Home 22 

CHAPTER IV. 
In Camp - - 28 

CHAPTER V. 
Sailing Southward 37 

CHAPTER VL 

At New Orleans - 43 

CHAPTER Vn. 
At Fort Jackson 54, 

CHAPTER Yin. 
Days of Usefulness 70 



4 CONTENTS. 

CHAPTEE IX. 
The Colors Besigned 79 

CHAPTER X. 
Tributes to the Soldier and the Christian 91 

CHAPTER XL 
Conclusion — - - -- 101 



THE COLOR-BEARER 



CHAPTEK I 



EARLIEST YEARS. 



Francis Amsden Clary, son of Deacon John 
Clary, was born at Conway, Mass., Aug. 19, 

isse". 

His mother died when he was but two 
weeks old, leaving the request that her babe 
should be "trained up for God," that he 
should become " a preacher and a mission- 
ary to China." Truth-loving and conscien- 
tious, he grew up under the influence of a 
quiet country life, beautiful scenery, and a 
religious home; and so situated, it does not 
seem strange that he early understood and 
accepted the responsibilities of a Christian. 

At the age of twelve, it seemed to himself 
and to others that he had yielded heart and 
life to the control of the Holy Spirit, and he 



6 THE COLOR-BEABER. 

became at that time a member of the cliiirch 
in his native village. 

When the disclosure of his mother's con- 
secration was made to him, the fervor of re- 
hgions impulse seemed deepened within him, 
and his earnestness increased, to become wor- 
thy of such a mother and such a consecration. 

He adopted that wish as the settled pur- 
pose of his heart, a purpose that never wa- 
vered until his country's call grew more im- 
perative than that of China : then the same 
heroic determination which had given him 
his first strong and clearly defined motive 
took a new form; the same martyr spirit that 
impelled him to lay down his hfe for the 
needs of a distant nation, led him to sacrifice 
it for the maintenance of his own. 

Until the age of nineteen he remained at 
home, working upon his father's farm. 

He then went through a course of study 
at the Westfield Normal school, and after a 
brief interval of teaching, studied two years 
at Meriden, N. H., in preparation for entering 
college. He was enthusiastic in the pursuit 
of knowledge, as bearing on the deeper pur- 
pose of his life. He writes home from Meri- 



EAKLIEST YEAKS. 7 

den thus: "My studies dry? No, indeed, a 
stream of pleasure from Monday morning till 
Saturday night. The toil is incessant, but 
very sweet. Thus I am preparing to go 
about my Master's business." 

At Amherst, where he began his college 
course in September, 1859, the same ardor, 
combined with system and steady resolution, 
characterized him. Towards the close of the 
first year his health failed, and physicians 
and friends advising rest and change of air, 
he made an excursion to Labrador with some 
acquaintances who were about establishing a 
Mission house at Caribou Island. He assist- 
ed in the work, and the voyage proved bene- 
ficial to him, so that he soon returned to his 
studies with spirits refreshed and health re- 
newed. 

In so hasty an outHne of his early years, 
we can pause but a moment to notice the 
prominence of disinterestedness and active 
benevolence as traits in his character. While 
at Meriden and at Amherst, he was in the 
habit of visiting district schools in his imme- 
diate vicinity, and exhibiting to the children 
curious and remarkable objects wliich he had 



8 THE COLOR-BEAKER. 

collected, for tlieir amusement and instruc- 
tion. He took a deep personal interest in 
the sick, the afflicted, and the dying, and 
spent much time in visiting them, both dur- 
ing intervals of school duty and in his va- 
cations at home, ministering to the wants of 
body and soul. To such a man the appeal of 
a stricken nation could not be made in vain; 
and he was one of those early accounted wor- 
thy to suffer and to die in so noble a cause 
as that of a nation's deliverance. 

The time of his return to college was April, 
1861, the month memorable in our country's 
annals as the date of the outbreak of the 
great rebellion. The Union found itself, with- 
out warning or preparation, plunged at once 
into the abyss of war. The shock which 
stunned the nation aroused also its latent 
energies. Young and old, the first-born and 
the darling Benjamin, offered themselves at 
once and freely to defend the nation's honor 
and maintain its existence. In schools and 
colleges the excitement was especially felt, 
and Amherst college was one of the first to 
offer the aid of its young men as volunteers ; 
an example of patriotism which has been well 



EARLIEST YEARS. 9 

sustained by the number and value of the 
sacrifices it has constantly made. 

From the first, young Clary's whole being 
was stirred by the summons. His prompt 
response, his patient waiting for acceptance, 
his enhstment, and his whole soldier history 
are best told in his own words ; and from this 
period, his correspondence will, so far as pos- 
sible, continue the narrative of his life — a hfe 
too brief in its noble purposes and endeavors, 
ever to be spoken of as *' concluded" on 
earth, 



10 THE COLOR-BEARER. 



CHAPTEK II 



PLANS EOR ENLISTMENT. 

"Amhekst College, April 22, 1861. 

"Dear Friends — As yon may well suppose, 
there is but little talked of or thought of but 
war and its attendant excitements. Even 
now, between ten and eleven o'clock, I hear 
the beating of the drum in the distance. We 
have been marching to music, listening to 
Union speeches, and assisting at flag raisings. 

"Our President made a stirring speech to 
us at prayers on Sunday morning. He said 
he was in Boston the day before, and wit- 
nessed the fearful excitement there, and added 
that he was willing to go forth to defend our 
country's cause, should he be needed. Prof. 

C has gone to see the governor to-day, 

about providing arms for the college. A 
pledge was circulated last night, soliciting 
the names of the members who will respond 
to the call of the governor, if he make one. 
It is the general impulse to take the field at 
any place or at any time during the war. I 



PLANS FOR ENLISTMENT. 11 

think seventy have enrolled their names with 
this intention, and my purpose, in writing this, 
is to give speedy information to my friends 
at home that my name is on the roll. 

"I suppose Prof. C has taken the list 

to the governor. I think I will detain this 
letter, however, until I hear of his success. 
If we are not needed, the drill will do us no 
harm ; and if there is need of our services, 
and the duty is made plain, surely our par- 
ents will not hold us back. 

"We expect, or at least hope to get our 
muskets this week, and with them the services 
of a staff-officer. You may be surprised at 
this step, but I believe that on second thought 
you will be glad of it. "We have the news 
twice a day now. 

"It is nearly eleven o'clock. The students 
in considerable numbers, and some of the 
inhabitants, have just ended their marching. 
There was a spirited Union meeting this 
evening, and measures were taken to organ- 
ize a company forthwith, expecting a sum- 
mons from government." 

"April 23. Prof. C has just returned 

from Boston. 



12 THE COLOR-BEAEEB. 

" The governor and otlier military men were 
delighted with our proposal. The faculty will 
have a meeting to decide the matter to-mor- 
row night. 

" Yours affectionately, 

*'F. A. CLAET." 

"AprH 28, 1861. 

"DeaeEbiends — This Sabbath opens more 
quietly than the last. The intense excite- 
ment has in some measure subsided, and the 
military movement so much talked of by col- 
lege students is becoming a failure. 

"It seems that v/e are not needed just now; 
and the faculty have decided it is best not 
to drill with arms upon the college grounds, 
and that too after one of the number had 
been to Springfield to procure muskets. 

"It is a disappointment iU brooked by some 
of our martial spirits; but we are trying to 
meet our duties as usual, quietly waiting to 
see when we may be needed. 

"Should it be necessary for our students 
to take the field, God forbid that I should 
hesitate a moment to obey the call of duty." 



PLANS FOR ENLISTMENT. 13 

"June 3. 

"Dear Friends — The time is passing swift- 
ly and pleasantly. I am now established in 
a work on the Sabbath that suits me well. 

Mr. S , my intimate friend in the Senior 

class, having left college, has bequeathed to 
me his little Sabbath-school, held in the brick 
school-house at Fort River, a neighborhood 
in Old Hadley, about three miles distant. 
There are two classes; six blacks and four 
or five whites constitute the number. 

"I have the negroes to teach. Their ages 
vary from five or six to thirteen years of age. 
I enjoy talking to them, teaching them hymns, 
etc. I hope God will accept my labors, which 
I shall be Hkely to continue for a long time, 
if permitted. I am sure you will be glad with 
me that this opening for usefulness has pre- 
sented itseK. 

"We shall soon be reviewing our studies in 
college. I can look back upon this term as 
a real success. My health is quite good. 
Life seems to me more earnest. I enjoy 
more the blessings of each day, and espec- 
ially the hope of doing something for my 
heavenly Father, so that I am still willing 



14 THE COLOR-BEAEER. 

you slioiild take that enthusiastic letter I 
wrote at the commencement of the term as a 
fair index of my present feehng." 

But now the time arrived when men were 
trembling with fear for the safety of their 
country. Frequent reverses and defeats 
taught the people to look for news with deep 
solicitude. Kentucky and Missouri were fear- 
fully threatened. Numbers of the best col- 
lege students were leaving to annex their 
names to the "roll of honor." Others were 
well-nigh ready to say, "We '11 go." 

Clary perceived the nation's peril, and his 
wavering convictions of duty sometimes troub- 
led him. Whether he should join the army, 
or remain at college to prepare for mission- 
ary life, was the question for him to decide. 

He loved his country with more than ordi- 
nary devotion, and had long borne her inter- 
ests on his heart before the throne of God ; 
and now he felt more strongly than ever, 
that his first impulse to leave his studies for 
the national defence was right. The elo- 
quence of his patriotic teachers kindled with- 
in him new zeal for the cause. 

With reference to a soul-stirring sermon 



PLANS FOR ENLISTMENT. 15 

delivered by Dr. Stearns, he writes, "It was 
almost enough to make one resolve at once 
to enter the army; and perhaps I shall go, 
as it is. I do not mean to be hasty or 
thoughtless. I begin to regard the summons 
as more and more urgent. Some of our best 
young men are leaving. I want to be will- 
ing to answer the call, the .moment the way 
is made clear. I think I will say nothing 
to my parents about it until I feel more de- 
cided." 

His decision, which was not made without 
prayer, is thus communicated to his father. 

"Amherst ColijEge, Oct. 1, 1861. 

*'My dear Father — ^Perhaps you will be 
surprised to read this letter; but upon a sec- 
ond perusal, and upon careful consideration 
of the motives prompting me to take the step 
proposed, I think you cannot object to my 
leaving college at once to join my brave 
brothers and classmates here who are hast- 
ening on to the conflict, especially if you 
have thought earnestly of the pressing need 
of men for the army. 

" The gloom of to-day is deeper here than 



IG THE COLOE-BEARER. 

I liave seen it at any time before. A feeling 
of determined patriotism is prevailing among 
the young men, and it is said that the facul- 
ty do not seek to hinder them as they seemed 
to do at first. 

*' On this question I feel quite decided; but 
you know, dear father, how much I think 
of your advice, and how glad I am to se- 
cure your acquiescence in all the important 
changes and plans of my life. 

"Hitherto you have most kindly fallen in 
with my projects; such as going to sea, to 
Labrador, etc. Now I come to you with a 
proposal far different from any previous one, 
and more important than all. 

"I am hopeful that you will second my 
proposition, and send me away with your 
blessing. I have the feeling that you will 
certainly grant my request. 

"Please to think how supporting it will be, 
as I make the necessary preparations and 
take my leave of friends. Think how hard 
it will be to go away without your ready ac- 
quiescence. But this I do not fear. Looking 
upon the country as you do, especially upon 
Kentucky and Missouri; upon the reverses 



PLANS FOR ENLISTMENT. 17 

and disasters wliich are multiplying on our 
side, and upon the fact that men, men are 
called for with such heart-stirring appeals; 
looking in the face of all this, dear father, 
and remembering that, though you cannot gc 
yourself, you have a son, strong and able- 
bodied, who is yearning to be in the conflict, 
to whom it is the greatest self-denial to stay 
at home a single day, surely you will say, 
* Go, and the God of battles be with you.' 

"You spoke about my not joining the army 
till obliged to by drafting. I think I am 
obliged to go now. My conscience, my con- 
victions of duty, every thing about me sug- 
gests the course proposed. I am well, and 
thankful too for my health. Let it be of 
avail for the country's service. 

"Perhaps I have said enough; I will add, 
that these words are not the hasty expres- 
sions of only a few days' rash impulse. 1 
have been struggling with myself — have been 
praying; feel quite clear that it is my duty, 
and am happy in the thought that I can and 
must go. 

"I want to receive your reply certainly by 
Friday. Meanwhile I will try to find the 



18 THE COLOR-BEARER. 

best metliod of enlistment. That I trust will 
not take long; and then the sooner off, the 
better for my conscience, my health, and 
every thing. If I have said enough, I will 
close with the prayer that you may give just 
the right rej)ly to 

"Your affectionate 

"FKANCIS." 

The margin of this patriotic letter was 
filled with these lines, which illustrate the 
eagerness and resolution with which he had 
already entered upon his chosen work: "I 
presume I shall go to "Worcester or Sj)ring- 
field in a few days, if it seems best. I want 
to hear from you, so as to be making plans 
with more definiteness and rapidity. For the 
present I go on with my regular lessons. It 
is pretty hard work, however. Father, if all 
I have said is not enough, I have the prom- 
ise of Dr. Stearns' sermon of Fast-day for 
you." 

In writing thus, he was not impetuous, 
but simply earnest. 

During the interim, he labored as well as 
the circumstances would allow. But study- 



PLANS FOR ENLISTMENT. 19 

ing was iip-liill work, for liis heart was in 
tlie war, and he was looking with hope for 
the forthcoming letter of reply. The mes- 
sage soon reached Conway, Mass. His fa- 
ther immediately sent back this honest, heart- 
felt reply : 

"Conway, Oct. 3, 1861. 

"My dear Francis — I was greatly surprised 
at the contents of your letter, received this 
afternoon. I shall not undertake to dictate, 
but as a father you will allow me to advise. 

"I am not afraid to have you go to the 
war, nor even to engage in battle, nor to fall 
in your country's service, if it is the Divine 
will. 

" But your circumstances are peculiar ; you 
have been consecrated as an ambassador for 
Christ to China. This I have supposed was 
the land of your adopted work. I had fondly 
hoped to live to see you enter that great and 
glorious missionary field, where you would 
have abundant opportunity to exhaust all 
your energies in wielding spiritual weapons 
to restore milUons of rebels to allegiance to 
the King of kings. But you propose to turn 
aside, for a season, from a preparation for 



20 THE COLOll-BEARER. 

tlie work of your life, to serve your country ; 
yet there are thousands and tens of thousands 
ready to sacrifice themselves on this altar, 
where there is one to go to China. You 
know you were twenty-three years of age 
when you commenced your college course. 
You have already lost one year; and can 
you think of losing one, two, or three years 
more ? Indeed, should you leave now, I should 
hardly expect to see you a graduate of Am- 
herst college. 

"But you go to 'help save the country.' 
It is true it is now in a critical, but not in a 
desperate condition. These temporary re- 
verses lead multitudes to enlist with alacrity 
for the war; and the probability is, that ere 
long there will be a full supply of federal 
forces. It is the superiority of your plans 
and future work over those of most young 
men, and even most who are pursuing a col- 
lege course, and not the danger of war, that 
makes me think it inexpedient. 

"Should you change again so soon, many 
of your friends might give you credit for in- 
stabihty of character, which would operate 
against your future usefulness. But I must 



PLANS FOR ENLISTMENT. 21 

bring this letter to a close, as it is time to 
go to tlie office, that you may receive it to- 
morrow. Should you decide after all to go, 
you will continue to have our best wishes 
and tenderest concern. Love from all. 

"Your affectionate Father." 



22 THE COLOK-BEARER. 



CHAPTER III 



LEAVING HOME. 



The young student tliouglitfully perused 
liis father's letter, finding in it no sufficient 
reason for changing his determination to enter 
the army at once. He writes soon after, 

" I allowed but a few minutes to pass before 
enlisting, after I read father's letter, for I was 
sure that I could answer all his questions from 
the heart." He joined what was called the 
Western Bay State regiment, afterwards 
numbered the Thirty-first. Immediately on 
leaving home, he occupied himself in enhsting 
recruits, having been employed to do so by 
the proper authorities. He undertook this 
work with his usual zeal, and many instances 
of his perseverance and success might be 
given. 

We mention but one. A young man in a 
neighboring town had made a deep impres- 
sion on the mind of Clary, as a brave, able 
man, and an active Christian. " I deter- 



LEAVING HOME. 23 

mined," tie writes, " not to leave his home till 
I should do so with his name on the enhst- 
ment-roll. I found him expecting to be mar- 
ried in a short time, with a prospect of build- 
ing and occupying a house of his own in 
Michigan. * Shall we not pray together?' 
I asked. ' We will,' was the ready response." 
The young man showed the way to the parlor. 
They knelt, both their souls struggling for 
inward enhghtenment, for divine guidance. 
Would not God deign to point out the way r 
Again and again they bowed in importunate 
prayer. Nearly an hour had passed before 
they left the room. 

Then they retired to rest, the young recruit- 
ing officer saying, " Hope it will be all right 
in the morning." Simultaneously with their 
prayers, a mother's pleadings were ascending 
in an adjoining room, that she might be ready 
to give up her son, if it should seem best. 
When morning came the decision was ready 
another name was added to the list of Chris- 
tian patriots. 

While stopping at the village of Ware, 
where the greater part of his company had 
enhsted, he writes, " Three of my companions 



24 THE COLOR-BEARER. 

and myself occni^y one room in tlie hotel here. 
"We have devotions every night and morning. 
This is exceedingly gratifying to me, especial- 
ly as it might not have been expected, since 
neither of them make any pretensions to re- 
ligion. Will you not pray earnestly that my 
influence may be salutary over these my com- 
panions? 

" I am obhged to hear a great deal of pro- 
fane swearing, and to associate with those 
who indulge in it. I feel sad to think I shall 
be under the necessity of hearing oaths, per- 
haps many times a day. Any hints that you 
can give me as to the best way of urging men 
to discontinue the practice, will be most grate- 
fully received. 

" Saturday night I repaired to the minis- 
ter's, and obtained some good books for my 
companions to read. I was glad soon aftei 
to see one of them reading very diligenth 
the Pilgrim's Progress. He calls it * first 
rate.'" 

" Ware, Nov. 4. — We have had pretty good 
drilling to-day. I enjoyed it. I find many 
opportunities to watch the development of 
character day by day, and am amused to ob- 



LEAVING HOME. 25 

serve the great clamor for office. Disappoint- 
ment and ill-feeling are constantly arising from 
disheartened office-seekers, who threaten to 
leave the ranks imless they can be gratified. 
I find that only a sraall number of those now 
here are professors of religion." 

At Conway we hear of young Clary, with 
several others, addressing, one of those pa- 
triotic meetings then so common all over the 
loyal portion of the country. His words were 
few and well chosen. They glowed with the 
fire of a patriot, a soldier, and a Christian. 
All felt their power ; and upon his audience 
he left the abiding impression that our coun- 
try was worthy of the sacrifice for which it 
called — that the lives of her young men were 
not to be offered up in vain. 

He afterwards writes of this gathering, 
" Our meeting was inspiring. Our friends 
gave us good advice and good cheer; and 
through the noble efforts of the ladies, we are 
the recipients of such comforts as the soldier 
can appreciate — needle-books, handkerchiefs, 
stockings, and blankets." 

This visit to the home he so much loved 
was long remembered. Every thing in and 



26 THE COLOB-BEAREB. 

around tlie " good old brick house" — as lie 
affectionately called it — was as dear to liim as 
" the apple of his eje." 

The faithful old horse which had carried 
him so many times to the distant church and 
railroad station ; the wild, rural walks which 
his feet had so many times traced and re- 
traced ; the beautiful hills, whose openings 
revealed sister villages; and the maple or- 
chard where in childhood he had loved to watch 
the process of sugar-making — all these brought 
to mind most pleasant remembrances and 
associations from which it was hard to break 
away. 

But how insignificant were they, in com- 
parison with his estimate of the treasures of 
the household ! We find Clary in his own 
room on the day he was to leave, sad and 
thoughtful. He folds neat packages, arranges 
files of papers, puts away all his effects with 
scrupulous care, the choicest relics being giv- 
en into the faithful keeping of his youngest 
sister. 

Thus he closes up his affairs at home. The 
remaining time, so precious yet so sad to him, 
he spent in writing to his absent sister, and 



LEAVING HOME. 2"! 

in calling on a few of his neighbors, all of 
whom had some land wish to express. 

Beturning home, he found his sister unable 
to attend to her duties for grief. His youn- 
ger brother could scarcely control his emotions 
in parting from him before he went to school. 
In the midst of these painful and agitating 
feelings his father called, "It is time to be 
going." That word "going" never before 
broke so strangely, so sadly on his ear. He 
says, " My heart murmured, not quite ready 
to go from this home of homes, perhaps never 
to return." 

He hastened down. Little comforts unask- 
ed — ^which a mother alone knows how to pre- 
pare — he found in his valise. 

An affectionate good-by to all, and he was 
on his way to join his comrades at Ware, just 
previous to their removal to Camp Seward, 
located at Pittsfield, Mass. 



28 THE COLOR-BEAEER. 



CHAPTER lY 



IN CAMP. 



Clary's first appearance on camp-ground 
was under trying circumstances. Sickness 
prevented liis marcliing mth tlie soldiers, and 
he was compelled to ride in tlie baggage- 
wagon — quite a trial to liis pride. He was so 
ill, that on his arrival his captain insisted 
upon his riding back to take quarters at the 
hotel, in company with a fellow-soldier. 

Soon, however, he recovered his health, and 
set himself earnestly at work. It was not an 
infrequent remark of his, "I mean to make a 
good soldier;" and from this time until the 
close of his life, he hterally carried this into 
effect. 

He held it to be the duty of a good soldier 
to "endure hardness" without complaining. 
Privations he expected, and they were cheer- 
fully met. What troubled him most was the 
indifference of his comrades to sacred things. 
He could bear patiently every hardship of 
the camp, but the profanity which he was 



IN CAMP. 29 

obKged to hear, lie deemed the most inexcus- 
able of all sins of the tongue, and he could 
never endure listening to it without the keen- 
est sorrow. 

His duties as sentinel sometimes called him 
from rest at an early hour. He writes, " I 
was communing with my Saviour as early as 
three o'clock this morning.. This profitable 
season prepared me to speak to my neighbor 
sentinel. He received my suggestions very 
kindly, and promised that he would abandon 
the use of profane language, and would seek 
to do right in other respects. I enjoyed my 
morning watch exceedmgiy, although in 
strange contrast with my meditations ; for I 
had a loaded gun, with strict orders to shoot 
any man who should persist in passing the 
line without permission." 

In a letter dated Nov. 26, alluding to Capt. 
Lee, who had been violently assaulted by a 
soldier, he writes, " Capt. Lee seems to be a 
favorite with all the men in camp, and a great 
deal of sympathy is manifested for him. But 
it is a bad place for one so sick to be in; 
there is but a single board partition between 
his bed and the large hall filled with nearly 



30 THE COLOR-BEARER. 

five liimclred men, many of wliom are exceed- 
ingly noisy and careless. Just now, as I write 
on one of the great beams, I can liear tlie mul- 
titude in tlieir Babel-like confusion." 

" Nov. 27. Since I left home I have been 
quite ill. A severe boil upon my neck, and 
perhaps a worse one upon my right eyebrow 
also troubled me. Just as I was relieved of 
the latter, a genuine felon on my left fore- 
finger claimed my serious attention." 

" Dec. 11. Our prayer-meeting is increas- 
ing in numbers and interest. The little room 
is crowded at every meeting, and there is 
some evidence of unusual thoughtfulness. I 
hope you will continue to pray for us. Pro- 
fessors of rehgion are in great danger of low- 
ering their standard, for the wicked are an 
overwhelming majority. I really believe that 
some of them are destined to be saved by the 
impressions they will receive in our camp. I 
am glad to be here, with the hope of helping 
some to a better life. This I can do the more 

effectually, as Mr. E of Boston furnished 

me with several dollars' worth of tracts and 
books." 

A letter to his father, dated Dec. 17, says, 



IN CAMP. 31 

" That was a good letter yon wrote last, and 
it deserves a long and careful reply. I thank 
you most heartily for the deep interest you 
manifested in my welfare. Heaven will bless 
you for it all, be assured; but the remembrance 
that you are constantly in the thoughts of a 
grateful son, may cheer some of your hours of 
loneliness. I think of yon at home a great 
deal, but especially do I love to remember 
you when at my morning and evening devo- 
tions. Am I not right in thinking that I am 
often mentioned in your secret petitions, as 
well as at the family altar ? 

" Father, I desire that you should know of 
my constant happiness. My spirit is made glad 
from day to day, by the consciousness that I 
am in the line of duty. I find so much to en- 
courage me in trying to do good, that it gives 
me a constant feehng of thankfulness to my 
heavenly Father for his unbounded mercy. 

"I am glad you are disposed to write so 
freely and plainly to me. You help me on to 
a better life. Our meetings still continue to 
be prospered." 

To his sister S he wrote at the same 

time, "Eejoicewithyour soldier brother, dear 



32 THE COLOR-BEAREE. 

sister, that lie has so much to make life sweet, 
and that that life is freely offered for the safe- 
ty of the country, if necessity demands it. I 
have not for a moment regretted my enlist- 
ment. I really enjoy camp life. I feel deep- 
ly for the anxious ones, who are much disap- 
pointed that the meetings are soon to be given 
up. We hope to be able to recommence them 
some time." 

He was promoted to the rank of Color-Ser- 
geant Jan. 5, 1862. Keferring to it he writes, 
"My situation is different from that of any 
other in the. whole regiment. I have been 
chosen by the colonel and adjutant to bear 
the national colors for the regiment. The 
of&cers had been thinking of this place for me 
for several weeks. But the announcement 
came as a perfect surprise. Upon second 
thought I decided to go straight forward, and 
do my best in the position, which you must 
know is one of the most responsible and dan- 
gerous in the whole line." 

*' Jan. 8. On Monday our camp presented 
a busy scene, in anticipation of Gen. Butler's 
visit. At evening I was called aside by our 
captain, and informed that the colonel wish- 



IN CAMP. 33 

ed me to act as orderly sergeant, in concert 
with twelve non-commissioned officers, form- 
ing a body-guard for tlie general during his 
stay of twenty-four hours. We marched to 
the Berkshire hotel, where he was expected 
to pass the night. 

" Soon after his arrival, he signified that 
two of our number would be sufficient. Ser- 
geant B with myself took our posts before 

the door of the parlor, while the general re- 
ceived his friends. These became very nu- 
merous by the next morning. 

"At lOi o'clock in the evening we were ex- 
cused till the morning. We returned to the 
hotel early, but it was of course long before 
the general rose, as he did not retire until 
two o'clock. Men and boys from every quar- 
ter came flocking to the house to shake hands 
with or get a sight of him. The general was 
very affable, and received his many friends 
with a good grace, I could not but think 
that such a man must have a patient soul, for 
it must be annoying to be interrupted by so 
many who are eager merely to gaze upon a 
distinguished personage. 

" A httie before noon a grand salute was 

Oolor-bearer. Q 



34 THE COLOR-BEAEEB. 

fired, the regiment was formed into line, and 
the review took place. Just here was a trying 
time for my humble self. I refer to my taking 
the centre of the regiment to receive the colors. 
The ceremony was very interesting, and I 
had a good opportunity to hear the gene- 
ral's speech, which was brief, eloquent, and 
earnest. 

"Then followed a thorough inspection of 
the separate companies by the general. He 
looked upon the clothing, shoes, and knap- 
sack of every man, to see that all had a 
change of clothing." 

Feb. 5, 1862, he writes, "After being in the 
hospital for fifteen days, I was released yes- 
terday, with the privilege of being absent from 
duty for five days, being yet quite weak, for 
I have had to contend with various illnesses, 
and what was worse, witness many scenes re- 
volting to my heart. I did not submit to the 
latter without giving an earnest remonstrance. 
I hope it was not without effect. 

"You will be glad to know that my sick- 
ness has done me a great deal of good ; I have 
been very happy, especially in the exercise of 
prayer. The peculiar circumstances that sur- 



IN CAMP. 35 

roimdecl me drove me nearer to my Sayiour, 
who manifested himself very graciously unto 
me." 

His hospital experience was of use to him, 
for he was disciphning himself to endure the 
pecuhar trials incident to such a life. Of his 
last night spent in the hospital he says, "It 
was a solemn one, for I saw one of our num- 
ber die. He breathed his last at half-past 
two yesterday morning. Not a relative, nor 
even an officer in his company, to attend him 
in his last hours. I rose several times to do 
for him what I could, and to be with him to 
the last. His dying struggles were enough 
to make one weep ; but more sad still did I 
feel, to witness the shght impression made 
upon some of the men, who were busily em- 
ployed in card-playing, while the fearful death 
rattle could be heard all through our rooms. 
It has made a deep impression upon my own 
mind, and the last recollection of my stay in 
this hospital must be tinged with sadness." 

It was just after this that he made a " fly- 
ing visit," most unexpectedly, to his home. 
This visit was often afterwards referred to by 
himself, and by his parents, as an unusually 



36 THE COLOR-BEARER. 

pleasant one. Tliere was then manifested 
none of that sadness which marked his for- 
mer leave-taking. 

"Writing from Camp Chase, Lowell, Feb. 14, 
he says, "I am in good spirits, and quite 
elated with the prospect of being paid off to- 
day. We left Camp Seward at 6 A. M., Wed- 
nesday, and arrived at this place abont dark. 
I was glad to lay hold of the colors once 
more. I enjoyed the ride. We had twenty- 
seven cars, eight of which were used for bag- 
gage. We have fine quarters, but expect soon 
to leave them for the sea. 

" If I do not write again, let me tell you 
that my last visit was by far the most pleasant 
I ever made at home. I thank you all for 
being so cheerful Long may I remember 
the impressive scene at our family devotions 
on the morning of my departure." 

In his next letter, dated Feb. 19, occurs this 
pleasant statement : " The memory of my last 
visit home will be like a pleasant "sunbeam 
cast upon my rugged pathway. Dear father, 
I thank you heartily for your kind words of 
advice, affection, and sohcitude." 



SAILING SOUTHWARD. 31 



CHAPTER Y. 

SAILING SOUTHWAED. 

On the twentieth of February, 1862, the 
Thirty-first was ordered on board the trans- 
port "Mississippi" at Boston. The next day 
they sailed for fortress Monroe. 

Of his prospects, looking southward. Clary 
says, " I am not sorry that I enlisted ; on the 
contrary, I am more and more satisfied that I 
have taken the right course. This is the deep 
conviction of my heart. I shall still keep an 
eye on China, for I do not by any means give 
up the long cherished hope of standing up for 
Christ before that people. 

" My business matters are all arranged, and 
no one will be embarrassed in case I never 
return. I have a great desire to live, if it is 
God's will. I have done but a tithe of the 
good that I might have done. I do not know 
that I have been the means of converting a 
single soul. 

" When I left college I little thought what 
a change I was bringing upon myself. But 



38 THE COLOR-BEARER. 

tlie dark cloud wliicli spreads over our land 
must be removed, before I quietly resume the 
duties and pleasures of college life. Loved 
are those duties, and choice those pleasures ; 
but richer far to my heart is the privilege of 
going to defend my country in her peril. I 
have no desire to return until she is rescued 
from the storm, and her enemies are made to 
repent and return to their allegiance." 

Such were the sentiments of our young hero, 
Sergeant Clary. The patriot spirit does not 
need a Scotland or a Switzerland for its ex- 
pression. The devotion of a "Wallace and a 
Tell glows in the bosom of many an unknown 
soldier in the Union ranks. " God, Liberty, 
our Country," this is the watchword of our 
warriors, and the motto of the banner under 
which they will conquer or die. 

The ship in which Sergeant Clary's regi- 
ment embarked was overtaken by a severe 
gale off Cape Hatteras, and was driven by its 
fury on " Frying Pan Shoals." 

Their peril now became imminent, for a 
hole was worn in the bottom of the ship. To 
add to their trouble, they discovered a steam- 
er making towards them from the shore, but 



SAILING SOUTHWARD. 39 

were ignorant whether it was manned by 
friends or foes. It proved to be the United 
States sloop-of-war Mount Yernon, bj which 
they were rescued. 

The circumstances are related by Clary. 
"After satisfying himself that our vessel was 
a federal craft, the captain came to our re- 
lief; but while she was approaching, we knew 
not whether her intentions were friendly or 
otherwise, so there was considerable excite- 
ment with us. Our officers gave command 
for each man to put on his equipments, and 
have his gun ready for action. 

" The men were prompt in obeying this 
order. I think that when our company is 
called to fight, it will show itself v/ell. I can 
not express to you our gratitude, as we saw 
the stars and stripes run up by the Mount 
Vernon. It then seemed necessary for us all 
to forsake our ship to save our lives, for our 
steamer was leaking badly. So on Friday, 
just at evening, four hundred troops belong- 
ing to the ' Thirteenth' Maine regiment were 
conveyed in small boats to the steamer. The 
rest of us expecting to leave, placed our all 
upon our backs in anticipation of forsaking 



40 THE COLOB-BEAEER. 

the Mississippi for ever. But tlio lightening 
of the freight, by removing men and provis- 
ions, together with the assistance of the Mount 
Yernon as a tug, enabled us to get off the bar. 

"On Saturday morning the weather was 
delightful, and the Maine troops were return- 
ed to our vessel, when we sailed on for Port 
Royal. We arrived at Hilton Head about an 
hour before sunset, but were not able to dis- 
embark until Monday about noon, when our 
fifteen hundred troops scattered about, glad 
to set foot on land again." 

After a brief detention at Hilton Head, they 
again embarked; and on March 20th they 
arrived at Ship Island, from which place he 
writes : 

" The memory of my last home visit is most 
pleasant now ; I have often thought of it in 
connection with the possibility that I might 
never return. 

" "Wliether I return or not, I desire to feel 
a spirit of perfect resignation to the will of 
God. I never enjoyed the Saviour's presence 
more than in the XDeculiar trials of this soldier 
life. I am in a situation to get much good 
each day. I like the place I have in the reg 



SAILING SOUTHWARD. 41 

iment very mucli. I find it well to spend all 
my spare time in studying tlie tactics." 

On the eighteenth of April the Mississippi 
sailed up the river whose name it bears, en- 
countering numerous rebel fire rafts. Clary's 
journal has these notes of the passage : 

" Apeil 24, 1862. Porter's famous mortar 
fleet is engaged, and the heavy firing makes 
our great ship jar, at a distance of many miles. 

" April 26. We are now within five or six 
miles of forts Philip and Jackson, and can 
easily perceive the magnificent display of 
bombs thrown in profusion upon the doomed 
forts. 

" April 27. Coming on deck, we find our- 
selves near the west bank of the river, where 
we have a good view of the warlike prepara- 
tions of both enemies and friends. 

" April 28. — Gen. B just came sailing 

past us in a small steamboat, and in a sten- 
torian voice and "^dth great enthusiasm ex- 
claimed, ' Fort Jackson is on fire ! Get two 
days' rations ready, and await further or- 
ders!'" 

The terrific scene of the bombardment was 
in full view. The soldiers' hearts beat high 



42 THE COLOR-BEARER, 

with the hope of planting the national colors 
on the walls of the stubborn forts. It was a 
time for tumultuous and conflicting emotions. 
Only a soul resting on God could maintain its 
calmness at such a time. 

With reference to his own feelings Sergeant 
Clary wiites, " I never enjoyed rehgion so 
much as in these few weeks past. My trust 
in God is quickened, and now on the eve of 
conflict it is more hvely than ever. We are 
witnessing splendid naval achievements by 
Admiral Farragut. Forts Jackson and Philip 
will soon be ours." 

Their regiment was ordered back to the 
gulf, to land in the rear of fort St. Phihp, and 
take it by siege ; but this service was made 
unnecessary by the surrender of the fort to 
the fleet, soon after the regiment reached the 
shore. They then returned to their trans- 
ports and sailed up the Mississippi to New 
Orleans, just in time to witness the surrender 
of the citv to the Federal forces. 



AT NEW ORLEANS. 43 



CHAPTEE YI. 

AT NEW ORLEANS, 

Four days after liis arrival at the Crescent 
City, Sergeant Clary writes : 

, "May 5, 1862. 

" Dear Friends — I am now established in 
one of the convenient little rooms of the cus- 
tom-house ; the building is filled with several 
regiments of our troops. For company, I 
have the corporals of the color-guard. 

"We were quite ready to appreciate the 
luxury of tables and chairs, and other pieces 
of furniture which the frightened rebels left in 
the confusion of their hurried departure. 

" I desire to thank God for our signal pres- 
ervation through so many dangers, and for 
allowing us to take possession of this city 
without the loss of a single life. Surely he 
has been better to us than our fears. 

" The people of New Orleans at first de- 
clared that the hated Yankees could never 
take the forts or city. But when the news of 
our success came, great consternation possess- 



44 THE COLOR-BEARER. 

eel tlieir hearts. Mob yiolence was the order of 
the day. The defences of the city were for 
the most part abandoned or destroyed; and 
on April 26, Gen. Lovell, perceiving that it 
was of no use to resist our approach while 
the gunboats of Com. Farragut were sta- 
tioned directly in front of the city, ready 
to shell it at any moment, fled to parts un- 
known." 

May 6. "After conquering the enemy be- 
low, our gunboats had but little opposition in 
their approach to the city. One battery, 
thrown up on the old battle-ground where 
Jackson fought, opened upon our men, but 
was quickly silenced. The way was now clear 
for the * Mississippi' and the other transports 
to bring in the thousands of infantry. 

" Accordingly on Tuesday, May 1, we sail- 
ed up between splendid plantations on each 
side of the river, and anchored in front of the 
city just after noon, exchanging rousing 
cheers as we arrived, with the crews of the 
various vessels already anchored. We could 
not help noticing the gloom and silence which 
pervaded the whole city. All the stores and 
offices were closed. But very few came out 



AT NEW ORLEANS. 45 

on the wliarf at first, perhaps one or two hun- 
dred j)ersons. 

" We were cautioned to hold no conversa- 
tion with the enemy; and were ordered to 
load all the guns, to fix bayonets, and appear 
on deck in complete readiness to go ashore. 
We had to crowd the people back from the 
wharf, for now they had come out in great 
numbers. While standing before the rabble, 
we were subjected to jeers and curses, though 
nothing very violent in the way of opposition 
occurred. For the most part, the people ex- 
pressed their contempt and bitter hatred by 
sullen silence. Some would dart back at the 
approach of our flag, as if its touch were pol- 
lution. There was but one Union flag in the 
whole city, and that was floating over the 
custom-house, where we were going to quar- 
ter. 

" The arrangements for this purpose being 
completed, we proceeded to march through 
several streets to the custom-house. Insult 
upon insult was heaped upon the flag. It 
seemed as if the desperadoes would actually 
tear it from my hands. I managed to carry 
it unsullied, and we congratulated ourselves 



46 THE COLOK-BEARER. 

that tliis wa>s tlie first regimental color of the 
United States that was planted in the city. To 
our company was assigned the perilous duty 
of clearing a passage for the general and his 
army to pass. Our men were quite elated 
with this honor. From eight to ten thousand 
troops are now in the city. Martial law has 
been proclaimed for several days; the faces 
of the people do not wear so malicious an ex- 
pression, and some of the traders have open- 
ed their stores again : yet, after all, they claim 
that their opposition to our government will 
never be changed. 

"In order to enforce martial law a large 
number of guards are required; these are 
posted on the various streets of the city, night 
and day. We feel the heat considerably, al- 
though the building where we are quartered 
is quite cool. The water which supplies this 
immense structure is forced up from the river, 
and is suitable to drink. 

" Our trip up the river was the most novel 
and enchanting May-day excursion that we 
ever enjoyed. The river for a long distance 
is higher than the wide sj)reading plains on 
either side. Our vessel often sailed so near 



AT NEW ORLEANS. 4T 

the bank we could speak with the negroes, 
many of whom would stop their work, and 
give expression to their delight by clapping 
their hands, throwing up their aprons, hoes, 
etc. 

" Many of the planters' mansions are rich 
and neat; some almost hidden by the dense 
fohage of willows, cypress, oak, or orange 
trees. 

"May 19. Among the strangest sights 
here, I must mention the great bread crowds — 
crowds of women with their baskets, rushing 
for tickets to enable them to secure provis- 
ions ; for Gen. Butler has taken such a course, 
that provisions are allowed to be brought 
from Mobile and the mouth of the Red river 
and dehvered at the market. The people 
have been almost on the verge of starvation, 
for the flying rebel soldiers took all the pro- 
visions of the city with them for their own 
sustenance. A little girl came to our camp 
to sell eggs last week ; I asked the price ; she 
replied, ' Ninety cents a dozen !' 

" The weather here is much like that of our 
July days, although the nights are quite cool 
and damp. I am one of many who are affected 



48 THE COLOK-BEAEEB. 

by a sensation of languor, from the excessive 
heat ; but we are favored by being required 
to drill only a short time in early morning and 
the cool of evening. 

" We had fine opportunities for writing in 
the custom-house, but of these we are now 
deprived. Annunciation square, where we 
are at present quartered, is a fine level sjDot, 
ornamented with a few shade trees, of which 
we take full advantage, for the heat is quite 
oppressive. The families immediately sur- 
rounding this park are said to be among the 
most bitter secessionists. We feel it neces- 
sary to keep a vigilant guard, and our pickets 
have seen actual service now for the first time. 

" On Friday night I acted as sergeant of 
the guard. My duties required me to be up 
all night. I went the round five times, but 
saw nothing very exciting. This was extra 
duty, but I was ready for it, since the colors 
are seldom called for in our present position. 
I am grateful to find my health so good in 
this hot climate. The imprudence of many 
in excessive drinking and other evil habits 
tends to increase my own watchfulness. I 
hope that by rigid self-denial and prudence, 



AT NEW OELEANS. 49 

I shall be able to escape disease, and tlirongh 
the kindness of our heavenly Father to see 
my dear home once more. 

"June 2. We are still at Annunciation 
square. During three days of last week, a 
portion of our company was required to take 
up quarters at a station-house near by, and 
serve as city police. My experience there 
was rough, I assure you. I never before had 
my eyes pained with such revolting scenes. 
I had read of the characters at Five Points ; 
here I found their equals in degradation. 
Time and again I had to conduct armed 
squads, in search of some Of the most reckless 
desperadoes in the city, into the streets where 
many a man had perished by the assassin's 
knife. 

" One day last week, I took a company of 
fifteen men and two corporals, and searched 
a large suspicious looking house, in hopes of 
securing a man who had taken a gun from one 
of our sentinels and deliberately discharged 
it at a sick woman. Having my trusty re- 
volver drawn, I had nothing to fear ; but our 
search proved fruitless, and we returned dis- 
appointed. 

Color-bearer. 4 



50 THE COLOK-BEABER. 

" Some runaway slaves were brouglit to our 
quarters to be locked up for safe keeping. 

But Mrs. I and all mj friends may know 

that I liave had nothing to do with this hated 
work; and I never will assist it in any way. 

" The appearance of things in the city is 
very much improved. The people begin to 
understand that we have not come to plunder 
and destroy. Gen. Butler has certainly 
wielded his power in a very judicious manner. 
But we have no Sabbath here. I believe 
this is the most abandoned, God-forsaken 
city in the whole Union. Trading of all sorts, 
running of cars, etc., mark the day; while 
those who attend the services of the sanctuary 
are very few." 

" July 15. The weather is steadily and in- 
tensely hot, with the thermometer in the vi- 
cinity of 100^ from a little past sunrise xmtil 
sunset. The occasional showers, which cool 
the heated air, are most agreeable. We have 
recently obtained three hogsheads to hold 
rain-water for drinking. This we find much 
better than the muddy water of the Missis- 
sippi, which we have been using. There is 
now a plenty of ice in the city, and we soldiers 



AT NEW ORLEANS. 51 

have just a little for a taste. We are eacli 
allowed usually a loaf of soft bread — like 
mother's of the smallest size — to last for three 
meals, given out at noon. For the rest of the 
dinner, we have sweet potatoes and meat, 
sometimes beans, once in a while rice, and 
occasionally hasty pudding. Irish potatoes 
are too high-priced for common folks to in- 
dulge in — fifteen to twenty dollars per barrel. 

" I neglected to say that for breakfast and 
supper we receive just about nothing at all. 
Our coffee is so miserable an apology for the 
real article that I fairly despise it, and of 
course refuse to drink it. I buy milk pretty 
often at a picayune a pint." 

" August 7. My health is not very good, 
but still much better than when I wrote last. 
I do not exj)erience much difficulty about 
sleeping, when an opportunity offers, for I can 
lie down upon the brick or stone pavement in 
almost any street in the city, and sleep as 
soundly as you can at home. This is the way 
we rest too when we go out on guard. "We 
take turns in lying upon the pavement, having 
our rubber blankets to shield us from the 
dampness. 



62 THE COLOE-BEAFER. ♦ 

" Our food is goo i, espeaally the bread, 
and I do not take much else. My weight is 
one hundred and forty-five po mds now, while 
at Labrador I weight d one hi mdred and sev- 
enty-six pounds." 

He ^mtes to his idster Aug. 22, "I hav© 
thought very much oc death of late ; and the 
more intently I fix my mind upon this theme, 
the more I enjoy the ( exercise. Yes, I may be 
nearer home than I think, ancl I feel perfectly 
willing to leave the is 5ue entii ely in the hands 
of God. 

"I do not wish to darm you, or cause you 
to regret my accepts, nee of Ihe office which 
has been in my hards for more than seven 
months. Yet you mist remember that it is 
one of the most dai.gerous positions in the 
whole regiment, in (^ase of action. At the 
fight before fort Don ildson, i.o less than five 
successive color-beari ts were ihot down; and 
at Baton Rouge, in tlie recert conflict, three 
rebel color-bearers were kill 3d. There is a 
prospect of our being called iato battle. Our 
situation is getting nore ani more critical; 
the enemy threaten io make a desperate at- 
tempt to recapture 'S'ew Orleans. We are 



AT NEW iLEANd. 53 

looking eagerlj- for reinforcements, as we 
greatly need thorn." * 

So our young soldier stands with his face 
to the foe, caln:ly awaiting the approaching 
footsteps of Dtath, whose coming his heart 
already prophet ies. Tl ousands are standing 
to-day with the same fearful prospect before 
them. Would that they anight share the 
faith which kept his soil in "perfect peace." 



54 THE COLOE-BEAREE. 



CHAPTER YII. 

AT EOET JACKSON. 

With a part of his regiment, Sergeant 
Clary went to garrison fort Jackson. His 
friends were glad to receive from him this 
description of the fort where he spent so much 
time. 

" The fortification is a large one, built of 
brick. Immediately surrounding the walls 
there is a moat from forty to fifty feet wide, 
and fifteen or sixteen feet deep. Outside of 
this is another moat ; and over each of these 
is a drawbridge, designed to be taken up in 
case of an attack by an enemy. 

" The fort has five sides, and as many bas- 
tions, which make considerable addition to the 
strength of the fort proper. 

" On a level with the space in the interior, 
are numerous casemates, or arched ways, 
which are really under ground. These are 
covered by the ramparts, which extend all 
around the fort. The highest gTOund is term- 
ed the parapet. On the rampart against the 



AT FORT JACKSON. 55 

parapet, a rougli slied is built for eacli com- 
pany, from eighty to ninety feet long." 

It was in one of tliese sheds that the sol- 
diers of Company D made their home. The 
sergeants occupied one end, separated from 
the other by a piece of canvas. 

" Within these narrow hmits— sixteen by 
seventeen feet— there are three beds, a table, 
a chair, a bench, and a trunk, together with 
all the arms and accoutrements under our 
charge." 

Writing to his friends at home, Aug. 27, he 
regrets that so much work was done on the 
Sabbath. "I feel sorry that so much of holy 
time is used in such a way. I presume that 
not one half of the men had a thought of the 
Sabbath ; I almost forgot it, the day was so 
busy. There are about one hundred and 
forty contrabands here; they are daily em- 
ployed in improving the condition of the 
interior of the fort, for the shells made terri- 
ble havoc with the brick walls which shel- 
tered the officers* quarters. The outer walls 
were not severely damaged. The fight was 
a terrible one. I am credibly informed, that 
during the space of one hour and a half, 



56 THE COLOE-BEARER. 

eleven thousand pounds of powder were used 
inside this fort." 

Sergeant Clary had a few intimate fiiends 
in the regiment, whose tastes and aspirations 
for a better life than the many led, made them 
truly congenial spirits. 

" Sergeant J. E. W , Lieut. B , and 

Corp. W , make up my trio of particular 

friends. The first is almost -perfect, the sec- 
ond is a loved classmate and Christian friend, 
and the last is ever ready to perform acts of 
Christian kindness." He enjoyed the society 
of these friends, and spoke of them always 
with much enthusiasm. Appreciative allu- 
sions were often made to his commanding of- 
ficers, both as to their military skill and gen- 
tlemanly demeanor; and it was a cause of 
gratitude to the dear ones at home, that amid 
so many circumstances tending to harden 
the soldier's heart, he could still find some 
tried friends, and with them take sweet coun- 
sel. 

Other dear friends he had whose names are 
unknown, but who made his brief life happier 
by their kindness and manly sympathy, while 
they shared with him the vicissitudes of an 



AT FORT JACKSON. 51 

army experience. To the Cliristian soldier, 
companionship with the generous and en- 
hghtened is especially precious. In the army 
particularly is the motto needed, "Let your 
conversation be in heaven." 

It was the habit of Clary always at the 
return of the anniversary of his sainted moth- 
er's death, to turn his thoughts to her, to 
heaven, and to the Life to which her prayers 
had consecrated him. Hence, Sept. 3, 1862, 
he writes : 

"My dear Father — I am glad to secure 
some time for myself this day, as I was anx- 
ious to devote much of the leisure of this 
solemn anniversary to the memory of my dear 
mother, as far as I recollect what you and 
others have told me of her. I desire to be 
more like her in spirit; and am grateful to 
God, that he permits me to be so earnest and 
hopeful. I trust that your prayers and hers 
will avail much. 

"I cherish a glad remembrance of that 
home-scene of prayer, as I left for the war. 
Week after week glides swiftly by, and I hear 
every sound but that of prayer. I need yours 
for me, for peculiar trials beset me. I am 



58 THE COLOR-BEAKER. 

greatly strengtliened by prayer and home 
letters. They help me to maintain a purer 
walk and holier conversation before careless 
and criticizing observers. 

" We have been in the fort now nearly a 
fortnight, and I have seen no papers except 
a conple of 'Deltas' from New Orleans. 
This is rather too bad, when we are so anx- 
ious to hear from Richmond. We are in a 
state of trying suspense with regard to the 
news, having heard that fort Donaldson is 
recaptured, and that Pope and McClellan are 
defeated. Oh, how earnest the soldiers in the 
fort are for the papers ; but we feel that we 
must be contented, and forego many of the 
conveniences which to our friends at home 
seem indispensable. 

" We have begun the drill upon our heavy 
guns. At the time the war commenced, the 
fort was furnished with twelve barbette, four- 
teen casemate, and nine howitzer guns. Now 
it contains about eighty. 

" The rebels cast many of theirs into the 
moat; this is a formidable trench, filled with 
stagnant water. In it are several ugly alli- 
gators, and some large fish equally repulsive, 



AT FORT JACKSON. 59 

which serve, however, in a measure to purify 
the water. Surrounding all is a lowland 
swamp, furnishing an abundance of serpents, 
lizards, tree-toads, and myriads of mosquitos." 

One of his favorite ways of usefulness was 
writing letters for sick and illiterate soldiers. 
These often called forth affecting expressions 
of gratitude in return. The following letter 
is from a Christian lady whose husband had 
for a long time been sick in the hospital at 
fort Jackson. It furnishes a bright example 
of that womanly patriotism which has so often 
and so freely laid its dearest upon our coun- 
try's altar of sacrifice. 

"Me. Claey — Your little note which I re- 
ceived last night with the welcome letter, was 
very pleasing and encouraging to me ; esp'ec- 

ially as it informed me that my dear A had 

so kind a friend to be with him, now that he 
is removed from those who love him and who 
watch so anxiously for his good. I cannot 
tell you how much I appreciate a friend who 
will be with him in all hours ; in those of 
danger as well as those of pleasure and safe- 
ty ; in hours of suffering it may be ; and who 
will be true to him as a Christian brother. 



60 THE COLOK-BEAEEK. 

"I thanked God Ijist night, and I thank 
him now from my hea^t, that he has seen fit 
to bless my loved one with the friendship of 
one who has given hiiaself so entirely to 
Christ and his canse. 

" Your extracts please me much, very onuch, 
and I find myself thiaking of them and re- 
peating them often. The last you wrote, 'In- 
quire every evening, if the day has been an 
improvement on the past/ was very appropri- 
ate; but my particuLir favorite is this: *If 
your life is dark, thei] walk by faith ; God is 
pledged to keep you as safely as if you could 
understand every thir g.' 

" These and the others I will try to remem- 
ber and practise; and I doubt not they will 
assist me many times when the 2vay is dark, 
coming as they did from a stranger who had 
the kindness to copy :hem. I thank you for 
them, and also for your kindness in speaking 
in so pleasant and friendly a manner of him 
whom I have given up, as I would have given 
myself, had it been possible, for my country's 
service. 

" I will implore the blessing of heaven to 
rest upon you both, that you may be filled 



AT FOET JACKSON. 61 

with tlie Spirit, and te enabled to do mncli 
for the Master whom jou serve, and whose I 
trust and believe you are. I would ask an 
interest in your prayers that the one left be- 
hind may trustingly and cheerfully fulfil her 
tasks with submission 1:0 the will of God." 

Clary's nature was a grateful and apprecia- 
tive one; he loved to express his thankful- 
ness to those who had in any way lightened 
the burdens of his soldier life. Of one lady, 
whom he regarded as his principal benefac- 
tress when in camp at Pittsfield, he writes, 

"Mrs. F , you know, is the benevolent 

lady who cured my felon, refusing all remunera- 
tion for the same, and who, when I was ill in the 

hospital at P brought a generous supply 

of chicken broth and apples ; and now Mary 
C , the little granddaughter — whose pic- 
ture I enclose — has. S(int me such a box of 
comforts as will remind me for a long time of 

their benevolence. Mrs. F is a second 

Florence Nightingale iii spirit. Many a weary 
soul has she saved from suffering; many a 
sad heart has she made light by her self- 
sacrificing labors." 

Writing Sept. 19, he says, "We have been 



62 THE COLOK-BEAREE. 

thrown into quite an excitement by the es- 
cape of three of our rebel prisoners, who had 
been sentenced to confinement here. We 
turned out and tried the pecuharities of 
swamp travelhng in such a way as to give us 
a yivid remembrance of it for a long time. 
The wily fellows put us to a deal of trouble, 
and drew us out into a drenching rain. But 
with the help of negroes — ^better pedestrians 
than ourselves — who understood this swamp, 
we found them. They had been parley- 
ing in vain with a Frenchman, for a boat to 
pass the wide bayou, full of alHgators, and 
had just gone back towards the wood, proba- 
bly to remain till night, when they could ob- 
tain the boat without permission. A little 
before sundown they were brought into the 
fort in triumph, when each had appended to 
him a chain with a sixty-four pound ball at- 
tached. The weather here is a little more 
comfortable now; but the torments of the 
mosquitos are unabated. I am trying to 
write this letter under great difficulties, hav- 
ing a swarm of these insects buzzing about 
my head, compelling me to pause to give them 
due attention. I hope my friends will ap- 



AT FORT JACKSON. 63 

predate the letters prepared at sucli a sacri- 
fice." 

And so they did. Too well they knew the 
hardships the soldier endured. Their anx- 
ious inquiries regarding health, spirits, and 
exposure, elicited this reply: "Of all these 
I will speak freely, except in reference to one 
point, that is, our manner of living. Unless 
you urge the matter, I would rather say noth- 
ing about it. You can regard it as a case 
* where ignorance is bliss.' 

"As soon as our sixty days expire, two 
weeks longer, it will be the turn of some oth- 
er regiment to enter upon the prison life of 
the fort, and thus give us an opportunity 
again to visit the outer world. I, for one, 
shall be glad to go. While here, our mails 
are greatly hindered. We of Company D 
must cherish some sad memories of this un- 
healthy spot. To-day we must bury one of 
our number here. We have reason to hope 
that he died a Christian. 

" Dear father, I am heartily glad that you 
referred to the danger to which our morals 
are exposed. Yes, even our ofl&cers, many of 
them, are in the wrong path. I need caution, 



64 THE COLOR-BEAEER. 

that I may be no stumbling-block before oth- 
ers. I need your prayers, which I have faith 
to believe will be answered in my behalf. 

" Yes, I need all the help I can gain from 
every source, in order to bring honor to my 
Saviour's name. It certainly requires much 
wisdom, to devise and put in practise means 
of usefulness to others. Camp-life has a mul- 
titude of seductions, and I have an opportu- 
nity to witness its terrible effects upon the 
morals of those who yield to the wiles of the 
tempter. Sad havoc has been made by strong 
drink. I have seen more than one sergeant 
reduced to the ranks on account of its use. 

" Father, I feel like praying that your de- 
clining days may be your best and happiest, and 
not imbittered by the thought that I am yield- 
ing to temptation. And, mother, I often ask 
myself, why am I not more grateful for the 
early restraints of my home ? I entreat you 
to accept my thanks for your self-denying 
efforts for my good — for every prayer that has 
gone up to heaven for a blessing upon me. 
My home was never dearer to me than at the 
present time ; never was I happier in follow- 
ing the plain path of duty ; nor have I ever 



AT FORT JACKSON. 65 

been so hopeful as now, that we shall check 
this terrible war, and celebrate the anniver- 
sary of its close with -unbounded joy." 

Sergeant Clary manifested great interest 
in the little son of Rev. Mr. Howland, mis- 
sionary at Ceylon, who had been left in 
this land, with his brothers and sisters, to be 
educated. John was at the^home of Clary in 
Conway, and was almost overjoyed at the re- 
ception of the following letter, which he show- 
ed not only to all his brothers and sisters, but 
to almost the entire neighborhood. 

" FoKT Jackson, La., Oct. 14, 1862. 

"My dear John — I must write you one 
letter while we are in fort Jackson. I am 
all the more glad to do this, because father 
gives me so good a report of your conduct. 
Then again, I would like to write to you for 
your father's sake, as well as your own. You 
remember how I used to enjoy visiting at 
your house in Conway. I should miss your 
parents much if I should visit home now. 
But I do not expect to do this for a long 
time. 

" Of course we have a good deal of talk here 
about good soldiers. Now I observe those 

Cr'flr-bearer. 5 



66 THE COLOR-BEAKER. 

men make the best soldiers, who, when they 
were boys, were obedient and good. Such 
boys find it much easier to perform their duty 
when they are men. Since I commenced 
writing, one of the company, a large strong 
man, has been ordered to prepare for picket- 
guard : instead of going quietly forward and 
cheerfully obeying, he has been grumbling 
and swearing in a very unpleasant manner, 
telKng what he tvill do, and what he wo7it 
I have made up my mind that he was not 
one of the best of boys when young. 

"Tou have heard about the alligators in 
the moat that surrounds this fort. Some of 
these are from ten to fifteen feet in length, 
and I have seen several of their young, with 
bodies no longer than my hand. I saw the 
adjutant to-day with one of these creatures. 
He had it in a tub of water, and several of 
the officers were looking on while he tried to 
make it eat some sponge-cake. His alligator- 
ship would not be imposed upon. Don't you 
think the adjutant would have acted more 
wisely, if he had given the cake to some 
soldier, and fed the alligator with something 
less expensive, and better suited to his taste ? 



AT FORT JACKSON. 67 

"Oct. 15. A bright sunny morning tliis, 
and we are glad to get a little warmth, for we 
have had a cold snap. We wore our over- 
coats all day Sunday, and felt cold then. 
Some of us were obliged to go to bed in or- 
der to be comfortable. I am told that such 
changes are quite frequent during the cold 
months. So you will see that this is a very 
unhealthy place. Many of the men have 
what we call the ' shakes ;' properly, the fever 
and ague. 

"A short time since, we heard guns fired 
as if by our distant pickets, and straightway 
the long roll was beaten, and the different 
companies turned out in a hurry. There is 
always a strife at such times to see which 
company will be out in line first. At length, 
after much running to and fro, we were sent 
back to our quarters, and were told that this 
was a plan of the colonel's to see how quick 
we would turn out. 

" "Well, John, what do you think I did last 
evening? I'll tell you. On invitation of 

Sergeant N , I visited his quarters. He 

and a squad of men under his command, re- 
main there to man the casemate gun, in case 



68 THE COLOB-BEARER. 

the guerrillas should make a land attack. I 
found tliey had an old fashioned fireplace, 
^nd a fine blaze made by the good dry pine. 
Now would you like to know what use the 
sergeant made of this fire ? He took a fry- 
ing pan down and sliced into it sweet pota- 
toes, and placed thereon a piece of alligator 
meat. We chatted a while and told stories, 
while the novel mess was cooking. At length 
it was done, and by the light of the pine fire 
I proceeded to devour this strange dish with 
a relish. The sergeant asked me what my 
mother would say if she knew what I was 
eating. 

" Well, this alligator meat tasted very much 
like beefsteak. A good soldier will eat al- 
most any thing that comes before him, and if 
not so nice as he would like, will not com- 
plain; so I conclude mother will think that 
as far as eating is concerned, I am a good 
soldier. 

"I have heard a little about that false 
alarm night before last. The contrabands, 
who live in small rude huts upon the shore, 
when they found the pickets rushing by them 
to gain the fort, and firing their muskets, and 



AT FORT JACKSON. 69 

crying, ' Turn out the garrison,' thought there 
was real danger. So they bustled out of their 
little dens, shouldered a few clothes, and hur- 
ried up to the outside drawbridge. That was 
a time for the sentries who were in the secret 
to remember. The negroes begged and wept 
even to get across the bridge and inside the 
fort. It required a sergeant and seven men 
to keep the crowd back. 

" We have a dove-cote close by our door, 
which contains a flock of beautiful doves. 
There are two or three dogs in the fort, and 
the prisoners have a number of chickens. 
These remind us of home. Oranges are plen- 
tiful now at a cent apiece ; the worst of it is 
we have no money to pay for them. But we 
manage a barter trade — bread for oranges. 
Since dinner to-day, our colonel sent enough 
oranges around to give each man in the regi- 
ment one." 



to THE COLOR-BEAEER. 



CHAPTER YIII. 

DAYS OF USEFULNESS. 

Attacked with a fit of illness the last of 
October, 1862, he was taken to the hospi- 
tal, where he remained for several weeks. 

There he gained friends by his thoughtful 
attention to the wants of others, by his ten- 
derness and Christian zeal; and he was able 
to hold conversation with many with refer- 
ence to their souls' interests. His life was a 
bright example of love and of earnest devot- 
edness to the service of God, and this to 
such a degree that his unconverted comrades 
would often say, "Clary is a Christian." 

But yet his own conscience was so sensi- 
tive, that he felt and expressed the strong- 
est regret for the slightest omission of duty. 
These sentences were constantly recurring in 
his letters: "Pray that I may conquer my 
easily besetting sin — that of speaking against 
others." "Pray that I may have courage to 
rebuke swearing." "Pray that I may be a 



DAYS OF USEFULNESS. 71 

more active Cliristian." "Pray tliat I may 
'stand up for Jesus.'" "Pray that I may be 
a burning and a shining light." 

He knew that these requests were not 
shghted by friends at home, and he was as- 
sured that their prayers, as well as his own, 
were heard in heaven. His doubts were few, 
and his cup of joy often -well-nigh full, as 
was evident from the expressions of hope 
and trust that gushed from his pen. "I am 
happy;" "If God should see fit to take me, 
I am ready;" "Eejoice with them that do 
rejoice ;" "There is rest for the weary," were 
sentences that were often found in his letters 
to his friends. 

Writing to his father November 6, he 
says, "Dear father, you pray for me I know. 
The assurance does my heart good. I feel 
strengthened when my thoughts turn back, 
and I seem to see you bowed in prayer. I 
fancy I can almost tell the words that form 
the petition for your absent son. I feel hke 
pleading with you in all earnestness, to pray 
that I may be a more earnest Christian. 
There is so much in the army to prevent 
one's making positive effort, that I feel a 



72 THE COLOR-BEABER. 

want of sufficient wisdom and courage to 
approach the hearts of our men, so steeled 
against the tender and winning influences of 
the Spirit. I am ready to weep for their 
hard-heartedness ; and one might almost as 
bitterly weep for the unfaithfulness of some 
of the professed believers in Christ. Oh 
how would such repent, if they realized that 
they are wounding the Saviour in the house 
of his friends. 

"We have no regular chaplain to check 
the men in their profanity ; the Bible is sel- 
dom seen in their hands. The profanity is 
much worse than ever before in our regiment. 
Boys that would not swear when the regi- 
ment was first formed, now blaspheme with 
the utmost indifference. 

"Let me tell you of the time I have for 
my evening devotions. You know our lights 
have to be extinguished at half past eight. 
Well, it is the few minutes after this time 
that I steal away for silent communion with 
God; and at such times I do enjoy a rich 
blessing. So now you can sometimes join 
me at this sacred hour. 

"I am satisfied that silent irifluence should 



DAYS OF USEFULNESS. 73 

not satisfy the Cliristian ; positive effort is de- 
manded. I have not done my duty; and if 
called to lie down in death this night, the 
burden of souls unwarned by my entreaties 
would hang like a heavy weight upon my 
spirit. Dear parents, my heart is full to- 
night; I feel ready to resolve and to practise 
self-denial, and I have hope that I shall be 
able to tell you of something done for Jesus 
in coming days." 

And this he was able to do. In a letter 
dated December 3, 1862, he writes, " I must 
give you a little of the experience which has 
fixed the memory of the last week in autumn 
with a deep impression on my mind. Of late 
I have been assisting in the hospital. For 
four nights I sat up four hours, and had 
charge of eleven men, some of whom were 
very sick, and one at the point of death. 
Those were solemn hours to me, for I knew 
that death was coming on apace, and would 
not tarry long before claiming a victim. I 

refer to poor C . He had been in the 

hospital since the eighth of November. The 
chief nurse having returned, I went back to 
my company quarters last Saturday night, so 



74 THE COLOR-BEAKER. 

tliat I did not see liim alive after that. He 
died on the evening of the last day of au- 
tumn. 

"About a week before his death, he re- 
quested me to call upon him. I did so, and 
read a passage of Scripture, and prayed with 
him. When I realized hov>^ habitually pro- 
fane he had been, when I remembered that 
he was soon to go to his account, and that 
there was not one besides myself to speak to 
him about a preparation for death, I was 
weighed down with a sense of responsibil- 
ity such as I never felt before. I chose to 
read to him the account of the prodigal son. 
This comforted the sick man ; and the mem- 
ory of his gratitude will be one of the pleas- 
antest reminiscences of my life. 

" One night after this I was with him 
when his sufferings were more than usually 
intense, and I asked him if it would not be a 
relief for me to kneel by his bedside and 
pray; he at once replied in the affirmative, 
and I earnestly prayed that the dying soldier 
might be prepared for all God's will. 

"His mind was remarkably clear to the 
last. He did not seem to be afraid of death. 



DAYS OF USEFULNESS. 75 

I cannot help clierisliing the hope that God 
forgave the sufferer, and took him to a heav- 
enly home. There is much of sadness con- 
nected with this case, inasmuch as it pro- 
duced little or no impression upon the sur- 
viving members of his company." 

A little later he writes to his father, " The 
weather is quite cool to-day ; the north-east 
wind has no mercy on the sentinel, to whom 
the ' two hours ' are long and dreary in the 
night watch. The Mississippi water is quite 
clear and pleasant to the taste now ; I like it 
right well. I have a great deal of respect 
for the ' father of waters,' after all. The river 
will be muddy enough next spring and sum- 
mer, however. 

" On Tuesday evening news came that Gen. 
Banks had assumed command of the gulf de- 
partment, relieving Gen. Butler. We don't 
know what the latter is to do; but we can 
conscientiously praise him for his skilful 
management of affairs in the 'Crescent City,' 
since he first assumed the fearful responsi- 
bility. We have received the aj)pellation of 
Butler's Pet Eegiment, and I think Vv^ith 
some reason. At all events he made the 



T6 THE COLOR-BEARER. 

Thirtj-first his body-guard, on his trinm- 
phant entrance into New Orleans. Gen. Weit- 
zel called for our regiment to make up his 
brigade. Gen. Butler told him he could take 
any but the Thirty first." 

Writing to his mother about this time, he 
says, " Sometimes our sleep is sweet, but you 
know it is cut suddenly short by the report of 
the morning gun, which is often more loud than 
welcome. But it must be promptly obeyed, 
and straightway all the companies are form- 
ed into hne in front of their respective quar- 
ters, for roll-call. Yery soon ' coffee ' is an- 
nounced, which is the substitute here for 
those significant words, so pleasant at home, 
* breakfast is ready.' " 

Sergeant Clary often wrote with special 
earnestness to inquire for the sick and afilict- 
ed ones at home. On the reception of a letter 
from his father which conveyed the intelli- 
gence of the death of a good lady of his ac- 
quaintance, he writes, 

" I am glad that you wrote me so minutely 

about Mrs. G . I have indeed lost a near 

friend, and I cannot realize that she has gone. 
I believe we shall one day greet her in heav- 



DAYS OF USEFULNESS. tt 

en. For the orphans let us pray in faith, 
for I cannot forget the mother's anxiety for 
them." 

As has been before remarked, he found 
much to do by way of writing letters for 
the sick and illiterate. In making mention 
of this kind of labor, he speaks with surprise 
of the great number of men who were unable 
to read or write letters, and gives a detail- 
ed account of some of the labors which he 
assumed in carrying on their correspond- 
ence. 

Every thing of this kind was cheerfully done, 
and he derived much amusement and pleasure 
from the efforts thus made to assist others. 
He writes particularly of one unlearned com- 
rade for whom he acted as reader and aman- 
uensis, who would scarcely allow him to open 
his own package from home, before demand- 
ing his services. 

And thus the few remaining days at fort 
Jackson were passed — filled up with httle acts 
of kindness and greater services to those 
about him. In the army, as in every situa- 
tion, seeming trifles often make up the sum 
of human happiness or discomfort; the small 



*IS THE COLOR-BEAREE. 

•sacrifices whicli life demands are often hard- 
er to make than the great. 

Sergeant Clary exemplified in his life the 
sacred maxim, "He that is faithful in that 
which is least, is faithful also m much." 



THE COLORS RESIGNED. 79 

CHAPTEE IX. 

THE COLORS RESIGNED. 

Orders soon came for the Tliirty-first to 
leave fort Jackson ; and on February 14, 1863, 
Sergeant Clary writes, "Having received a 
large addition to our force, we think that we 
may be destined to Port Hudson. I feel will- 
ing to leave the issue of coming events with 
God. He has blessed me so signally, that I 
will not distrust him now. 

" I am glad to assure you of the smile of 
Jesus upon his unworthy young servant, and 
further, that he has heard my prayer, ' Lord, 
increase my faith.' Now we will continue to 
pray for each other in the full assurance of 
hope." 

"Magnolia Geove, below Baton Kouge, 

March 9, 1863. 

"We are now, I think, on the eve of meet- 
ing the enemy in his strong-hold at Port Hud- 
son. Here we are gathered in large force, 
probably about forty thousand infantry. We 
left camp Kearney last Friday, and arrived 



80 THE COLOK-BEARER. 

before tlie city of Baton Eouge yesterday. 
At noou we disembarked, and remained witli 
arms stacked for several hours, waiting for the 
officers to select a camp-ground. 

"During this interim many of the Fifty- 
second boys came to see us, and I will assure 
you it was no small gratification to meet a 
number of young men from my own native 
town. I could hardly make it seem other 
than a pleasant dream. I felt a thrill of hap- 
piness in grasping their hands, such as you 
might suppose would visit one in my isolated 
condition. Poor boys ! they have had much 
struggling with sickness, and have lost twenty- 
nine by death." 

March 10, his diary shows the regiment 
to be under marching orders, with seven days' 
rations cooked. " Our knapsacks are also 
packed, and the little mementos that we can- 
not part with are snugly transferred to our 
pockets. The colonel called me with the cor- 
porals of the color-guard to his tent this even- 
ing, and gave us an excellent speech. His 
words were few and well chosen, and glowed 
with such enthusiasm as fired my soul most 
deeply. I was deHghted with his full expres- 



THE COLORS RESIGNED. 81 

sion of confidence. May I never forget that 
noble speech." 

In writing to his father, March 31, he says, 
" Father, I thank you for all your letters, and 
for all the words which have cheered and en- 
couraged my heart, when I have had bitter 
trials to meet. 

" I ought to have dated this one day soon- 
er in commemoration of your birthday. I 
wish you a most happy new year, my dear 
father." 

His diary of the date of April 4, shows that 
his days were not without hardship and trial. 
" I have been suffering somewhat from sick- 
ness and a peculiar undefinable languor, which 
the debilitated soldier only knows. I never 
before had to struggle so hard to keep from 
falling out of the ranks. Great exertion in 
following up the rebels has been required 
during the forced marches of the last four 
days. I was obliged to throw away my wool- 
en blanket, the gift of Mrs. F , because 

I had not strength to carry it further. I was 
forced to take an ambulance the last two 
days." 

After a few changes of location, their brig- 



82 THE OOLOR-BEAEEB. 

ade was ordered to move up the Teche valley, 
with three days' rations. They enjoyed the 
whole march. In one of his letters he speaks 
of the cattle quietly feeding upon the hills, 
unmindful of the glittering host moving on to 
scenes of strife. The sight brought back 
thoughts of the peaceful home left behind, and 
formed a striking contrast with the warHke 
designs of the expedition. 

A letter dated May 1, written to his friends 
at home, furnishes us vdth more instances of 
his gratitude for a merciful preservation 
through the dangers of battle. " Strange, 
sad, wonderful, is the closing record of my 
life for April, 1863. A multitude of mercies 
to gladden your hearts. It seems as though 
I could not be sufficiently grateful to our 
heavenly Father, for his goodness and care. 
This is the most remarkable and eventful 
month of all my life. 

"These rapid, fatiguing marches, and the 
want of stationery, have put it out of my 
power to write frequent letters. 

" Our fight was a complete success ; our 
advance kept up a running combat with the 
retreating rebels. On Sunday another ad- 



THE COLORS RESIGNED. 83 

vance was made, and we did not have to wait 
long for tlie enemy. About 3 P. M. a com- 
pany of rebel cavalry dashed boldly out of the 
woods, and made a close reconnoissan.ce di- 
rectly in front of us, hardly a fourth of a mile 
distant. Our battery took position, and by 
a few shells which did good execution, put 
them to flight. But we were soon surprised 
by a rebel battery, to which our own respond- 
ed with terrific fury. There was now heavy 
firing on either side. The shells were burst- 
ing around us nearer and nearer. 

" The flag was getting to be a conspicuous 
mark. The shells were flying thicker and 
faster, bursting around us and over our heads. 

One piece of shell went between Corp. W 

and me, burjing itself in the earth. A few 
minutes after, a heavy cannon-ball struck 
close beside our colonel, and threw the earth 
a dozen feet into the air. The rebels were 
getting excellent range, and our situation w^as 
becoming critical. The order was given for 
us to fall back under shelter of some trees; 
then darkness came and we lay down to rest, 
ready to spring into line at any moment. 

" The colors were close to my side that 



84 THE COLOR-BEAEER. 

night, as I lay sleepless on the battle-field. 
During the night the enemy had approached 
our lines with gunboats and batteries. The 
firing in the morning became hot and heavy. 
But reinforcements were coming to us over 
the bridge. The Thirty-first were sent out as 
skirmishers, and I was ordered to the rear 
with the colors until they should be needed. 
There I remained in suspense, listening to the 
terrible cannonade. 

" One of our regiment, of company B, was 
shot through the heart early in the morning, 
and three of our own company were wounded. 

" Finally, our regiment being reheved by 
the Thirty-eighth Massachusetts, the adjutant 
rode up to us with the order, ' Out with those 
colors — double quick !' A welcome summons 
to the color-bearer." 

Our hero was still suffering from debility, 
but God sustained him wonderfully, and the 
successful issue of the Teche battle filled him 
with joy and gratitude. 

His letters for some time had become in- 
fi-equent, and now the pause was longer than 
ever. His fond parents looked for news from 
the army with great anxiety. The non-arrival 



THE COLORS RESIGNED. 85 

of letters for a few weeks was sufficient evi- 
dence tliat something unusual was taking 
place. They perused the newspapers more 
eagerly; and went about their daily occupa- 
tions with thoughtful and care-burdened 
hearts. 

They remembered also those words in his 
last letter, "We slept on the battle-field, 
where we had been fighting. It was cold and 
raining; we had no blanket to shelter us. 
The groans of the wounded and dying filled 

our hearts with sadness. Corporal P and 

myself made a mutual promise that if either 
should fall in death, the other would visit the 
home of the deceased and give particulars." 
But a merciful God preserved his life during 
these battles. 

The next letter that came from the gulf de- 
partment was written by a strange hand. 
The fears of his friends were realized. It an- 
nounced Sergeant Clary's death. It was ^vrit- 
ten by his college friend Sergeant "Wilder, who 
fell at the battle of Sabine Cross Roads, April 
8, 1864 — a young man of much promise, a 
brave soldier, and a true Christian. 



86 THE COLOR-BEARER. 

" Cahip neah Poet Hudson, June 15, 1863. 
"Dea. John Clahy: 

" Dear Sir — It becomes my mournful duty 
to inform you of the death of your son Fran- 
cis A. Clary, color-sergeant of the Thirty-first 
Massachusetts Volunteers. 

"Yesterday morning the Thirty-first, with 
other regiments, advanced, with the expecta- 
tion of charging upon the enemy's works, un- 
til they arrived under a hne of entrenchments, 
where they were ordered to lie down. For 
some reason, no charge was ordered, and they 
remained in the same position all day, exposed 
to a galling fire. 

" In the afternoon your son was mortally 
wounded, and lived less than an hour after. 
He retained his consciousness ; and although 
in much pain at first, finally died easily. His 
wound was in the neck on the left side, the 
ball not coming out. When first struck ho 
said, *I am wounded; some one else must 
take the colors now.' He afterwards called 
several times for water, which was given him ; 
and he bade his companions ' good-by.' 

"These facts I gathered from those who 
were with him when he died. As I am now 



THE COLOES RESIGNED. 87 

in the quarter-master's department, I was not 
■with, the regiment in battle, and had no op- 
portunity of seeing him myself until he was 
gone. 

" This morning I saw him laid in his last 
earthly resting-place, beneath the shadow of 
a large forest-tree. 

" The night previous to his death, I had a 
pleasant interview with him; he appeared 
very cheerful and happy, and said that he had 
enjoyed his devotions to an unusual degree 
for some time previous. 

" He desired me to take charge of his little 
diary, and said that for the few past weeks 
he had not had an opportunity for writing 
home, owing to the long and fatiguing march- 
es, the fighting, and the care which he found 
it necessary to take of his health. He said 
that no gloomy forebodings caused him to 
ask me to write to you, if any thing should 
befall him in battle ; and I am of the opinion 
that his usual forethought, in view of what 
might happen, and not any presentiment, led 
him to do this. 

" From what I have heard my friend Clary 
say of his father, I know that you are one 



88 THE COLOR-BEABER. 

Tvlio recognizes God's hand in every event — 
that you will say, 'The Lord gave, and the 
Lord hath taken away;' blessed be his holy 
name. The conduct of your son, ever since I 
first knew him, has been such as became a 
patriot and a Christian. You sorrow then, not 
as those without hope. The Saviour whom 
he loved, in whose service he lived, hoping to 
spend many years among the benighted of 
foreign lands, has called him to himself. 
This thought makes me feel less grieved at 
the loss of my friend. I know that what is 
our loss is his gain ; and assured of this, I feel 
greater freedom in writing to you, and in this 
feeble way offering to you the balm of conso- 
lation. Few hve so exemplary a life as did 
your son ; few die a nobler death ; and though 
dying so early, he has accomplished the work 
which God gave him to do. 

" You must feel deeply afflicted by the dis- 
appointment of so many fond anticipations ; 
but may God grant that like the Psalmist you 
may be able to say, *It is good for me that I 
have been afflicted.' May you and those other 
dear ones who are called to mourn, be drawn 
nearer to God by this affliction, feel more of 



THE COLORS liESIGNED. 89 

liis love in jour hearts, and be able to say 
with childlike submission, ' Thy will be done.' " 

Following this touching letter, there came 
some testimonials from the army. 

The Greenfield Gazette published the fol- 
lowing notice : 

"July 6, 1863. Francis A. Clary, son of 
Dea. John Clary of Conway, color-bearer of 
the Thirty-first Massachusetts regiment, was 
another victim to the rebelhon, in the assault 
on Port Hudson. He was killed while bear- 
ing the banner of freedom up to the rebel 
works. He is spoken of as a promising young 
man, and of excellent principles." 

The same paper of 'a later date contained 
a testimonial from a member of his regi- 
ment. 

" Sergeant Francis A. Clary of Conway, 
Company D, killed. He was color-sergeant, 
and often said he should be killed in the first 
severe engagement. In the army his was a 
beautiful example of a consistent Christian 
life. That he was ready to die none can doubt. 
* I believe Clary was a sincere Christian,' was 
a remark recently made by a comrade, speak- 
ing of the occurrence. Struck with tht re- 



90 THE COLOR-BEARER. 

mark, I cannot lielp asking, what better epi- 
taph, could a man desire?" 

An extract from a letter of Captain Nettle- 
ton of the same regiment, published in the 
Springfield Eepubhcan, and dated July 10, 
contains this statement : " Color-sergeant 
Francis A. Clary was killed holding the colors 
in his hands. He was a brave man, one who 
would not shun death, nor seek it recklessly, 
but who would meet it calmly and with true 
courage. He was a sincere and well-tried 
Christian — not only professing, but perform- 
ing his duty ; and was universally respected.'* 



THE SOLDIEK AND CHEISTIAN. 91 



CHAPTEE X. 

TRIBUTES TO THE SOLDIER AND THE 
CHRISTIAN. 

The death of the young soldier was a crush- 
ing blow to the friends who had centred so 
many hopes upon him. The work to which 
he had been destined was so sacred, and he 
so well fitted for a life of usefulness, it almost 
seemed as if God must spare him for the ful- 
filment of a mother's prayers. But the mourn- 
ing hearts bowed in submissive silence, know- 
ing that He who appoints every human lot 
understands best how his children can serve 
him, and remembering that the issues of life 
and of death are in his hands. While they 
sat thus "in the shadow of their great afflic- 
tion," sorrowing, yet not without hope, many 
tributes to the worth of the departed came to 
them from friends outside the family circle. 
Some of these letters, whose tenderness and 
sympathy lightened the burden of their sor- 
row, illustrate also the character of Sergeant 
Clary. 



92 THE COLOR-BEARER. 

Tlie first is from Mrs. Howland, tlie mother 
of the boy to whom Clary wrote so long a 
letter from fort Jackson, and in whom he al- 
ways had taken a deep interest ; it is dated 
at her missionary home in Ceylon, Sept. 9, 
1863. 

" The loved Francis — how many pleasant 
conversations we had with him in our Con- 
way home ! He would sit down by Mr. How- 
land, like a son or a brother, and speak free- 
ly of his difficulties — his feelings — his plans. 
I remember just how he looked, when he 
came to bid us good-by. He said he never 
felt more fully persuaded than now, that he 
was in the path of duty. 

" "When we have had anxious thoughts 
about him, it has been a comfort to us that 
he had consecrated himself to the work as the 
Lord's work; and we felt that he would be 
blessed, whatever should happen to his earth- 
ly form. 

" Though you feel his death so deeply, yet 
how different are your feelings from those of 
parents whose sons entered the war impeni- 
tent. But I need not recall such thoughts to 
you ; your own mind has supphed them. You 



THE SOLDIEK AND CHRISTIAN. 93 

have had the sympathy and prayers of a 
large circle of friends, but the Saviour has 
given you that comfort which they cannot 
give. 

"Mr. Howland spoke in monthly concert 
last Sabbath about Francis. We hope his 
example may do good here in India, and thus 
help to accompHsh his wish to labor as a mis- 
sionary." 

The following letter from Geo. W. Barber, 
a student at Amherst college, who had him- 
self lost an arm in battle, shows the influence 
Sergeant Clary had over him. 

♦'Oct. 11, 1863. 

" I esteemed Francis as one of my dearest 
friends. Ever since I became acquainted 
with him at the Normal School at Westfield, 
I have been strongly attached to him. His 
warm heart, correct example, and self-sacri- 
ficing spirit stimulated me to set my own 
mark higher. His consistency and zeal in his 
Master's service quickened and encouraged 
me moi-e in the Christian race than any oth- 
er influences that were brought to bear upon 
me, when I had but just commenced to run. 

" When I had finished my course at West- 



94 THE COLOR-BEAKER. 

field, I had a desire to climb fartlier up the 
hill of science, that I might make myself more 
useful in the world; but as my means were 
limited, I saw no way of attaining my desires. 
About this time I visited Francis at his home, 
and made my wishes known to him. He re- 
plied to me in substance as follows : 'Dedicate 
yourseK to the Lord, and he will open a way 
before you to usefulness. If you feel it to be 
your duty to proclaim the gospel, do not 
hesitate, or expect to see the path clear from 
the beginning through your whole course; 
but take the first step in the path of duty, and 
the succeeding one will be more evident.' He 
then told me of the academy at Meriden, 
where I could obtain some assistance, and 
advised me to go there and prepare for col- 
lege. I did so, and am now at Amherst. 

"It was his advice that led me to make the 
trial, trusting in the Lord. I now feel grate- 
ful for the salutary influence which he exert- 
ed over me ; and for the kind counsel and ad- 
vice which he gave. I had hoped to express 
these thoughts to him; but I never can on 
earth. I hope to meet him in a world where 
wars and fightings are not known, and to 



THE SOLDIER AND CHEISTIAN. 95 

enjoy his society, with all the blood- washed 
throng around the throne of God." 

C. M. Lamson, a college classmate, writes 
of him: 

"July 27, 1863. 

" We always honored him for the integrity 
that made him scorn those httle meanness- 
es which college morality so often winks at. 
We admired in him that love of order and 
those correct habits of study, which go far to 
make up the perfect student. To mention his 
correct, consistent Christian character, would 
be to relate nothing new to you, who have 
watched the earnestness of his piety from the 
beginning, and the constant strengthening of 
his j)urpose to carry out the wishes of a dying 
mother. 

" We missed him in our meetings for pra}^- 
er, for in these he showed that his spirit 
walked with God. Must we not believe that 
his mission is now accomplished, and that his 
walk is where no veil hinders his vision? The 
first words I heard after the announcement 
of his fall were, ' There is one killed who went 
to the war because he thought it was his 
duty.'" 



96 THE COLOR-BEAKER. 

The following tribute was received from 
Lieut.-Col. W. S. B. Hopkins, of the Thirty- 
first Massachusetts Volunteers. 

"Baton Eouge, La., Sept. 22, 1863. 

"Your letter of the 7th inst., making in- 
quiries about the late Sergeant Francis A. 
Clary, was duly received, and although I am 
unacquainted with his history before his en- 
listment, I gladly pay my tribute of honor to 
the memory of a brave soldier. 

"Sergeant Clary left Amherst college and 
enlisted in a company which I was then rais- 
ing for one of the regiments which Gen. Butler 
was organizing in Massachusetts for his ex- 
pedition against New Orleans. He was early 
selected for color-sergeant of the regiment, 
on account of his soldierly bearing, and the 
accuracy of his marching. From the first, 
every one felt that the colors were safe in the 
hands of Clary; for there was in him that 
quiet but intelligent determination, which 
stamped him as a gallant man, even before 
his bravery was ever tested. 

"If a life of consistent Christianity, with- 
out obtrusiveness, amid all the excitement of 



THE SOLDIER AND CHRISTIAN. 91 

army life, can make bravery more admirable, 
then was Clary a model soldier. 

'^I think that he always had the impres- 
sion that he shonld not live long. His posi- 
tion in line of battle, as the bearer of the 
colors, was one of more than common dan- 
ger, and that fact he fully appreciated. He 
was however at last killed by a chance shot, 
when the regiment lay on the field, within 
two hundred yards of the guns of Port Hud- 
son. Through' three other battles, he had 
borne himself gallantly and safely. He was 
reserved as a sacrifice for the last fight of 
that siege which finally opened the Missis- 
sippi river. 

"Beloved by his comrades, respected and 
admired by all, he died the death of a Chris- 
tian soldier. Able, gallant, and conscientious, 
he has fallen in his prime, without any other 
personal glory than that he died a patriot 
martyr. Who would wish more?" 

Sergeant Wilder was with the subject of 
this memoir during his army life probably 
more than any other person, and we add one 
more letter from him, written to a fiiend of 
the deceased soldier. 



98 THE COLOR-BEAEEB. 

"From tlie time of Sergeant Clary's enlist- 
ment until liis cleatli, we were together much, 
and I can testify truly to his worth. Dearly 
as he loved his country, he loved his heaven- 
ly Master better, and in volunteering to de- 
fend the one, he sincerely believed he was 
advancing the cause of the other. Few mark 
out for themselves so self-denying a life as 
he did ; but I know from what I heard him 
repeatedly say, after the hardships of a sol- 
dier's life had been experienced, and ample 
time had elapsed for the early enthusiasm 
to subside, that he never regretted his course 
in entering the army. 

"That so conscientious a young man as 
Sergeant Clary should have been so fully 
j)ersuaded that this was his post of duty, in- 
stead of being in China in fulfilment of his 
long-cherished plans to become a missionary 
of the Cross, is one of the highest tributes to 
the real nature of our cause, and to the mo- 
tives which actuate many of its defenders. 
Religion to him was not a Sabbath garb, 
donned once a week; it was the deep con- 
trolhng iniluence which moulded his whole 
life. In private, he was much given to med- 



THE SOLDIER AKD CHRISTIAN. 99 

itation and prayer; and I have recently neard 
one who was with him much during the long 
marches in the Teche country and to Port 
Hudson, remark that from morning till night, 
when not otherwise necessarily employed, he 
was engaged in devotion. With truth can it 
be said of him, he walked with God. 

"He was very sensitive, earnestly desiring 
the good opinion of others ; but he never 
allowed this to interfere with his duty, what- 
ever odium he might incur by its perform- 
ance. 

"As a soldier he held a high place. Ever 
faithful in the discharge of his duties, he 
never grumbled at the trials incident to a sol- 
dier's hfe, but cheerfully bore them, and so 
far from shirking any part of his duty, he 
seemed to desire to know and perform work 
from which he might have been exempt. For 
instance, at fort Jackson, where the regi- 
ment remained as garrison for many months, 
he voluntarily went on guard, participated in 
the drills, and performed other duties, which 
as color-sergeant he might have avoided. 
His tall manty form we shall no longer see 
bearing the colors of the Thirty-first; but 



100 THE COLOR-BEARER. 

tlie example wliicli lie set ns of true piety 
and ardent patriotism, will not soon pass 
away. Those wlio were but sligiitly acquaint- 
ed with him unite in praise of his worth; 
while others more familiar with him feel 
most deeply that by his removal they are 
bereft of a fiiend whose loss cannot be made 
good. As a Christian, I know of no one in 
the regiment who is worthy to wear the man- 
tle of Sergeant Clary." 

Thus those who knew him well, loved and 
appreciated him; but the Friend above who 
called him so early home, knew and loved 
him better still. His virtues blossom now in 
the light of a sinless world, in the sunshine 
of his Saviour's nearer smile. 

If none other wears his mantle, every sol- 
dier may share the grace that made him 
what he was — a true man, a brave soldier, 
and a devoted Christian. 



CONCLUSION. 101 



CHAPTER XI. 

CONCLUSION. 

The deatli of one wlio falls in a noble cause, 
is like a torch at which the enthusiasm of 
survivors is kindled. The flame of heroic 
emulation flashed up in the soul of many a 
young man who had not yet enhsted in the 
army of the Union and of freedom, when he 
heard that another color-bearer had been 
struck down by rebel bullets in the attack up- 
on Port Hudson. 

That young color-bearer held yet another 
flag in sight of his regiment — the banner of 
the Cross. " Conquer by this," had long been 
his motto; and under this banner have the 
great victories of the world been achieved. 

The struggle in which our nation is engaged 
would indeed be a fruitless one, if the Cross, 
if the pure principles of Christianity thereby 
typified, were not its deepest source of inspi- 
ration. When Clary fell, calling, "I am 
wounded ; some one else must take the colors 



102 THE COLOR-BEABEK. 

now;" he spoke for the standaVd of the Cross 
as well as for that of the Union. How many 
of his fellow-soldiers have felt the meaning of 
his dying cry, and have rushed to catch both 
banners from his faithful hand ? 

If the death of a good soldier speaks so 
loudly to his comrades, what then is the mes- 
sage of his life ? "When a spirit so full of holy 
enthusiasm as his passes away from earth, 
we feel more deeply the need of true men — 
men of sincerity, energy, and unfaltering 
principle. The world itself is bereaved when 
a young man of such promise dies. The 
barren plains of China mourn for Clary, as 
well as the bright hills and blossoming fields 
of his pleasant Conway home. Christian 
ardor and resolution like his are rare, yet not 
unattainable. 

The work that drox3ped from his dying 
hands has the same need of accomphshment 
as if he had lived. There is a yet louder de- 
mand than ever for Christian soldiers. Chris- 
tian citizens, and Christian missionaries, be- 
cause of those who have fallen in the dew of 
their early consecration. The blood of the 
martyred dead calls out to their brethren 



CONCLUSION. 103 

from the ground, to fill the posts they so 
bravely held on the battle-field of life. If 
ever there was a time when the young men of 
the nation should especially feel their respon- 
sibility to God and their fellow-beings, it is 
now. 

And the secret of Sergeant Clary's excel- 
lent life, at home, at college, and in the army — 
that which gives the clue to his faithfulness 
in meeting duty, his calmness and courage in 
facing danger — is his constant reliance upon 
the Saviour in whom he trusted, his habitual 
reference of all that concerned himself and 
his friends to the power and love of God. 
The word of God was dear to him — the com- 
panion of his days and nights on the battle- 
field. On the morning of June 14, he read 
his last chapter, the second of the second 
epistle to Timothy. Surely he had endur- 
ed "hardness as a good soldier of Jesus 
Christ." 

The 11th, 12th, 13th, and 15th verses were 
marked by his own hand, as having been 
committed to memory on the morning of his 
last day spent on earth. 

The fifteenth verse, the last one marked in 



104 THE OOLOK-BEABER. 

his Testament, must ever bring a precious 
memory to liis friends, as giving the key to 
his early closed life ; and as showing that to 
his latest hour he cherished faithfully the 
thought of his early vows, " Study to show 
thyself approved of God." 

He had for some months previous been 
reading in the " Soldier's Text-Book." The 
passage of Scripture in that, for the morning 
of the fifteenth, was peculiarly appropriate: 
"And God shall wipe away all tears from their 
eyes ; and there shall be no more death, nei- 
ther sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be 
any more pain ; for the former things are pass- 
ed away." Rev. 21:4. The accompanying 
beautiful remarks are, "Happy prospect, 
when I shall forget my present aching hours, 
this racked body and wearied spirit, and be 
ushered into the bright sunshine of a tear- 
less, painless, sorrowless world." 

" Oh, that I had wings like a dove ; for then 
would I fly away, and be at rest." 

And doubtless in those last fearful hours of 
the battle-field, he remembered and adopted 
as his own the words of his favorite psalm, 
the 27th : " For in the time of trouble he 



CONCLUSION. 105 

shall liide me in his pavilion; in the secret of 
his tabernacle shall he hide me ; he shall set 
me up upon a rock. And now shall my head 
be lifted up above mine enemies round about 
me; therefore will I offer in his tabernacle 
sacrifices of joj; I will sing, yea, I will sing 
praises unto the Lord." 

The source at which this young soldier 
quenched his soul's thirst in hours of bodily 
and spiritual conflict, is free to all. The 
treasure-house that supplied him with sword 
and shield, and armor of proof, remains open ; 
and the cause of the nation, of humanity, of 
God, calls aloud for defenders. 

First a soldier of Christ, then of his coun- 
try; this was Sergeant Clary's example. 

There is lonehness in the home that once 
echoed to his footsteps, in the hearts where 
the fragrance of his memory yet lingers. 
They who are regretted in death are they who 
have blessed others by the usefulness and 
hohness of their lives. 

But the voice of the Christian hero is not 
wholly hushed by the ceasing of his mortal 
b>reath. Clary yet speaks ; and the message 
that comes from his grave, and fr'om his 



106 THE COLOR-BEAKEB. 

abode of peace in tlie heavenly world, is 
this: 

"Live in the truth. Die for the truth." 

"Figlit the good fight; lay liold 
Ujpon eternal life: 
Keep but thy shield — ^be bold; 

Stand through the hottest strife. 
"With thy great Captain on the field, 
Thou canst not fail, unless thou yield. 

*' Trust in thy Saviour's might; 

Yea, till thy latest breath 
Fight, and like him in fight, 

By dying, conquer death; 
And all- victorious in the field. 
Then, with thy sword, thy spirit yield." 



WQ)it lh% YQ)mmg. 



LIFE ILLUSTRATED. 

MAY COVERLEY. 

The trials and success of a young dressmaker. 224 pp. 
18mo: 

ABEL GREY. 

A young musician rising from poverty to distinction. 
212 pp. 18mo. 

HANNAH LEE. 

Severe trials and reward of a faithful domestic. 208 pp. 
18mo. 

DOWN IN A MINE. 

The miner's mode of life, his dangers, and his security. 
208 pp. 18mo. 

THE LITTLE SEA-BIRD. 

A child rescued from a wreck, trained for God, and re- 
stored to her parents. 192 pp. 18mo. 

KATIE SEYMOUR. 

Youthful piety illustrated in doing good. 152 pp. 18mo. 

MY BROTHER BEN. 

The struggles and victories of a fatherless family. 142 
pp. 18m0i 

HARRY THE WHALER. 

His voyage to the northern regions. 138 pp. 18mo. 

HARRY THE SAILOR-BOY. 

By the sam« author as the above. A story for boj^s. 
119 pp. 18mo. 

THE NAUGHTY GIRL WON, 

By ^the power of Christian love. 135 pp. ISmo. 

MARCIA AND ELLEN. 

An example of filial affection and patient industry. 126 
pp. 18mo. 



THE GOLD BKACELET. 

The rewards of honesty. 122 -p-p. 18mo. 

THE ROCKET. 

The story of the self-made George Stephenson of Eng- 
land. 118 pp. ISmo. 

MACKEREL WILL. 

The reclaimed children. 116 pp. 18mo. 

AMY'S HEW HOME. 

Trust in God our safety in trials. 112 -pp. 18mo. 

TRAMPS IJSH NEW YORK. 
Lively and instructive sketches of institutions and scenes 
in a great city. 104 pp. 18mo. 

STEPS UP THE LADDER, 

Or the Will and the Way. 103 pp. 18mo, 

THE FLOWER-BOY OF THE PRAIRIE. 

Benny of the West rising from poverty to be a success- 
ful merchant. 102 pp. ISmo. 

GRACE ABBOTT, 

Or the Sunday Tea-party. 95 pp. 18mo. 

THE YOUNG HOP-PICKERS. 

Successful Christian effort for the neglected. 85 pp. 
18mo. 

The above, with about three hundred other volumes of 
great value and attraction for children, 

ARE ISSUED BY THE 

150 Nassau-street, NE^IV YORK; 40 Cornliill, BOS- 
TON; 939 Cliestiiiit-st., FHILiADEIiPHIA; 75 Stati- 
st., ROCHESTER; iC3 'Walniit-st., CINCINNATI; 
170 Clark-st., CHICIAGO ; 9 Soiitli-Fiftli-st., ST. 
liOUIS; 73 ^'est-Fayette-st,, BAL.TIMOI?E, and by 
Booksellers in tlie principal Cities and Towns. 



BY A FAVORITE AMERICAN AUTHORESS. 



IN LARGE, CLEAE TYPE, FINELY ILLUSTEATED, AND OF 
GREAT INTEREST. 

"CHEERILY, CHEERILY." 

The straggles and triumplis of a widow and lier children. 
205 pp. 18mo. 

THE BLUE FLAG, 

Or the Sailor's Home ; very attractive. 200 pp. 18mo. 

THE BOY»PATRIOT. 

A charming book for boj^s. 180 pp. 18mo. 

EMILY AND UNCLE HANSE. 
The power of Christian love in an adopted child. 150 pp. 
18mo. 

AMY AND HER BROTHERS. 
The rich reward of love and labor united. 149 pj). iSmo. 

KELLY NASH. 
The boy who * ' didn't care. " 138 pp. 18mo. 

HANNAH'S PATH. 
How love clears np life's pathway. 118 pp. 18mo, 

THE WOODMAN'S NANNETTE. 
A touching story of a deaf mute. 110 pp. 18mo. 

BUSTER AND BABY JIM. 

Hope for the perishing. 109 pp. ISmo. 

THE FISHERMAN'S BOY. 
The stammerer taught of God. 101 pp. 18mov 

THE PROMISED ONE, 
As revealed in the Old Testament. 63 pp. square form. 

STRANGERS IN GREENLAND. 

wThe missionary family and Dr. Kane. 5G pp. square. 



SQUARE SIZE. 



iTirst iTootsteps hi tlje tOaj? of Enot33Ubge. 

Beautiful lessons for j'oung cliildren. 

CHILD'S HISTORY OF THE APOSTLE PAUL, 
By the author of "That Sweet Story of Old;" embodying 
the great outlines of his life, teachings, and lah.ors, in a 
manner adapted to the young. 

SKETCHES FROM THE HISTORY OF JERICHO. 
In illustration of the power of faith. By an accomplished 
lady. 

Strangers in C?5recnlanb. 

Depicting the adventures of Dr. Kane, and the greater 
courage and patience of the first Danish missionary, and 
his heroic wife Ann IJlgede. By a favorite authoress. 

BETHLEHEM AND HER CHILDREN. 

Containing the Grave at Bethlehem, the Bride, the King, 
and the Babe of Bethlehem. With colored frontispiece. 

THE MORI^imG STAR, 

Or, Stories about the Childhood of Jesus. 
Colored frontispiece. 

EASY LESSONS FOR THE LITTLE ONES AT HOME. 
Colored frontispiece, and other engravings. 

"THAT SWEET STOKY OF OLD;" 

Or, the History of Jesvis. 
Colored frontispiece. 

Joseph and his Brethren. 

Colored frontispiece. 

PUBLISTTED BY THE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

And for sale at its Depositories, 150 Nassaxi-st., New York ; 
40 Cornhill, Boston ; 929 Chestnut-st., Philadelphia; Bal- 
timore, Rochester, and Cincinnati. 



km 21 W)'^ 



^ 



m 



LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 




013 763 710 8 ^ 



