Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 







S: 




V 



OF THE 

AMERICAN 

HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY 

KBCOMMENDED BY 

A «0NVBSm01ff 

1 

OF THE 

nXBZffBS OF MZ8SZ01V8, 

HELD IN THE CITY OF NEW-YORK, MAY 10, 1826, 

AHP ADOPTED BT THE 
TOaSTHER WITH THE 

FOURTH REPORT 

or THB XiJUW HIJLXBB 8O0XBT7. 

PRESEMTED B7 THE EXKGUTXVE COMmTTEE, AT THE ANNIVERSARt 

USSTING, JtfAT 12 1826. 

anitj^ an SlppenHftr. 



PRINTEp BT D. FANSHAW, AMEEfOAV TRACT SOCIETY HOUSE, 

Ko. 87 NaMav-street 

His" 



it 



, C IS- 3 

els' 



\ 



I 



» • 



CONSTITUTION 



OF THI 

AmouoAar bomb mnnoKjkxr soonnnr. 



ARTICLE 1. This Society shall be denominated ^^ The AMSRicAif 
Home Missionary Societt." 

Aet. 2. The great object of this Society shall be to assist con- 
gregations that are unable to sifpport the Gospel Ministry, and i0 
send the Gospel to the destitute, within the United States. 

Art. 3. The officers of the Society shall be a President, Vice- 
Presidents, a Treasurer, an Auditor, a Corresponding Secretary, a 
Recording Secretary, and fifty Directors, who shall be annually 
appointed by the Society ; and who, together with the Directors for 
life, shall constitute a Board, seven of whoiQ shall be a quorum, at 
any meeting regularly convened. 

Art. 4. The Officers and Directors shall appoint an £](ecutive> 
Committee of thirteen, (including the Treasurer, the Corresponding 
Secretary, and the Recording Secretary,) residing in the City of 
New- York and its vicinity ; seven of whom shall be a quorum, at 
any meeting regularly convened. This Committee shall have power 
to appoint its own meetings, form its own rules of business, and fill 
any vacancies in its own number which may occur during the year^ 
and to convene special meetings of the Board or Society; shall 
appoint Missionaries, and instruct them as to the field and manner 
of their labours ; shall have the disposal of the funds ; shall create 
such agency or agencies for appointing Missionaries, and for other 
purposes, as the interests &i the Institution may require ; and shall 
make an Annual Report of their proceedings to the Society. 

Art. 5. The Treasurer shall give bonds annually to such amount 
as the Executive Committee shall think proper. 

Art. 6. Any person may become a member of this Society by 
contributing annually to its funds ; thirty dollars paid at one time 
shall constitute a Member for life; and one hundred dollars paid at 
one time shall constitute a Director for life ; and any person, on the 
payment of a sum, which, in addition to any previous contribution, 
to the funds, shall amount to one hundred dollars, shall be a Dlrector 
for life. An executor, on paying a legacy of two hundred and fifty 
dollars to the funds of this Society, shall be a Member for life ; and 
the payment of a legacy of one thousand dollars shall constitfite him 
a Director for life. 



Art. 7- Any Missionary Society may become auxiliary by agrees 
ing to pay into the Treasury of this Society the whole of its surplus 
funds, and sending to the Corresponding Secretary a copy of its 
Constitution and Annual Reports, ajentioniog i\ke names of their 
Missionaries, and the nelds of their operations. 

Art. 8. Every Auxiliary Society which shall agree to pay the 
whole of its funds to this Society, shall be entitled to a Missionary, 
or Missionaries, to labour in such field as it may designate ; at least 
to the amount of i^s contributions j provided such de^gnjttifuat be 
made at the time of payment. 

Art. 9. The officers of all Auxiliary Societies shall be, ex-officio. 
Directors; and annual contributors to their funds shall be members 
of this Society. 

Art. 10. The Society shall meet annually in the City ^f Nevf^ 
York, on the Wednesday next preceding the second Thi^day ip JVfay. 

A^T* 1^* ^^ alteration shall be made in this Coqst^uf\pn with- 
out a vote of tiii^o-thirds of the Members present, at an annual meet- 
ing, 9or unless the same shall have be^n proposed at a previous 
annual .meeting, ^r recommended by the Execudve Cpmmjtiee. 



rrr— r 



PROCEEPiNaS 

i^EStJ?.TiNc; IN THE i:o]^MA:f:iOLX 

OF THE 



A ^on^ise history of the measures which have resulted in Hm 
ibcmation of the '' American Home Mbsionary Society'* h 
ccmtained in the fotlowing Circular, with its aocompwying 
documents, which, in the month of'^March, 1826, was ad- 
dressed to a large number of the friends of Qfii^sions^ of the 
Congregational, Presbyterian, ai^d Dutch Reformed Churches, 
in all parts of the United States! 



The Executive Committee of the XJmiedDovMstie Missio'ftfi»y Society have Jbr 
9everai years, felt anincreasing conviction that a more extended (iffieirtfjin' the pr^ 
fionof " Borne Mimowi'^ii equally indispensable to the moral aavaneemeiU andpo^ 
lilictayltMUy of the United Stat^, Tkey have.beheld with saiisfaetiont tft^tfi* 
mon with their eountrymenf the unexampled increase of this ntfig^iknitkfWi^tf^.^a^ 



I 



resoureet, mndhaue eorUempUxted, ffiith gratitude to God, the mighty union of wealthy 
and talent, andpiety, which hare been enlisted in the promotion ofteveral other ob' 
jut9ofnationaleh0niy. Nor wndd they pan over, ag ineontiderable among Uu re$yita 
of the philanthropic efforts qfthe American churches, the good which the blessing 
of Godupon their munificence has already enabled this andother local Domestic Mu- 
sumary Sodeiies to accomplish. It is delightful to reflect thai, in instances not afeto, 
through the instrumentality of Societies now existing^the solitary place has been 
made gflad by the voice of one who was sent to priAGh the Gospel to the poor. Bui the 
more the wnSlersigned have been ofUed, in the discharge of their approfuiate diuiiUf 
to acquaint themselves with the spiritual wants of the rising communities of the West 
and Southy and the destitute condition of considerable portions of the older slaiet, 
the more decided is their conviction that mere local efforts muel be, for ever, inatUf* 
quale to accomplish the wishes of the benevolent. The field which is now waiting 
for the eultivattng hand of the ehurches of these UwUed lxaie*,and which ie widen-* 
ingwUh every wove ofemigralion thed beats back the weHemwldimefSt reqmree <| 
concentration of the nation^ s strength to supply it with labourers sufficient to gather 
inits harvest. 

This Committee have therefore noticed, of late, with no ordinary pleasure, the 
progress ofpuhUe aentinunl friendly to the formation of a noHonai Semetyftr Bome 
Mimons. With solidtious interest, also, have thep watched every movement ithidt 
has been made toward the accomplishment of this immensely important and high' 
ly patriotic design. With the same interest, they now eheerfally assukme the Mui 
reposed in thein by the dot^imenis recefrded on the opposite page of thU sheet, 
and proceed to invite the attentionofthe Christian public to further measures. HaV' 
ing also held correspondence ufith individuals at the South and West, and received 
from oU a uniform and eordiiU emnrestion of deep iniereet in the object, we Hmmt 
entertain a doubt that, in the good providenu qf God* Amerieem Christians of the 
Congregational, Presbyterian, and DiUeh Reformed denomination are prepared to 
sanction the measure which we now propose, and to unite in one concentrated and 
intense effort to build up the wastes of our comnum country, and supply all her des- 
titute with the means of salvation. 

The iPxeeutive Committee have accordingly resolved to irmte a meeting of the 
Directors of the United Dotnestie Missumary Society, together toith other fhends 
vf mssions in the United States, to convene at the sessioh room of the Rriek Pros* 
byterian Church in this city, on Wednesday, the tenth day of May ne^U, at eight 
o^clock A. M., for the purpose of forming an American Hove Missionart 

SOOIBTT. 

Permit us, Sir, earnestly to soHcit your counsel and the weight of your influence 
at that meting. And may He who is head ever aH things to the Church, guide the 
deliberations of those who shall take part in this benevolent ettterprise, and make 
the contemplated Society a river of life to the An^erican people, and a glory in 
the midst of them. 

With sentiments qf respect and affection. 

Yours, in the service of the ehurehee, 

' ABSALOM PETERS, Corresponding feretory. 

Peter Hawes, Treasurer. 
^ Stephen Locxwood, Recording Secretary. 

JoHR D. Keese, Chairman of the Executive Committee. 
Gardiner SpRiNa, "X /Eleazer Lord, 

Jaum M. M4TB.W., / i^7lL%^ >«"»"«• Tajm», 
Thomas Mac Aulet, > iMmutic Mimj^n- < ARCBnALD FALf oitbr, 
Elihu W. Baldwin, \m%Stik^, 1 Thomas WxESTSib. 

, John NiTCBiEft / \. 

Vnited Domestic Missionary Society's Qffice„\ 
No. 7^ Dey^reet, New-York, March 18, 1806. 5 



8 

mal thing. 2. Local Societies dow existing;, not to b6 Superceded, 
except in accordance with their own d^ire^ and nol to be impeded 
in their operations, but to be strengthened and stimiilated. 

^^ Several gentlemen, present, then expressed tMr views in relation 
to the points presented in this part of the Coomiittce'ft refiort, and Ae 
meeting unanimously voted their concurrence. 

'^ It was then, on motion, unanimously resolved that it is, in the opi- 
nion of this meeting, expedient to attempt the formation of a NaUonal 
DomesHe Missionary Society. 

** The committee then reported the form of a constitution, which 
having been considered and approved, as suitable to be recommended 
to a meeting hereafter to be convened for the purpose of fcxrniing tbe 
proposed Society, it was voted, unanimously, that the Rev. Dr Pot- 
ter, and Messrs. Edwards and Wisnen be a committee to communi- 
cate to the Corresponding Secretary of the United Domestic Misr 
sionary Society of New- York an account of all the proceedings whicli 
have been had in relation to the interesting subject of the deliberations 
of this meeting ; and to correspond and co-operate wiUi the Execu- 
tive Committee of that Society, and wjth others, if necessary, for tbe 
purpose of effecting, in the best manner, the estabFishment of the pro- 
posed Society. 

" The foIIoM^Ing queries were then proposed for the consideration 
of the meeting, viz : ^ Shall the United Domestic Missionary Society 
of Ne^-York be requested to invite friends of domestic missions in 
different parts of the country (o attend tire annual meeting of that So- 
ciety, in May next, for the purpose of acting on the plan of a If atipu- 
al Society now proposed ? Shall that Society be requested to become 
the National. Society, modifying its constitution to suit the ease ? Or 
shall a meeting of the friends of domestic missions in different parts of 
the country be otherwise convened, a National Society formed> and 
then the New-York Society be invited to become auxiliary ?'* 

'^ After consultation, it was unanimously voted that it is highly de^ 
^irable that the more general meeting should be requested by the Ex- 
ecutive Committee of the United Domestic Missionary Society ofNew- 
York, and that that Society should become the American Domestic 
Missionary Society, should no special reasons Qccurto render sucb a 
measure inexpedient. 

*' The Rev. President AUea then> at the recyiest of the Chairman, 
returned thanks to Almighty God for the harmony ao4 cordiality 
which had characterised the proceedings of the brethren ^89fim^ed, 
aiid for the auspicious resist of theiir d<<}iberatiOQK} ^^i commended 



tbe desif o» and the interesU of our American Zion, and of the churcb 
throughout the world, to th« Divine blessing ; after whi^h the meet- 
ing was disfolvM. 

** On tbo morning of the following day, January 12, it was ascer^ 
tained that the Rev. Walter Chapin, of Woodstocki Vermont, and a 
delegation from the Executive Committee of the Upited Domestic 
Missionary Society, of New-York^ consisting of the Rev. Absalom 
Peters, Corjresponding 3ecretary, Rev. Matthias Bruen, and Mr. 
Archibald Falconer, who had intended to be present at the iiieetiqg, 
but had been prevented, by the badpess of the roads, from reaching 
tbe city in lime, had arrived late the preceding evening. * The mem<* 
berai of tbe meeting who were still in the city, met these gentlemen at 
the house of Mr. Homes, at 11 o'clock A. M. and gave them a parti* 
cular account of the proceedings detailed in the preceding record ; ioi 
relation to all of which proceedings they were pleased to express theit 
Unqualified approbation. 

*' I hereby certify that the above is a true account of the proceed*! 
ings of the persona therein named, in relation to the formation of a 
National Domestic Missionary Society. 

" B. B, WiSOTR, 
" Boston, Jan. 12, 1826." 

I 
l%e/hikwing it ike copy qfa LeUer addressed to (he Correspondiag &• 

creUsry by iht Heir. Drs. MSUer and Mexander^ Pn^essers in Hu Theom 

hfgkal luminary of Vie FreHn/terian Omfch^ dqied Prineelon^ Manfh 

6, 1826. 

" BavSBXVD AVD DVAR SlU, 

^ We rejoice to bear that there is a plan in contemplation (^ 
forming a Domestic Missionary Society, on a much larger scale than 
has bcretofore e^cisted. We have long been of the opinion that the 
subject of Domestic Missions is one which ought to Interest the heart^i 
and to rouse the exertions and the prayers of American Christians, to 
an extent which very few appear to appreciate. Our impression is, 
that, unless far more vigorous measures than we have hitherto wit-* 
nessed shall be soon adopted, for sending the blessed Gospel and it9 
ordinances to the widely extended and rapidly increasing New Settle^ 
ments of our country, their active and enterprising populatioo^must, 
at no great distance of time, be abandoned to a state not much shout 
of entire destitution of the means of grace. We would fain hope, that 
no Christian, who loves the Redeemer's kingdom, and reflects on the 
value of immortal souls ; no parent, who remembers that bia owQ 
children, or children's children, may, in due time, make a part of thci 

2 






11 



Her. John V. Clark, FI<»Tnino:ton, N.J. 

Calvin Cohoti,Batavia,New*York. 

David Chsfssell, Fairfield, N. Y. 

Jer. Dav, D D. Pres. Yale Col. Con. 

Jared Defwing, Fishkflf, New-York. 

Wm. R. I>e Witt,Harrisburcb, Pa. 

Thomas De Witt, Fishkill, N. Y. 

Sereno E. Dwigbt, Boston, Mnss. 
Ricbard V. De Witt, Esq. AibaojTjN. Y. 
Mr. Heary Dwi^ht, Geneva, New- York. 

Thomas Davidson, New- York. 
Bev. Justin Edwards, Andover, Mass. 

John Frost, Wfaitesborougfa, N. Y. 
Mr. Archibald Falconer, New- York. 
Rer. Jeise Fonda, Montgomery, N. Y. 

Isaac Ferris, Albany, New- York. 
Hon. John Fihe, Esq. OffdeDsburg, N. Y. 
B«v. Jacob Green, Bedford, New- York. 

Say ret Gazla^, Bainbridge, N. Y. 

John Goldsmith, Newtown, L. f. 

Asa HiNyer, D. D. Orange, N. J. 
Peter Hawesy Esq. New- York. 
Rev. Charles Hyde, Doylestown, Pa. 
Charie« Hastin^s^ £sq. Otica, N. Y. 
Heni^ Hill, Esq. Boston, Mass. 
Mr. Joel Hayes, South Hadley, Mass. 
Samoef M. Hopkins, Esq. Albany, N. Y. 
Iter. Wm. T. Hamiltmi, Newark, N.J. 
Mr. Richard T. Haines, New- York. 
Rev. Chas. t>. Hinsdale, Meriden, Con. 

James H. Johnson, Madison, Ind. 

John Johnson^ Newborg, N. Y. 
Hon. Jas. Kent,LL. D. New-York. 
Rev. John Knox, D. D. New- York. 
Mr. J^hn D. Keese^ New-Y orJc. 
Rev. H. Kingsbury, Ohio. 

Beta Keliog-g, Nortbingion, Con. 
Mr. Eleazer Lord, New-York. 

Stephen Lockwood, New- York. 
Rev. Luke Lyons, Esperauce, N. Y. 
Zecbariah LewiS) Era. New- York. 
Rev. Joshua Leavitt, Stratford. Con. 

Peter Lockwood, Peekskill, N. Y. 
Jonathan Little, Esq. New- York. 
Rev. James M. Mathews, D. D. N.York. 

Thomas McAuley, D. D. New- York. 

Samuel T. Mills, Moscow, N. Y. 

Benjamin Mortimer, New- York. 

Gilbert Morgan, Johnistown, N. Y. 

John MeJimspy, Montgomery, N. Y. 
John Morrison, Esq. New- York. 

Mills, E^. Hartford, Con. 

John Nitcbir, Esq. New-York. 

The Rev. M. Bruen, then, in behalf of the Executive Com- 
niittee of the United Domestic Missioi!iary Society, stated the 
object for which the meeting had been convened, and pre- 
sented letters from the following gentlemen, who were not able 
to attend, expressing their cordial approbation of the plan of 
a National Home Missionary Society; viz: His Excellency, 
C. P.Van Ness, Governor of Vermont; His Excellency, D. L. 
Morrill, Governor of New-Hampshire 3 His Excellaicy, De 



Rev. James J. Ostrpm, Marlboro', N- Y. 

E. A. Osbom, Newfoundland, N. .F. 

Alex. Proadfit, D. I) Salem, N. Y. 

David Porter, D. D. Catskill N. Y. 
Ananias Piatt, Esq. Albany, N. "Y. 
Rev. Matthew L. R Pennine, D. D. Prof. 
Thenl. Seminary, Auburn, N. Y. . 

WilKam Paji^e, Fredonia, N. Y. 
Hon. Jonas Piatt, Esq. New- York. 
Rev. William W. Phillips, New- York. 

Bezeleel Pineo, Mil ford, Con. 

William Patton, New-York. 

Ebenezer Porter, D D. Prof. Thepl. 
Seminary, Andover, Mass. 

N. Perkins, D. D Hartford, Con. 

Absalom Peters, New- York. 

Tbos. Punderson, Huntingdon, Con. 

Isaac Parsons, Haddam, Con. 

Aaron Putnam, Otsego, New- York. 

James Richards, D D. Prof. Theol. 
Seminary, Auburn, New-York. 

B. K. Rodcers, Sandy Hill, N. Y. 

Joshua T. Russell, Newark, N. .T. 

H. Reid, Abbeville District, S. C. 

George Stebbins, Middletown, N. Y. 

Thomas H. Skinner, Philadelphia. 

Jokn Smith, Trenton, New-Jersey. 

Miles P. Squier. 

Gardiner Sprint, D. D. NeW-York. 

Zephaniafa Swift, Derby, Con. 

Stepb. Saunders, South Salem, N. Y. 

David Smith, Durham, Con. 

Noah Smith, Southbury, Con. 

Joseph Sanford, Brooklyn, L. I. 
Garrett Smith, Esq. Peterborough, N. Y. 
Mr. Knnwles Tayh»r, New-York. 
Rev. Mark Tucker, Northampton, Mass. 

Steph. Thompson, Con. ( arms, N.J. 

A. Thompson, Greenbush, Rockland 
county, New- York. 

William F.Vaill, Union Mission, Ar- 
kansas 'J'errilory 

Benjamin B. Wisner, Boston, Mass. 
Mr. p. H. Wickbam, New- York. 

Thomas Webster, New-York. 
Rev. Henry R. Weed, Albany, N. Y. 

John Wheeler, Windsor,*Vermont. 
John Wheeler, Esq. Hudson, N. Y. 
Elisba While, Esq John's Island, S. C. 
Rev. J. L. Williams, Middletown, Con. 
William W^oolsey, Esq. New-York. 
S. V. S. Wilder, Esq. Bolton, Mass. 



12 

Witt CliuioQ, dovdrnor of New-York ; Hon. Stephen Van 
Rensselaiei^, of Albany ; Rev. John H. Rice, D. t>. Prbfessor 
in the 'f'heological Seminary, Princ^ Edward, Va.; Rev. 
Samuel Miller, D. D. Professor in the Theological Seminary, 
Princeton^ N. J.; Rev. Calvin Chapin, D.D. Rocky Hill, 
Conn. ^ Hon. Charles Marsh, Woodstock^ Vermont^ ttev. 
E. D. GrifEn, D. D. President of Willlanis College, Mass, ; 
Robert Ralston, Esq. Philadelphia; Isaac C. Bates, Esq. 
Northampton, Miaiss. ; Rev. N. W; T&yjor, D. D. New-Haven, 
Conn. ; Rev. Alexander McClelland^ Professor in Dickinson 
College, Piennsylvania ; John P» Cushman, Esq. of Tfoy, N* 
T. ; Revk Nathaniel Bouton, Concord, N. H. ; Rev. Charles 
B. Haddock, Professor in Dartmouth College, N. H. ; Rev. 
George Duffield, Carlisle, Penn. ; Rev. W. i. Armstrongj^ 
Richmond, Va. ; Theodore Frdinghny sen, Esq. Newark, N. J. 

On motion of the Rev. Ebenezer Porter, D. D. seconded by 
the Rev. C. C. Cuyler, 

Resohedf That this Convention is now prepared to receivd any 

Sroposition which the Executive Committee of the United DoAiestie 
lissionary Sotiety may introduce, relating to the object of tills 
meetings ^ 

The Rev. A. Pt&ters, Corresponding Secretary of the United 
Domestic Missionary Society, then announced that the Exe- 
ttttive Committee had entrusted to hixA the form of a Consti- 
tution, which^ aflei^ much deliberation, they were prepared to 
recon^mend to the Convention, to be made the basis of the 
contemplated National Society. At thereqiiest of the chair- 
ilian, the Conslitutibn w^s read ; after which, on motion df 
the Hon. James Kent, seconded by the Rev. Dr. Bates, the 
following resolution was adopted : 

Resolvedy That this Convention entirely ap{;)*ove or the proposetl 
plan of a National Home Missionary Society, and that they will 
now procei&d to consider the Constitution which has been presented. 

The Constitutioti was then read, article by article, and after 
being discussed and ^amended, was approved, and is as fol- 
lows : (Seepage 3. J 

On motion of the Rev. James Blythe, D. D. xaf Kentucky, 
seconded by Rev. James Richards, D^ D. Professor in the 
Theological Seminary at Auburn, 

Resolved^ That the Convention havingapproved the proposed Con- 
stitution, recommend to the United Domestic Missionary Society to 
adopt the same^and become the American HooAe Missionary Society. 

On motion by the Rev. Jesse Fonda, of Montgomery, N. Y. 
and seconded by the Rev. B. B. Wisner, of Boston, 

Resolved^ That the of&cers of this meeting be ia Coittfnittee of the 



13 " 

Convention, to present to the U. D. M. Society a statement of tbe 
proceedings of the meeting; together with the proposed Cbnstitution, 
and the preceding recommendations that the same be adopted. 

Tbe Convention was then dissolved ; and the meeting closed 
larith the apdstolic benediction by the Chairman. 

THOMAS DE WITT, Secretary, 
JOHN CHESTER, Assistant Secretary. 



li'OURTH ANNIVJERARY 

6V THE , 

t^iiii^d DomeBtic Missionary Society « 



Tips Fourth Anniversary of the United Domestic Missioii* 
kry Society was held at the Citv-tldtel, New* York, on Frir 
day evening, May 12, 18!^. The Hon. Stephen Vati Red$- 
selaer, LL. D. President ot the Society, in the chair. 

The meeting was optened with prayer by the Rev. R^ry 
R^id, of Abbevilte I^istrict, South-Carolina. 

The Annual Report was then read^ With the i^xc^ption of 
the detailed account of churches aided, by the Rev. Absalom 
Peters, Corr^pondibg Secretary. After wfai<&h the following 
resolutions were unanimously adopted. 

1. On motion of Garrit Smith, Esq. of Peterborough^ 
Madison County, N. Y. seconded by the Rev. Joshua Bate^ 
D. D. Presidi&nt of Middlebui^y College Vt. 

Rtsdtftd — That the fte]piort of the Executive Committee be ap- 
proved and adopted^ and that it be published under their direction. 

2. On motion of the Rev. Nathan S. S. Beman, of Troy, 
s^ond^d^by the R^v. Edward Andrews, Norwich, Chenango 
County, N. Y. 

Resfdved — That while the thanks of this Society are eiven to 
Auxiliaries, and to individuals who have coatributed tb the funds 
during the past year, we are sensiblo that much of the future success 
of the Society must depend en the continued and unremitted aid c{f 
its friends. 

3. On motion of the Rt^v. Thomas H. Skind^r, of Phila- 
delphia, seconded by the Hon. Samuel Bayard^ of Princeton^ 
J!J. J. 



14 

Remilved-^ThaA devout gratitude to our LordJesus Christ, Ifae Great 
Head of the Church, b due for the revivals of religion, and the gene- 
ral success in many of our missionary stations, which have come of 
His blessing. 

4. The Rev. Thomas De Witt, of Fi^hkill, N. Y. in the 
.naaie of the Committee of the Convention held on the 10th 

inst. presented the Constitution approved by that body, and 
also their resolution recommending that the United Domestic 
Missionary Society adopt the same, and become the American 
Home Missionary Society/ 

5. On motion of the Rev. Benjamin B. Wisner, of Boston, 

jseconded by the Rev. Donald Mcintosh, of Cadiz, Harrison 

County, Ohio, 

Resolved— Thaii the recommendation of the Convention be adopted, 
and that the United Domestic Missionary Society now become the 
American Home Missionar^r Society, under the Constitution recom- 
mended by the Convemionl 

6. On motion of His Excellency, De Witt Clinton, Gov- 
ernor of4he State t)f New-York, seconded by the Rev. Wm. 
B. De Witt, of Harrishurgh, Pa. 

Btioked-'Thdl the Life Dkecters and life Members of the late 
United Domestic Missionary Society, be now recojrnised as Life Di- 
rectors and Life Members of the American Home Bf issionary Society. 

The American Home Missionary Society then proceeded 
Co the election of officers for the ensuing year, and made 
choice of the fcJlowing. 

PreMenL 
Hon. Stephen Van Rensselaer^ LL. D« Albany. 

Vice-'FresideMta, 

Hon% John Cotton Smithy %aroo,'Connecticut» 

Samuel Hubbard, Esq. Boston. 
Rev. Archibald Alexander, D. D. Prof. Theol. Sem. PrincetoBj' 
His Ex. De Witt Clinton, Gov. of the State of New-York. 
Rev. J. H. Rice, D. D. Prof. Theoi. Sem. Virginia. 
Robert Ralston, Gsq. Philadelphia. 
Hon. Jonas Piatt, New-Yock. 

His £x. David Lawrence Morriliy Gov. of New-Hampskire. 
Rev. Leonard Wood, D. D. Theol. Prof. Andover^ Massachusetts.' 

James Richards, D. D. Theol. Prof. Auburn, New** York. 

Hon. Wiltlam PhiHips, Boston. 

■ James Kent, LL. D. New-Tork. 
Rev. Calvin Cbapiu, D. D. Rocky Hill, Connecticut. 
His Ex. Albion K. Paris, Gov. of the State of Maine. 
Hon. John Woodworth.Albany, New- York. 
Rev. Ashbel Green, D. U. PbUadelpUa. 
Richard Varick, Esq. New- York. 
Rev. Ebenezer Porter, D. D. Theol. Prof. Andover , Mas^* 
f^amnel Biatchlbrd, D. D. Lansingburgh, New- York* 



*i 



15 

His Ex. Cornelius P. Van NrntSf Gov.'df the State of VerM^nt. 

Henry Rutgers, Esq. New^Toiic. 

Rev. Samuel Miller, D. D. Prof. Tbeol Sem. PriAc^on. 

David Porter, D. D. Gatskyi, New- York. 

^**^ J^mes P. Wiisoo, a D. Pliiadelphia. 

Nathaniel W. Taylor, D. D. TbeoL Prof, Tale-College. 

John Chester, D. D. Albany. 

His Ex. John Murphy^ Gqy* of the State of Alabama. 

Rev. Asa Hillyer, IX -D. Orait^ New-Jersey. 

Henry Dayis, D. D* President Hamilton College, New-York. 

Thomas Dewitt, Hopewell New- York, , 

*— - John H. Church, D. D. Pelbam, New-Hampshire. 

Charles Coffin, D. D. President of College, Tennessee. 

Conrad Speece, I>. D. Statiotoiit Virginia. 

^ Eliphalet Gillet, D. D. Hallowell. Maine. 

— Jeremiah Day, D. D. President Yale College, Con. 

James Careahan, D. D. President Prioceton College. 

Joshua Bates. D. D. President Mjddiebury College. 

William Neill, D. D. President Dickinson College. 

E. W, Gilbert, Wilmingtop, Delaware. 

Samuel Miles Hopkins, Esq, Albany. 
Rev. J. J. Janeway, D. D. PhiladeIpbia^ 

William Allen, D. D. President Bpudoui College. 

John Tappan, Esq. Boston. 

Rev. Philip Milledoler, D. D. President of Ratgcre College. 

— Justin Edwards, Andover, Massachusetts. 

B. M. Palmer, D. D. Charleston* South-Carolina. 

^ Thomas McAiiley, D. D. New-York. 

' Roger Minot Sherman. Esq. Fairfield, Connecticut. 

Roswell Colt, Esq. Baltimore. 

Rev. Thomas H. Skinner, Phitftdeli^bia. 

• Eliphalef nm. D. D. Ftesktent Unien CeOiee. 

John M^Dow^L D. D. Elmabei^oww, Newsiersey> 

Joel Hawes, Hartford, Connecticut. 

— Mr. Howe, Savannah, Georgia. 
B. B. Wisner, Boston. 

Jacob Van Vechten, Schenectady. ' 

Wm. Maxwell, Esq. Norfolk, Virginia. 

Rev. E. D. Griffin, D. D. President Williams College. 

Hon. Charles Marsh, Woodstock, Vermont. 

Rev. Alexander Proudfit, D. D., Salem. New- York. 

Theodore Frelinghuysen, Esq. Newark, New-Jersey. 

Rev. Heman Humphrey, D. D. President Amherst College. 

Bennet Tyler, D. D. President Dartmouth College.. 

C. C. Cuyler, Poughkeepsie, New- York. 

James Blythe, D. D. Lexington, Kentucky. 

William Ropes, Esq. Boston. 

Rev. Nathan Lord, Amherst, New-Hampshire. 

Nathan S. S. Beman, Troy, New-York. 

Wm. R. De Witt, Harrisburghj Pennsylvania. 

Garret Smith, EscuPeterborough, Madison coupty, New-York. 
Rev. John Knox, D. D. New- York. 



16 

S V. S. Wiider. Eiq. Bdton. Maatachasetts. 
Rev. Edward Pavaon^ O, P. Portland, Moitie. 
Thomas BradforoU Jr. Esq. Philadelpbi^u 
Bev. H. Reidy Abbeville, South-Carolina.' 

Robt. G. Wilson, D. D. President o£ the Ohio Univeni^^ Ohio. 

Mr. Henry Dwight, Geneva, New- York. 

Treoiwrtr, 
Peter Hawes, Esq. New- York. 

Arthur Tappan, Esq. NewYork. 

Corresponding Secrekay. 

Ber. Absalom Peters, New- York. 

Recording SeerHary, 

Stephen Lockwood, Esq. New-York. 

EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE, 

At a meeting of Ae Directors on Saturday, Mny IS, 1826^ the Er* 
ecutive Committee were aj^ointed, viz. 

John D. Keese> Chairman. 
Rev. Gardiner Spring, D. D. 

James M. Mathews, D. D» 

Elihu W. Baldwin. 

Matthias Bruen. 

Mr. Thomas Webster. 
Mr. Jbhn Nitchie. 
Mr. Archibald Falconer. 
' Mr. Knowles Taylor. 
Mr. EleazerLord. 

Members^ tm^fficM. 

Peter Hawes, Esq. Treasurer^ 

Rev. Absalom Peters, Corresponding Secretaiy. 

Stephen Lockwood, E^. Recording Seofetsiy^ 



romTB KEBOBX. 



The Executive Committee of the United Domes- 
tic Missionary Society, in presenting their Fourth 
Annual Report, come before the friends and patrons 
of the Institution with the voice of thanksgiving. 
The point at which we have now arrived in the pro- 
gress of our benevolent enterprise, is one which 
calls for new and devout praise to God. And if we 
do not mistake the spirit of this assembly, there is an 
emotion stirring in the heart of every friend to the 
growth of the Redeemer's kingdom now present, 
which warrants us to presume that^our own feelings 
of gratitude and joy are reciprocated by all those 
whose sympathy is a blessing, and in answer to 
whose prayers the Head of the church has preserved 
our lives, and prospered our efibrts another year. 

The duties assigned to this Committee, though 
arduous and responsible, have been such as to com*^ 
mand our liveliest interest. It has been our endea*' 
vour to discharge them with fidelity and effect. The 
providence of God could not have assigned us an- 
other field of labour on the earth ; there was not a 
good work to be done under heaven, upon which we 
would have entered with more cordiality and zeial. 



1 



18 FOURTH REPORT.^ [MAFy 

And with our daily progress, both our interest and 
encouragement have increased. The coincidence of 
our object with what we know to be the will of 
heaven, and the constant indications of the divine 
favour, which have attended all our measures for its 
accomplishment, have left us no reason to.doubt that 
the hand of God is with us in this enterprise, and 
that, through his blessing, we are effecting, in some 
measure, what He would have us to do. We are 
not aware that any portion of the public charity, 
committed to our disposal, has been diverted from 
its specific design, or expended to less efiect tfaao was 
amticipated. Much has been accomplisbed ftbrough 
the beneficence of this Society. Our own hopes 
bave been more than answer^ in what God has 
wrought by us* 

In the discbarge of our trust this Committee have 
been governed by the following principles : 

It bas been our endeavour, with the least possible 
ezfhetidkure (if means, to furnish the blessings of Ihe 
Gospel ministry to as many churches, and as large 
a number ef individual souls, as we could hope per- 
manently to benefit, by the most wise distribution of 
the funds of this Society. 

Under a deep conviction of the prime importance 
of a stated ministry, and in conformity to the usage 
of this Society from the beginning, we have expended 
the income of the year to aid feeble churches and 
congre^tions in the support of ministers, who were 
already settled over them as Pastors, or who had the 
project of being permanently employed to watch 
for souls, as ibey that must give account. 



lS2&Jt FOURTH REFOBT. 19 

We bare^ccordiDgly, in general, di3aouatenau<:e4 
the system <kf itinerantcy, which has been pursued) 
in too many instances, in thU and other couimriesi, ^o 
comparatively little effect. It has been required of 
the missionaries of this Society to confine their la- 
bours principally to a specified field, embracing^ one, 
or at most two or three churches or congregatious. 
Experience has convinced this Committee, and we 
rejoice to perceive in the recent usage of other Do- 
ittestic Missionary Societies, thrat the Christian public 
are beginning to be convinced that the system of 
chariitable aid, which furnishes weak congregations 
with the meims of supporting a settled ministry, is 
fur more effective in its permanent results, than that 
Hibich eaibra<!es a wider field, and plants, but does 
n^t wateir* The latter too often disappoints, £^nd 
discourages those whom it excites and interests ; the 
forpa^r pours upon its hepe^ciaries a perennial stream 
of those saving benefits which it has already taught 
them to value. To maintain a permanent ministry, 
therefore, on as wide a field as we have had ability 
to occupy, has bfecA wr settled purpose. 

It had not been enough, however, to answer our 
views of duty to the patrons of this Society, nor to 
the objects of its beneficence, to say that each of the 
congregations which we have aided has now a set- 
tled minister. We have also regarded it as a matter 
of indispensable importance tq the prosperity of the 
churches, that each minister in whose support we 
grant assistance, should be acceptable to the peopje 
l^niong whom he labours. As a genera) rule, there- 
fore, we have refused to aid in th^ 9uppiort pf cwy 
ipinister except qn appUcAtiqi^ ftqip the pepi^Ie them- 






2Q FOURTH KEPORT. CMaT, 

selves, certifying that they are united in highly es- 
teeming his ministry, that they desire to retain him, 
and that they need assistance in his support. Add 
to this, that, in all cases where the individual in ques- 
tion, and the circumstances of the congregation are 
not sufficiently known to the Committee, it has been 
our uniform practice to require the certificate of 
some neighbouring clergyman, that the people are 
really needy, and that the minister whom they seek 
to employ is of good Character and regular standing 
in the ecclesiastical connection to w^hich he belongs. 
Thus have we endeavoured, in all cases, to avoid the 
evil of imposing upon any congregation the labours 
of a man whom they do not esteem, and, on a re- 
view of our appointments for the year, we have the 
satisfaction of believing that each of the missionaries 
of this Society is the chosen minister of the people 
where he labours. In this way, also, we have hoped 
to escape the guilt of expending the bounty of the 
<:hurches in the support of unworthy men. The 
gifts of the Society have been accessible to none but 
those who had given proof of their ministry, while 
such as have assumed the sacred office without quali- 
fications to interest and instruct, have been e:^cluded. 
In a word, it has been our design to patronise none 
but faithful men, who were able to teach others also 
the doctrines of Christ. 

We have distributed the charities of the Society 
with a sparing hand. While it has been our wish to 
enable each of our missionaries to give himself wholly 
to the work of the ministry, we have reduced our 
grant, in every case, to the smallest sum, which, to- 
gether with the subscriptions of the people, could be 



1826.] FOURTH REPORT. 21 

considered sufficient for this purpose. We have in 
no instance conceived it our duty to grant aid suffi- 
cient to place a servant of this Society above the 
necessity of that self-denial and economy which be- 
come those who are commissioned to preach the 
Gospel to the poor. 

No less vigilant has been our care to guard against 
the injury which might accrue to the churches aided, 
by granting to any more than was needed. It has 
been our settled conviction, that an amount of assist- 
ance to any congregation sufficient to raise it above 
the necSS^ity of vigorous exertions to support its own 
institutions, is likely to paralyze and destroy, rather 
than to strengthen and increase its energies. Men 
are not wont to value highly that which costs thenfi 
nothing ; and that which has once been bestowed op 
them as a gift, they ever after feel reluctant to pur- 
chase. We have therefore guarded against the evil 
' of extending the Gospel principally without charge 
to any congregation. We have wished to see the 
principle universally recognised in the churches, that 
Gody on behalf of his ministers, has a demand on 
their temporal things, when he confers upon them 
' spiritual blessings ; that the labourer is worthy of his 
hire. Our grants have accordingly been reduced to 
an amount which we considered barely sufficient to 
answer the present necessities of each congregation ; 
while we have desired to leave upon the people the 
permanent responsibility of supporting the ordinances 
of the Gospel among themselves. In every instance 
it has been our endeavour, by the aid we have be- 
;Stowed, to encourage feeble congregations to do what 
tbey cooM ; and we have generally selected those ais 






22 FOURTH RKPORT. [MaY^ 

the objects of the charity of iMs Society whose em- 
dition and prospects have encoaraged U9 to hope Ibat, 
with a little aid for a limited time, they will be aUe 
soon to support the minister of tiieir choice without 
fweign assistance. 

In accordance with these principles, the followisg 
churches and religious societies have received aid 
from this Committee in support of the individuals 
whose names are annexed, in alphabetical order, to 
the accounts here given of the several missionary 
stations of the Society. The number of months for 
which each missionary holds his conimis#|||^ shows 
for how long a time this Committee has become re- 
sponsible that the ministrations of the Go;speJ may 
Jbe regularly enjoyed in each station. 

1. The Presbyterian Society in Syracuse, Onondaga county, N. Y. 
Imre been granted aid in the support of a mfaiister, who Is expected 
SDOQ to be installed as paatpr of tiie dlaroh lately formed in that 
new and rapidly increasip^ village. Cofnmission for 12 months 
from May 4, 1826. Proportion pf aid 2 months. Minister, 

The Rev. J. W. Adams. 

2. The First Church in Sidlivan, Madison county, INevt-York, fa«s 
iDteetved aid in the support of a missionary) whose coo^iaussion runs 
12 months from Jqne 13, 1825, and whose reports as^iie u$i that (lis 
labour has not b^en in vain in the Lord* Minister, 

Rev. Roger Adams. 

3. The Rev. Lucius Alden ws^ commissioned in October. 1825,^ for 
12 months, to labour as a missionary of this Society in the Sta,te of 
Indiana. One hundred dollars was granted him as an outfit, to 
bear bts expenses to the field of his contemplated mtaistry, with the 
expectation that he would loc^^ Ivfuself whf^rp the principal part 
of his suppiort woul^ be paid by the people. We are now happy 
to state, from the reports of Mr. Alden, that after a tpur of about 
8 weeks, in which he seems to have embraced, with great fidelity 
and zeal, ev:ery opportunity ef subserving the cause cft Chnst, he 



]S26»| FOURTH REPORT. 23 

])^afiie located on the 8f b of Janaary, 1^26, in the towa of Aurora, 
Dearborp comity^ hidianay wb9re his prospects of extended and 
increasing usefulness are sucli as to satisfy this Committee that he 
has been wisely directed to that as the field of his ftture Iflboui^. 
Our missionary has been received with great cordiality by the peo- 
ple of that place and victnity, and there is a prospect that they will 
be able to sustain a lar^e portion of his support. With the excep- 
tion of one, Dearborn is the most populous county in the State, and 
previous to the arrival of our missionary had no Presbyterian minis- 
ter within its bounds* 

4. Montrose, Susquehannah county, Pennsylvania. Commission to 
run 12 months from May 1, 1825. This people have now been 
aided two yeacs, diving which time the Committee have received 
satisfactory evidenice^ from the reports of their missionary there^ 
^usd the statements of the eldera of the church, that their spiritual 
condition has been gradually improvijig. An edifice for public 
worship has been erected, the church considerably increased in 
numbers, and Sabbath Schools and Bible classes, embracing a large 
prc^ortion of the children and youth of the place, have been form- 
^ and conducted with success. We have been haf^y to Icara^ 
idsoi that an infiuenee has been <elt through the county of a highly 
salutary character* The churches in the vicinity are making vigor- 
ous efturts to obtain tb^ ministrations of the Gosipel, and have been 
encouraged to expect assistance from this Society. The proportion 
of the year which the people of Montrose are assisted is 3 months^ 
Their Pastor is 

The ftev. Burr Baldwin . 

5. The Seventh Presbyterian Church in the City of New- York. 
Commission granted to run 12 months from Oolober 14, 1825* 
Proportion of aid 3 months. This church and the congregation 
connected with it has centinoed to increase during the last year. 
The edifice m which they have hitherto worshipped ha$ been ibund 
quite too small to aacmsiBiodate the congregation, and meesores^ 
ai€ now in progreiss, withencouEftgiiig prospects of success, to erect 
a new and larger hou90^ and on a more eligible site* More than 
16000 have already been subscribed for this purpose. Should this 
enterprise succeed, as we confidently believe it will, there is good 
reason to anticipate a happy relief of this congregation from those 
pecuniary embarrassments which have heretofore retarded its 



24 FOeRYH KEPOKT. IMhXj 

' ^owth, and that it will soon be able to support the ministry of tke 
Gospel without aid from this Society. The Pastor whom they 
have chosen is 

The Rev. £lihu W. Baldwin. 

6. The church in Orangeville, and the church in Sheldon, Genesee 
county, N. Y. have united their efforts to support a minister, whose 
labours are enjoyed two-thirds of the time in the former, and one- 

' third in the latter place. They receive aid from this Society in the 
proportion of 2 months for the year, commencing October 11, 1.825^ 
Their minister b 

The Rev. Johnson Baldwin. 

7. The Highlands, west of the Hudson river, have enjoyed the useful 
and arduous labours of a Missionary of this Society, during the last 
two years. His present commission is for 12 months from Novem- 
ber 7 9 1825. The people there are aided in his support, in the pro- 
portion of three months for the year. 

The Rev. Hosea Ball. 

8. The churches of Wooster and Apple Creek, Wooster county, Ohio, 
have received aid in the support of their Minister, 12 months, from 
August 24th, 1*825, in the proportion of three mouths. The Com- 
mittee regard it as aA interesting and important station. Their 
pastor is 

The Rev. Thomas Barr. 

9. The Presbyterian Church and Society in Cairo, Green county* N. 
York, have received aid, in support of their minister, for 12 months^ 
from May l6th, 1825, in the proportion of 7 weeks. 

The Rev. Daniel Beers. 

* 

10. The Second Presbyterian Society in Utica is, at present, in com- 
mon with other churches in that enterprising and important village, 
enjoying the smiles of the God of Missions in a powerful revival of 
religion. It has been aided by this Society in the proportion of S 
months for the year, commencing March 8, 1825. The Pastor of 
the church is 

The Rev. Samuel W. Brace. 



1826.] FOURTH REPORT^ 25 

* 11. The church in Crown Point, Essex county, N. Y. has been aid- 
ed by a grant to their Minister, under commission from this Com- 
mittee, for 12 months, from February 19? 1825, in the proportion 
of 6 weeks. Pastor, 

TheRev. Samuel C. Bradford. 

12. Cleavland, Cuyahoga county, Ohio, is regarded by this Commit' 
tee as a very important station for Missionary exertion. It has been 

. occupied since the last annual report, and furnished with aid in the 
support of a Minister, for 12 months, commencing September 1, 
1825, who is authorized to spend one half of his labours in other 
destitute places in the vicinity. The proportion of support grant- 
ed by this Society is 3 months. Minister, 

The Rev. Stephen J. Bradstreet. 

* IS. The church in Cape Vincent, Jefferson coufity, N. Y., commis- 
sion granted to run from November 20th, 1825, 12 months, in the 
proportion of 3 months. Minister, 

The Rev. Jedediah Burchard. 

14. The churches at Little Falls and Danube, Herkimer county, N. 
York, have been assisted. Commission granted to run 12 months 
from April 23d, 1825. Proportion, 3 months. Pastor, 

The Rev. Stephen W. Burritt. 

15. Indianapolis, Indiana, to secure the useful and important labours 
of the Pastor of the Presbyterian church in that place, has been 
aided. Commission for 12 months from May 16, 1825. Propor- 
tion, 3 months. 

The Rev. George Bush. 

16. Bangor, Franklin county, N. Y., enjoys the labours of a Minister 
half the time, through the aid of this Society. Commission for 12 
months. Proportion, 2 months. Missionary, 

The Rev. Joseph Butler. 

17. The church in Stow^s Square, Lowville, Lewis county, N. York, 
has received the continued patronage of this Society. To this 

"" This mark designates those churches and religious. Societies which have 
been aided by the Young Men's Missionary Society of New-York, auzUiary to 
the U. D. M. S. in the support of Ministers commissioned by this Committee. 

4 



26 FOURTH HSPORT. EM AT, 

church several addRiondhaf«beeii made since lielast report The 
aidailbrded them in sufiportof Gespelopdinanoeaisthe piopprtian 
of 2 moathfr to the year. €ommis»on for 12 months from Janoary 
10, 1826. Their Pastor is 
The Rev. Phineas Camp. 

18. The Rev. Hiram Chamberlin was appointed in October last to 
labour, as a Missionary of this Society, in the State of Missouri. 
l%e Committee granted him an outfit of jf 100 to defray the ex- 
penses of his journey to the field of his niiniBtry, with the expeeta- 
tron that he would be able to select a location in that State, where 
the principal part of his support might be derived firom the people 
who should enjoy his stated labours. From several communications 
received firom Mr. C. since his departure, we learn that be was de- 
tained some weeks by sickness on his journey, and subjected to 
unexpected expenses ; but even these delays appear to have been 
overruled in the providence of God to the accomplishment of valu- 
able objects in jreference to the progress of missionary efibrt at 
the West. Mr. C. laboured successfully a few weeks hi Ohio and 
Kentucky, where he was unavoidably detained. He has, at length, 
reported himself at St. Louis^ Missouri, where he arrived on the 8th 
of March, and where, in compliance with the wish of this CommitT 
tee, and^the advice 6f the St. Louis Presbytery, he has taken up 
his residence. He has been received in that place with great cor- 
diality, and efibrts are making to raise a portion of his support. It 
is a location in which die labours of a faithful minister cannot ful, 
with the blessing of God, to eflfect great good. An intelligent lay- 
nan, of that place, has teid — " A blow struck here will be felt by 
more than two millions." 

19. The church in Hunter, Greene county, N. Y., have received aid 
in the support of their Pastor. Commission for 12 months from 
July 15, 1825. Proportion of aid, 3 months. Pastor, 

The Rev. Seth Chapin. 

20. Moriah, Essex county, N. Y. The church in this place have en- 
joyed the faithful labours of a Minister 12 months, under commis- 
sion from this;Society, dated April 14, 1825. Proportion, 2 months. 
Minister, 

The Rev. Sylvanus Chapin. 



1816.] FOVRTH REFOBT. 27 

* 2t. Thtsbtnh in Hoonck, RcasBclaer couatyi N. Y^ thra«gb the 
aid of this Soowtyy has been dMe to maintaiii ihe^taiti adminis- 
tration ^ the word and ordinances of the Gospel. Coimiisskm fer 
12 months, dated February 8, 1825. Proportion of aid, two and a 
half Bumths* Minister, 

Hie Rev. Ebeaeoer Cheever. 

[We regret to record that the Rev. Mr. Cheever was under the ne- 
nessity, on account of the failure of his health, to leave the field of his 
useful labours, at Hoosick, in October last, having completed a little 
more than two-thirds of the year for which he was commissioned. 
He was soon after succeeded by the Rev. Mr. Little, whose name is 
reported in its alphabetical place.] 

*22. Truxton, Courtlandt county, N. Y. At this station we are 
happy to learn there is an increasing interest felt in religious insti- 
tutions. The aid granted to the people is for 12 months from De- 
cember 13, 1825, in the proportion Af about 2 months. Pastor, 

The Rev. Caleb Clark. 

23. Granby and Hannibal, Oswego county. These two places have 
united in their efforts to support the minister of their choice, and 
this Committee* have voted to grant them needed aid, in the pro- 
portion of 4 months. Commission to run 12 months from March 
21,1826. Their minister is 

The Rev. William Clark. 

*24. The church in Gainsville, Genesee county, N. Y. Commission 
for 12 months from January 10, 1825. Aid in proportion of 2 
months. Pastor, 

The Rev. William Clarke. 

25. Cohocton, Steuben county, N. Y. A minister has recently been 
employed in this station, and aid in the proportion of 3 months 
granted in his support. Commission for 12 months, dated Octo- 
ber 5, 1825. Minister, 

The Rev. Statbam Clary. 

26. Royalton, Niagara county, N. Y. Aid has been granted to the 
chnrch in this place. Commission for 12 months, dated Dtecem- 
ber 9, 1825. Proportion, 3 months. Pastor, 

The Rev. George Colton. 



28 FOURTH REPORT. [MaT, 

^^. The chiBch in Shelby, Orleans country N;Y. CommisnoQforlS 

months from April 25, 1826-^Proportion, 3 months. Pastor, 
The Rev. Alanson Darwin. 

28. The church in Antwerp, Jefferson county, N. Y. Commission for 
12 months from February 15, 1825 — Proportion, 3 months. 
Pastor, 

The Rev, Rufus R. Deiliming. 

29* Huron county, Ohio, presents an encouraging field for Mission- 
ary enterprise. It is a region of great spiritual destitution. A 
Missionary has been sent there under commission for 12 months, 
dated October 12, 1825, and is labouring faithfully to build up and 
strengthen the feeble churches which have been planted in that 
county. Proportion of aid. 3 months. Missionary, 

The Rev. Isaac S. Demund. 

30. Jamestown, a village on Chatauque Lake, N. Y. — Aided by the 
Geneva Agency. Minister, 

The Rev. Isaac Eddy. 

31. The churches of Annsville and Vienna, Oneida county, N. Y., 
have united in the support of a Pastor, and aid has been granted 
them in the proportion of 3 months for the year, commencing Janu- 
ary 26, 1826. Pastor, 

The Rev. Ozias £ells. 

32. The Rev. John M. Ellis was commissioned October 24, 1825, 
to labour as a Missionary in the State of Illinois. One hundred 
dollars outfit was granted him by this Committee, to defray the ex- 
penses of his journey to the field of his mission, under the expec- 
tation that he would soon be able to select a location, where the 
principal part of his support might be derived from the people- 
Mr. E. immediately took his departure for the West, and after a 
useful tour of about six weeks, having been delayed by the very 
low state of the waters of the Ohio, arrived at Kaskaskia, Illinois, 
in the early part of December. At this place our missionary was 
well received, and listened to with attention 5 and we are happy to 
learn, from his last communication to the Committee, that he will 
probably be able to remain at this station, to. divide his labours be- 
tween Kaskaskia and St. Genevieve, in the state of Missouri, with 



1826 J FOURTH REPORT. 29 

the prospect of great usefulness to tfae cause of Christ* These two 
villages contain considerable wealth and a large population, and 
are considered as highly important in their influence upon the 
surrounding country. The character of the inhabitants for intelli- 
gence and enterprise is highly respectable, and such as, with the 
blessing of Grod upon the faithful labours of an able minister of the 
New Testament, promise a rich accession to the church of Christ. 

33. The church in Windham, Oreene county, N. Y. Commission for 
twelve months, in the proportion of two months, dated May 1, 1825. 
Pastor, 

The Rev. William Evans. 

34. The church in Fayette, Genesee county, N. Y. Aided by the 
Greneva Agency. Pastor, 

The Rev. Isaac Flagler. 

35. The church in Bainbridge, Chenango county, N. Y. Commission 
for twelve months, from February 8, 1826. Aid, two months. Mi- 
nister, 

The Rev. Sayres Gazlay. 

36. The church in Bucksville, town of Mentz, Caynga county, N. Y. 
Commission for twelve months, from May 12, 1825. Aid, three 
months. Pastor, 

. The Rev. Birdsey Gibbs. 

37* The church in Chesterfield, Essex county, N. Y. Commission 
for twelve months, dated January 1, 1825. Aid, three months. 
Minister, 

The Rev. James J. Gilbert. 

38. The churches of Bethany and Mount Pleasant, Wayne county, 
Pennsylvania, have received aid in supporting a Minister, whose 
labours during the last year have been signally blessed of God. 
In Bethany there has been a revival of religion, the result of which 
has been the addition of 12 to the church in that place. Commis- 
sion for 12 months, dated May 1, 1S25* Aid, 3 months. Minister, 

The Rev. E. W. Goodman. 



30 FC^RTH REPORT. [M AY 



1 



39* Tks Cotign*gAli«iuil GliMteli in Soiiier% WesteheBter ooonty, N. 
York. Comminidn fmr twehre moDtlis If on Iday 4, lS2d Propor- 
tion of ai«^ thvee moMhi. Pastor^ 

Th6 R6V. Grifiith H. Griftlh. 

40. The PmBfoytefian church in Alleii-sli-eftt in the cky of Neir-York. 
CoiDinis)»ion for twelve tnonthB, from Avgvst 21» 1825. Aid, four 
months. Pastor, 

The Rev« WUIiam Gnj. 

41. The church in Milford, Pike county, Pennsylvania, has beea or- 
ganized during the last year, and has succeeded, with the aid of this 
Society, in procuring a minister to labour statedly half of the time. 
Commission for 12 months, dated January 3, I8264 Aid^ 3 months. 
Minister, 

The Rev. Thomas Grier. 

With the exception of the above, we are informed there is uo stated 
ministry in Pike county of any denomination, and no sanctuary, ex- 
cepting one lOg-hoUse, for public worship. It is a region which calls 
for the sympathies of Chrt&tiatis. 

•42. The church in Sodus, Wayne county, N. Y. Commission for 12 

months, dated May 5, 1825. Aid, 2 months. Minister, 
The Rev, Gerrit fiallenbeck. 

43. The church in De Royter, Madison county, N. Y. Commission 
for 12 months, from May 4, 1826, half the time^-*-Aid 2 months. 
Minbter, 

The Rev. Matthew Harrison. 

44. The churches of Chateageuy and Constable, Franklin county, 
N. Y. have united in the support of a pastor> and have received aid 
3 months. Commission for 12 months, dated August 24, 1825. 

• Pastor, 
The Rev. Jacob Hart. 

45. The church in Union, Broome county, N. Y. Commission 
granted to tun 12 months, from June 17 f 1826. Aid, 2 months. 
Pastor, 

The Rev. Oliver Hill. 



182lbl FOVaXH RBFOKT. 31 

46k ThellBv. Elbridge G. Howe Ms cooiinisakmed in OctolMv last, 
bf the Conncotictil Missionaary Society, t^laiiaur ia the qtato of 
IMklMsi On Ike 2il8t of Mu-eb, t^26j lie feoanred a snail i^rant 
of aid ftioin this ConniittM ; la tbe phifiovtioD of abom 2 months 
for Ihe yeat . He is located in S|iriaj|0eld, Saugwae coiwty« wskcre 
we are' happy to learn tltat his prospect of permanent usefiikiess is 
highly encourag^ing. 

47. The eboveh ia Gk^ene, Chenango county, N. Y. Cenmlssion fi>r 

12 moiiths, from January $y 1^6. Aid, 2 months. Minister, 
The Rev. John B. Hoyt. 

4S. The church in Cmter^iUe and ite vicinity, Alleghany county, N. Y. 

Commissioned for 1^ months, dated July 1, 1^5. Aid, 4 mouths. 

Minister, 
The Rev. Silas Hubbard. 

49. The ehurch in Ciatendon, Rutland c^mnty, Vermont, in this 
town the labours of our missionary have been signally blessed. 
During the last year a substantial house for public worship has hten 
erected and dedicated, and filled with an attentive and deeply in- 
terested audienee. A revival of religion commenced here in the 
early part of the last winter, as the fruits ef which, by the last re^ 
turns, 15 had been added to the church, end the work was still 19 
rapid and powerful progrelss. The last grant to this station was 
for 12 months, commencing October 10, 1825. Aid, 3 months, 
tastor. 

The Rev. Henry Hunter. 

50. The church in Bethany, Genesee county, N. Y. Aided by the 
Geneva agency. Pastor, 

The Rev. Reuben Hurd. 

51. The church in Stafford, Genesee county, N.Y^ Commission for 
12 months, from May 1, 1825— ^Aid 3 months. Pastor, 

The Rev. Milton Huxley. 

52. The churches in China, Genesee county, and Concord, Erie 
county, N. Y. Aided by the Geneva ageipMsy. Patfer, 

The Rev. Edmund Ingals. 



32 FOURTH REPORT. [MaT, 

53. The church in Bladiisony Indiana. Tint intereitinf and impor- 
tant place has been made the station of one of the Society's mif- 
sionaries, who was instdled pastor of the church there last antnain. 
One fourth of his time b deroCed to the performance of mimiooary 
labour in several destitute. places in the vicinity. Commissioii for 
12 months, dated October 1, 1825. . Aid, 3 months. Pastor, 

The Rev. James H. Johnson. 

54. Mount Pleasant, Westchester county, N. T. Conuniasion for 7 
months, dated June 19^ 1B25. Aid, 2 months. Minister, 

The Rev. Daniel H. Johnson. 

55. The churches of Warren and Orwell, Bradford county, Penn- 
sylvania. Commtssion for 12 months. Aid, 3 months. Ministeiy 

The Rev. Salmon King. 

*56. The church in De Kalb, St Lawrence county, N. T. Commis- 
sion for 12 months from June 2, 1825. Ftoai our missionary at 
this station no report has been received. Pkoportion of aid, 2 
months. Minister, 
The Rev. Thomas Kinnan. 

The trustees and elders of the above-named church, under date of 
December 13, 1825, have reported to us an interesting revival of reli- 
gion there, and mention, as the fruits of it, about 60 hopeful con- 
versions. 

57' The congregations of Dover and Beekman, Dutchess county^ 
N. Y. Commission for 12 months, dated February 8, 1825» Aid, 
3 months. Minister, 

The Rev. William C. Kniffen. 

58. The church in Elyria, Lorain county, Ohio. This place has be- 
come the seat of justice for the county, and is apparently soon to 
become a place of high importanee in that state. Our missionary 
there is allowed to spend one fourth of his time in destitute places 
in the vicinity. Commission for 12 months. Aid, 3 months. Mi- 
nister, 

The Kev. Daniel W. Lathrop. 

59. The Presbyterian church in St. Augustine, East Florida. Com- 
mission for 12 months. Aid, 4 months. Minister, 

The Rev. Eleazer Lathrop. 



1626J FOaKTK REFORT. ^ 

60. The church in Catlin's Settlenoienty townof LinkiaeiiyCheDan£^Q 
county 9 N. Y. Commission for 12 months from June 27) 1825. 

. Aid^ 3 months. Minister, 
The Rev. E. T. Leavenworth. 

61. The church in Evans, Erie county, N.Y. Commission for. 1^ 
months from August 11, 1825. Aid, 3 months. Pastor, 

The Rev. Samuel Leonard. 

€[2. The cburch in Constantia, Oswego county, N. Y. Commission 
for 12 months, dated August 24, 1825. Aid, $ months. Minister^ 
The Rev. Clement Lewis. 

63. The church in Hoosick, Rensselaer county, N. Y. Commissioa 
for six months, dated November 14, 1825. Aid^ in the proportion 
of 6 wee^s. Minister, 

The Rev. Jacob Little. 

64. The church in Nunda, Alleghany county, N. Y. Commission 
for 12 months from October 1, 1824. Aid, 2 months. Minister, 

The Rev. John Lindsley. 

65. The churches of Greenburgh and White Plains, Westchestec 
county, N. Y. Commission for 6 months. Aid«2 months^ l^inister. 

The Rev. Chester Long. 

66* The Rev. Orange Lyman has been employed three months as an 
agent of this Society, in Ondda and Onondaga counties, to, make 
collections for our benefit: where he laboured with effect,. and f, 

tit > 1 

sought also to distribute the word of truth. 



' r 



t 



67* The united churches of Pit&iown, Rensselaer county,. N. Y^ 
Commission for 12 months, dated December 9^ 1825* Aid, twd ^ 

and a half months. Pastor, 

The Rev. Solomon Lyman. • ''jft 

68. The Reformed Dutch Ciiurch in Broome-street, City of New- 
York. Commission for 12 months from March 8, 1825. Aid, 9 
months. Pastor, 

The Rev. Robert Maclean. 

5 



dA FOURTH REPORT. [MaV, 

09' The Rev. Lewis McLeod received a conrmission to labour as a 
missionary in Indiana, dated October 6, 1825. One hundred dol- 
liars was granted him as an outfit, with the expectation that he 
would be able to select a location, where his support, after reaching 
the field of his labours, would be derived principally from the peo- 
ple. Our missionary writes us from Harrbon, in that State, under 
date of March 18, 182$, that having visited several places in In- 
diana, which present very interesting and important fields for mis- 
sionary enterprise, he has at length concluded to spend the summer 
on the White Waters, chiefly in the county of Dearborn. This be 
has found to be a very destitute region, and one which presents 
great encouragement to the faithful labours of a minister of Christ. 

70. The Rev. John Maltby was employed as Agent for this Society 
13 weeks from November 1, 1825, to collect funds, and ibrm Aux- 
iliary Societies. These duties he discharged with great efficiency, 
and to the entire satisfaction of this Committee, principally in 
Rensselaer and Washington counties, in this State. 

71. The church in Boonville, Oneida county, N. V. Commission for 
12 months from December 1, 1824. Aid, 2 months. Minister^ 

The Rev. Ira Manley. 

72. The. church in Pomfret, Chatauque county, N. Y. Commission 
for 12 months from January 3, 1826. Aid, 3 months. Minister, 

The Rev. Elihu Mason. 

*T3. The church in Essex, Essex county, N. Y. Commission for 12 

months firom January 1, 1825. Aid, 2 months. Minister, 
The Rev. Asa Mesaer. 

74. The Reformedl Dutch Church in TompkinsviUe, Statin Mand 
Commission for 12 months. Aid, 2 months. Ministerj 

The Rav. John E. Miller. 

75. The church in Moscow, Livingston county, N. Y. Commission 
for IS months* Aid, 3 mqnths. Pastor, 

The Rev. Samuel T. Mills. 

*76. The church in New Stockbridge, Oneida county, N. Y. Com* 
mission for 12 months, dated October 25, 1825. Aid, 3 months. 
* Pastor, 
Th^ Rev. Jesse Minor. 



18^.] FOiraxH Bm^oRT. '3b 

77' The church in Hoily, Oatario^ county, N. Y. Aided by the Gt^ 

neva Agency- Minister, 
The Rev. John C. Morgan. 

78. The church in Perrinton, Monroe county, N. Y. Commission 

for 12 months, dated April 15, 1825* Aid, 3 months. Minister, 
The Rev. John C. Morgan. 

79' The church in Georgetown, Madison county, N. Y. Commission 

for 12 months. Aid, 3 months. Minister, 
The Rev. David S. Morse. 

I" . 80* The church in Westfield, Chatauque county, N. Y. Commission 
for 12 months, dated June 27f 1825. Aid, S mouths. Pastor, 
The Rev. Isaac Cakes. 

81. The church in Jersey City, Bergen county, N. J. Commission 
for 12 months, dated August 11, 1825. Aid, S months* Minister^ 

The Rev. James S. Olcott. 

82. The Presbyterian Society in Fredonia, Chatauque county, N. Y, 
Commission for 12 months from October 6, 1825. Aid, 3 raontiis. 
Pastor, 

The Rev. William Page. 

83 The church in Spencer, Tioga county, N. Y. Commission £q« 
one-fourth of the time, 12 months from August 24, 1825. Aid, 2 
months. Minister, 

The Rev. Samuel Parker. 

84. The church in Malone, Franklin county, N. Y. Commission tfr 
12 Months from August 8, 1825. Aid, 3 months. Pastor, 

The Kev. Ashbel Parmelee. 

85. The church in Mbira, St. Lawrence county, N. Y. ^ dommiasiow 
for 12 months, one-fourth of the time, from August 8, 1825. Aid, 
2 months. Minister, 

The Rev. Moses Parmelee. 

86. The church in Euclid, Cuyahoga county, Ohio. CorthJis^dtt foi* 
X2 months from January 1, 182^, with the privilege of spending a 



/ 



30 FOURtR REPORT. [MaT, 

part of the time in destitute congregationB in the vicinity. Aid, S 
months. Pastor, 
The Rev. Stephen Feet. 

87. The church in West Stockholm, St. Lawrence county, N. Y. 
Commission for 12 months. Aid, 2 months. Pastor, 

The Rev. Roswell Pettibone. 

88. The church in Rutland, Jefferson county, N. Y. Commission for 
12 months from January 1, 1826. Aid, 3 months. Pastor, 

The Rev. Adams W. Piatt. 

89. The ehurch in Athens, Bradford county, Pennsylvania. Com 
mission for 12 months from August 2, 1825. This is regarded by 
the Committee as an important station in its influence upon the 
surrounding destitute settlements. The labours of our missionary 
here promised great good. Proportion of aid, 3 months. Minist^, 

The Rev. Isaac W. Piatt. 

90. The Rev. Augustus Pomeroy was appointed in October last, to 
labour as a Missionary in the State of Missouri. An outfit of If 100 
was granted him, with the expectation that after reaching that State 
he would be able to derive his support principally from the people 
where he should statedly labour. Mr. P. has written us, under date 
of March 15, 1826, that, after some unavoidable delays in Ohio, he 
reached Missouri on the 12th of January, since which time he has 
travelled 400 miles in that :^tate, preaching wherever an opportu- 
nity presented. He seems to have pursued his arduous enterprise 
with great vigour and interest, and we have reason to believe that 
both his delay in Ohio, and his travels in Missouri, have been high- 
ly useful to the cause of Home Missions in those States. Throu^^h 
his instrumentality, in connection with the Rev. Mr. Chaoiberlin 
and the Rev. Mr. Bingham, an auxiliary Missionary Society has been 
formed in Washington county, Ohio, with a subscription of 5400 
for the first^ear. 

JVIr. Pomeroy has finally, with the advice of his brethren of the St 
Louis Presbytery, located himself at Booneville, Franklin, and 
Fayette, Howard county, Missouri, where much is to be done, and 
where hn labours are greatly needed and desired. 

^1. The church in New-Lisbon, Otaego county, NewYork. Com- 



1826.] FOURTH REPOltT. 37 

mission for 12 months, dated August 24, 1825. Aid, 3 months, 
Minister, 
The Rev. Seth J. Porter. 

^2. Mount Morris, Livingston county. Commission for l£ months, 
from January 1, 1825. Aid, 3 months. Minister, 

The Rev. B. Foster Pratt. 
Mr. P. resigned his commission in October, to occupy the place 

where he now labours. 

* 93. The church in Galen, Wayne county, N. Y. Commission for 

12 months, dated December 1, 1825. Aid, 3 months. Minister, 
The Rev. B. Foster Pratt. 

94. The church in Rush, Monroe county, N. Y. Commission for 12 

months from November 1, 1825. Aid, 3 months. Minister, 
The Rev. Erie Prince. 

95' The Congregation of LaPraire,Lower Canada. Commission for 

12 months, from November 1, 1825. Aid, 4 months. Minister, 
The Rev. Isaac Purkis. 

96. The church in Upper Greenburgh, West-Chester county, N. York. 

Commission for 6 months, dated November 1, 1825. Aid, one and a 

half months. Minister, 
The Rev. David Remington. 

^4 The church in Wysoz, Bradford county, Pennsylvania. Commis- 
sion for 12 months from March 17, 1825. Aid, 3 months. Minister, 
The Rev. Lyman Richardson. 

"^98. The church in Newark, Tioga county, N. Y. Commission for 12 
months, half the time, dated February 9, 1826. Aid, 2 months. 
Pastor, 

The Rev. Zenas Riggs. 

99. The church in St. Charles, Missouri. Commission for 12 months 
from October 1, 1825. This station, important in itself, and situat- 
ed in the midst of an interesting and rising State, still enjoys the 
faithful labmirs of the Missionary who has occupied it the last two 
years. Aid, 4 months. Minister, 

The Rev. Charles S. Robinson. 



^ 



;^ FOURTH iiEPORx* tMay, 

100. The ckurch in Monristown, St. Lawrence county, N. Y. Com^ 
mission for 12 months from January 1, 1825. Aid, 2 months. 
Pastor, 

The Rev. James Rodgers. 

101. The church in Masonsviile, Ddaware connty, N. Y. Comriiis. 
sion for 12 months from August, 1825. Aidj S months. Pastor, 

Tb» Rot. Egbert Roosa. 

102. The Church in Pontiac, Oakland county, Michigan Territory^ 
Commission for 12 months, dated October 6, 1825. Aid, 3 months. 
Pastor, 

The Rev. Isaac W. Ruggles. 

lOS. The church in Hartford, Washington county, N. T. Commis- 
sion for 12 months from January 26, 1826. Aid, 3 months. Pastor, 
The Rev. John B. Shaw. 

104. The church in Portage, FrankTm county, Ohio. Commission 
for 12 months, dated August 8, 1825. Aid, 3 months, l^astor, 

The Rev. George Sheldon. 

105. The church in Mendon, Monroe coun^, N. T. Commission for 
I2' months, dated January 10, 1826. Aid^ 3 months. Pastor, 

The Rev George G. Sill. 

106b* The chorek^ w Jliy,.E«ieg[t coanty, N. Y. Gdmmis^&B for 12 

moBths from Se(ttemlier 8, 1^251 Aid, 3 mooffas. Pastor, 
The Rev. Henry Slater. 

lOf.* The ehurch-in WellingtMi,. Lorain county, Ohio. ComnussrOD 
ion IQ moMhs, thnee-fourth» o# the tiaie; Aid^ 3 months. Minister, 
The Rev. David Smith. 

108. The church in Lewiston, Niagara county, N. Y. Commission 
fiK 6.menths, from'Mifrch 2l^i l<8fi6' Atd, 2 mondiSi Mibist^;,. 
T4ie«ev. DavidM^ Snitb. 

U)04 The rttcDild^GOBgvegpNiioati/cliqiQh in Lisld, Broome ccliiiiC3r,N. 

Y. Commislion for 12 months, • ftHMil A9»ii25,t 1825. Aid, 2 

months. Pastor, 
The Rev. Ira Smith. 



18^.| FOtTRTH nVPOBT. &9 

1 10. The churcd iti Sackett^s Rai<bour. Commission feir 12 moitihs, 

from February 8, 1825. Aid, 8 months. Pastor, 
The Rev. Samuel F. Snowden. 

Mia for 12 moBths fr^m April 14, 1^6, Aid, 3 months. J^ton, 
The Rev. Constant Soutfewoirth. 

112. The second church in Genoa, Cayuga county, N. Y. Aided by 

tbe Gfeneya fgeii^y. . MiflkiM^jr, 
The Rev. ^qo^i^ gtepken^. 

113. The congregation of Arcadia, a new and floarishtng village od 
the western canal, h^ie^med ^ projQi3?4i| ^fl4rom theQeneva 
agency. Minister, 

The Rev. Solomon Stephens. 

114. The chureh in Aiexaodfia, Jeflferson eaunty, N* Y« Cfommis* 
sioB fi»r 12 months from January 3, 1826. Aid> 2 mpplte. Mi- 
nister, 

The Rev. William B. Stow. 

111$. The churches of Pbaarsalia and AleDonoUfb^CbmdflUgoqQiiiity^ 

N. Y. Commission foir 12 mo^^bs^Aid S moniths. Ministev^ 
Thie Rev. Williafu O. Stralton. 

116. The church in Florence, Oneida county, N. ¥. Cammisnon 
for 12 months from October 27, 1825. Aid, 3 months. Pastor, 

The Rev. Samuel Swezey. 

Since the 1st of March last, a powerful revival of religion has been 
enjoyed in this station. By the last returns, we learir, that in the 
month of- April there had b^en between 50 and 60 hopeful conver- 
sions, and the work was still in glorious progress; ' 

« 

117. The church in Moravia, Caynga f^ounty. Commissimi for 12 

months. Aid, 3 months. Pastor^ 
The Rev. George Taylor. 

118. The church in Dnndaft Susq^ebaanah eon&ty, Pennajrlvania. 
Commission for 12 months froRi May 1» 1825. Aid, 3 months-. 
Pastor, 

The Rev. Charles Thompson. 



40 FOURTH R£POkT. [MaT, 

119* The church in Litchfield, Oneida county, N. ¥*. Comniission 

for 12 months from May l6| 1825. Aid, S months. FastcMr, 
The Rev. Ahner Towne. 

120. The church in Warren, Herkimer county, and the church in 
Richfield, Otseg^o county, N. T. Commission for 12 months dated 
May 16, 1825. Aid,3menth8. Minister, 

The Rev. Charles Wadsworth. 

*121. The church in Franklin, Delaware county, N. Y. Conimissio& 

for 12 months from December 9, 1825. Aid, 3 months. Pastor, 
The Rev. Daniel Waterbury. 

122. The church in Oxford, Chenango county, N. Y. Commission 
for 12 months dated August 10, 1825. Aid, 3 months. Minister, 

The Rev. Elijah D. Wells. 

123. The church in Greenbush, Rensselaer county, N. Y. Commis- 
sion for 12 months from January 3, 1826. Aid) 3 months. .Minister, 

The Rev. Thomas S. Wickes. 

124. The churches of West Farms and New Rochelle, Westchester 
county, have united in supporting a minister, to divide his labours 
equally between the two congregations, and aid has been granted 
them. Commission for 12 months from June 1, 1825. Aid, 3 
months. The church in New Rochelle has increased nearly one 
third during the last year, and now consists of 26 members. Mi- 
nister, 

The Rev. Joseph D. Wickham. 

125. The charch in Denmark, Jefferson county, N. Y. Commission 
for 12 months from June 2, 1825. Aid, 3 months. Minister, 

The Rev. Lumund Wilcox. 

* 126. The Third Presbyterian church in Marcellus, Onondago coun- 
ty, N. Y. This church has been blessed with a revival under the 
labours of our missionary the last winter. Previous to the 21st of 
March last, 17 had been added to the charch, as the fruit of this 
awakening, and six then stood propounded for admission. Commis- 
sion for 12 months from March 8, 1826. Aid, 2 months. Pastor, 

The Rev. William J. Wilcox. 



1826J FOURTH REPORX. 41 

*127- The ckurcfa in Lewis, E^aex county, N. Y. Cosnoigdon for 

12 months, dated November 25, 1824. Aid, 2 months. Pastor, 
The Rev. Silas WiWer. 

1^8. The Presbyterian Society in Tompkins, Delaware county, N. 

Vork. Commission for 12 months from August 8, 1825. Aid, one 

and a half month. Minister, 
The ReV. Elisha Wise. 

129* The church in Greenbush, Rensselaer county, N. Y. Received 
aid 4 months from June 1, 1825, in the proportion of 2 months. Mi- 
nister, 

Th0 Rev. WiHiam Woodbridge. 

Mr. Woodbridge was conamissioned for 12 menths, but circumstomces 
rendered it expedient for him to leave the field to which he had 
been appointed. He was soon after succeeded by the Rev. T. S. 
Wicks, whose name is found in its alphabetical place, in the preced- 
ing list. 

130. The church of Orville, in Manlius, Onondaga county, N. York. 

Commission for 12 months from October 31, 1825. Aid, 3 months, 

Minister, 
The Rev. Hezekiah N. Woodruff. 

From the foregoing details it may be seen that the 
Committee have extended aid^ during the last year, to 
148 churches ai}d congregations, and that these con- 
gregations have been statedly supplied, in vi^hole or 
in part, by 1 27 Missionaries. 

ThevCommittee have thus made provision for the 
eotire support of 27 years and 9 months of mission- 
ary labour, and by this have secured to the cong^rega- 
tions aided, 115 years and 11 months of parochial 
or ministerial service. 

Of the Missionai*ies, 100 have been employed in 
the State of New- York, 1 in Vermont, 1 in New- 



42 FOllBTH BB^OBTi [MaY, 

Jersey, 7 in Pennsylvania, 7 in Ohio, 1 in Michi- 
gan, 4 in Indiana, 3 in Missouri, 1 in Illinois, 1 in 
East Florida, and 1 in Lower Canada. 

To assist the churches to which they minister, in 
the support of these Missionaries, the Committee 
have paid out, since the last anniversary, includ- 
ing the expenses of their office, and of the agencies 
which they have employed, the sum of ;^10,166 80. 

From the Treasurer's account, it appears that the 
receipts of the last year have amounted in all to 
;^11,804 09, and that there is now in the Treasury 
;$f 1,647 29. 

More than the sum at this time in the hands of 
the Treasurer is now due for Missionary services 
which have been already performed ; and besides this, 
the Committee are now under pledges for the sup- 
port of Missionaries, whose labours are yet to be dis- 
charged, to the amount of about ;^7000, which we 
are bound to pay as it shall become due in the 
successive months of the coming year. This obli- 
gation we have assumed in the fear of God, and we 
hesitate not to believe that his blessing on the libe- 
rality of the churches will enable us to discharge it, 
and that the spirit of the Christian community will 
sustain us under still greater responsibilities. We 
are strengthened and confirmed in this belief by our 
experience of the Divine blessing hitherto. We do 
not believe that the Keeper of Israel will forsake to- 
morrau) the cause which he loves and prospers to- 
day. After the example of Paul, we reason thus — 
The Lord hath suppUedy he doth suppltfj and we tnist 



1826.] FOURTH REPORT. 48 

in him that he will supply j all our reasonable demands 
upon his people in this labour of love. 

It is known to the members of this Society, that 
the Committee have at their disposal, with the ex. 
ception of ;^230, no funded property ; and we are 
glad it is so. We look to Him who owns all the 
wealth of the universe ; and it is a source of the most 
exquisite satisfaction that we receive the gifts of this 
Society almost directly from his hand. He puts it 
into the hearts of his people to give, and the cause of 
benevolence moves on, because the people have a mind 
to work. Each bestowment is a free-\fill offering. 
We receive it, in every instance, as a kind of first- 
fruit of a spirit of benevolence which the Lord him- 
self has created in the soul of the giver, and we thank 
him the more, when we are thus constrained to trace 
every good gift directly to the Father of Lights, from 
whom it Cometh down. It is a system of receiving 
and distributing charities, which, more than any 
other, is fitted constantly to remind us of our con- 
nexion with the skies, and to fasten on us the impres- 
sion that we are acting for God, \i'hile, at the same 
time, it is the system best adapted to keep alive the 
interest of the Christian community. 

We have introduced these reflections in view of 
the experience of the last year. In looking for the 
sources from which the income of the Society has 
been derived, we have been constrained to say, the 
hand of God hath done it. His Spirit has wrought 
upon materials of his own forming, and produced the 
accumulated gifts which have constituted the sum to- 
tal of our receipts. Several hundreds of dollars have 



M FOURTH R£POBT, [MaT, 

been derived through channels which we are uq- 
unable to detect. They haye been bestowed by in- 
dividuals who have chosen to give their alms in se- 
cret. Other hundreds have been made up of widows' 
mites — the hard-earnings and the thank-offerings of 
the poor. The ministers who have endeavoured to 
interest their congregations in this object, and who 
have taken up collections for the Society, have done 
us a service for which they deserve the ^approbation 
of the churches. 

The special agencies which have been employed 
have been v^ry productive, in proportion to the tinje 
occupied in conducting them, and several auxiliary 
Societies have been efficient helpers. 

Of these, the first place in this report is due to 
the Young Men's Missionary Society of the City of 
New- York. The same enterprise and efficiency, 
which was mentioned at our last anniversary, has 
continued to mark their proceedings another year. 
They have assumed the responsibility of supporting 
18 of the missionaries of this Society, at an expense of 
Jl^ 1,450, and should the Parent Institution enlarge 
its system of operations, as is contemplated, this ef- 
ficient auxiliary hopes to increase its income to an 
amount sufficient to support all our missionaries with- 
in the State of New- York. 

Several other auxiliaries have done well, an'd de- 
serve to be mentioned in this connexion. 

The United Female Domestic Missionary Society 
pf this City, has contributed ^300. The Clinton 



1826«] FOURTH REPORT. 45 

Branch of th« U. D. M. S* has reported |(177 and 
77 cents. The Washington County Domestic Mis- 
sionary Society, Ohio, formed in January last, has 
reported a subscription of ;^400, and several others 
might be named whose contributions have gladden- 
ed our hearts, because they have been tokens of the 
sympathy of Christians alt over the land, in the 
great work of supplying the destitute of our country 
with the means of salvation. 

The Committee are happy to state here, that they 
entertain a high sense of the important service ren- 
dered to the Society by their Treasurer, Peter 
Hawes, Esq. who, though the embarrassments of tb6 
Treasury have compelled him frequently, during the 
year, to advance several hundreds of dollars to answer 
current demands, has performed with great faithful* 
ness the duties of his ofiBce, and entirely without 
charge to the Society. 

The amount of good which has been effected by 
this Society, the last year, an angel could not calcu- 
late. We believe it to be great, in proportion to the 
weans expended, beyond a parallel in any other sys- 
tem of benevolent effort in our country. We shall 
not be suspected, by this remark, of a disposition to 
depreciate the importance of other benevolent Socie- 
ties. The work of Education, of Fweign Missions, 
of Distributing Bibles and Tracts, necessarily in- 
curs greater expense, and we rejoice in the pa- 
tronage which these several enterprises have receiv- 
ed from American Christians. We venerate the zeal 
which carries them forward. Our design is simply 
to remind oiu: friends that the work of Domestic Mis- 



46 FOURTH REPORT. [MaY, 

sions, while it is equally important with any other 
object of public charity now before the churches, is 
the least expensive, with the exception, perhaps, of 
the system of Sabbath-school Instruction, in compa- 
rison with the greatness of its results. 

This Committee, during the last year, with an 
expenditure of less than ijf 11,000, have brought the 
blessings of a stated and permanent ministry within 
reach, probably, of not less than 80,000 or 30,000- 
souls, who, without our aid, must have remained 
comparatively destitute. And the labours of our 
missionaries have not been without some visible ef- 
fect. Under God, they have saved souls from death, 
and turned many to righteousness. Several of our 
stations have been blessed with special revivals of 
religion. The result of these has been the ingather- 
ing of tens, and twenties, and fifties, who, we trust, 
will never cease to recognise this Society as the in- 
strument of their salvation. Besides these showers 
of mercy, the blessing of God has distilled like the 
dew upon very many of our congregations. There 
is scarcely a missionary of the Society who has not 
been able to report, at the close of his 1 2 months, the 
hopeful conversion of, at least, one sinner. These, 
in the aggregate, amount to several hundreds, whose 
peace has bee^n made with God during the past year, 
through the instrumentality of this Society. 

But the good effected is very inadequately told by 
these numerical calculations. The less palpable, but 
more general influence of our missionaries upon the 
communities, in the midst of which they have held 
forth the word of life, and administered the ordi- 



1826.] FOtTRTH REPORT, 47 

nances of Christ, has put in operation a multitude of 
moral causes, which, in their progressive results, can- 
not fail signally to promote the political and moral 
health of the nation. The institutions of Christianity 
established and perpetuated in 148 townships, vil- 
lages, and parishes, embraced in 55 counties, and 10 
States and Territories of the Union, must exert a 
powerful agency in the improvement of our national 
character. In bearing our part, therefore, in the 
support of these heralds of life, we are doing the 
work of patriotism, no less than that of Christianity; 
and the friends of civil lifierty may unite with all 
Christians, and with the angels of mercy, in blessing 
God for the agency of this Society. It has sought, 
and, to no inconsiderable extent, it 'has already pro- 
moted, that intelligence and virtue without which 
civil liberty can not be maintained. 

# 

This last remark, while it affords us a clue to the 
incalculable benefits which may yet result from the 
efforts of the last year, we regard as especially im- 
portant in reference tp future missionary operations 
in this country. In ICngland, and on the continent 
of Europe, it is otherwise. But here, every citizen 
has a responsible part in sustaining the dominion of 
his country. The sovereignty is in the people. The 
government of the United States is practically a go- 
vernment of opinion ; and the representation of the 
people, both in our National and State legislatures, 
is becoming 6very year more and more literal and 
perfect. The voice of each individual subject, and 
of each district represented, is every year more dis- 
tinctly heard, and more implicitly obeyed, in all our 
legislative bodies. If, therefore, we would guard the 



48 rauRTH nupORt. [May, 

admiftistration of our government from abuse, and 
oor political institotiofis from ruin, we must purify 
the tivelve million sources of political power and 
public induenee wbkb are to be found in the senti« 
ments and manners of tbe individuals who compose 
the nation. This we beHeve can be done in no other 
way so effectuatly a» by the permanent estabfishment 
of Christian ordinaneeSr All history assures us that 
the strongest guarantee of the intelligence, the poli- 
tical security and social morality of any people, is to 
be found in tbe stated and faithful preaching of tbe 
doctrines of God- 
But the highest point of political purity of wfaich 
infidel statesmen have ever dreamed, is far below tbe 
mark for the prize of the tugh calling to which the 
principles of this Society direct aU the objects of its 
beneficence. It seeks to prepare the souls of men 
for a purer world than that which tbe last fires shall 
burn. How much it has already done to m^e hea- 
ven glad, the records of eternity alone can disclose. 
How miKh it may yet effect, \ijv the increase of its 
means, and the future enlargement of its plan of ope- 
rations, no mind can conceive. A wide field is before 
us for cultivation, and we are sure, if the present and 
future generations of our country are to be saved from 
the ruin which all sinners deserve, they must be bless- 
ed with the influences of a Christian ministry* "How 
can they be saved without a preacher ?" This ques- 
tion, addressed to American Christians in reference to 
the ra^illions of the destitute within our own borders, 
is enough to call into action all the sleeping energies 
of the churches. Besides the inhabitants of nume- 
rous waste places in the older States, there are tens 



1826.] FouaxH report. 49 

of thousands of the sons of the Pilgrims who have 
gone away from the richest legacy of their fathers. 
In the ardour of worldly enterprise, they have sought 
the new and fertile countries of the West, and spread 
themselves along the borders of the wilderness, which 
retires at their approach ; but they have neglected to 
take fire from the altar of their homes. They have 
carried with them their activity, their enterprise, 
their intelligence, their love of liberty ; and many of 
them are not insensible that it will be impossible to 
bequeath these to their children without the influences 
of Christianity. They know, too, that Christianity 
without the administration of its ordinances, is a 
thing of name, and of none effect. To this Com- 
mittee they have made their appeal ; and we gladly 
publish that our consciences have been stung with ^ 
sense of our responsibility, and our affections deeply 
enlisted in their behalf. We have endeavoured to 
supply their wants. We have sent them several mis- 
sionaries since the last anniversary, and now, about 
to lay down our office for the year, we commend 
these increasing millions, with increasing earnestness 
and importunity, to the Christian sympathy of this 
Society. The good effected by what we have al- 
ready done is enough to encourage still more vigo- 
rous efforts ; and we make this appeal with the greater 
confidence, at this time, because it has been our hap- 
piness recently to witness the kindling up of a livelier 
and a more extended interest on this subject than has 
hitherto existed in our country. 

It has been our privilege to be made the organs of 
assembling in this City, the present week, a numerous 
and respectable Convention of the friends of Domes- 



50 FOURTH REPORT. 

tic Missions from all parts of the United States, for 
the purpose of forming an ^^ American Home Mission- 
ary Society." The unanimous and highly auspicious 
result of their deliberations will be laid before this 
Society at the present meeting. We have only to 
add, that, should you ^dopt the recommendation of 
that Convention, the present is the last Report which 
the Society, in its present form, will be called on to 
accept from their Committee. Were it to be the 
close of your efforts in the same cause, we would 
call the people of the land to mourning.' But it is 
happily otherwise. The United Domestic Missionary 
Society will here lay down its life, to take it again. 
We come to the close of our fourth year, therefore^ 
with such feelings as surviving friends are wont to 
cherish when they stand over the grave of a good 
man, and there, in remembrance of all that was holy 
in the acts of his life, and in anticipation of all that 
is to be glorious in his future existence, are heard to 
say, It was gain for him to die. The Society which 
tve have served has finished its probation. The ex- 
periment has been fairly tried, and the result is a 
conviction pervading the mind of the nation, that it 
is an instrument of God's own choosing, for the sal- 
vation of the American people, and that it is worthy 
to be elevated to a higher sphere, to be introduced 
into a wider field, and, to be clothed with greater 
efficiency in its glorious work, that all the people of 
the land, in the length of it, and in the breadth of it, 
may rejoice and be glad in the Lord. 

By order of the Execative Committee, 

Absalom Pjbtbks, Cor. Secretary. 



r 




1 


g n 


5? 


S CO 




(D S 


]*• 


3-r 


^ 


sra. 


Q 


B9 or 


(< 


D O 


M> 


S-3 


»< 


10 


* 


•o 




? 


te 


&• 


93 


■ p 



I? 






3 g^ 
o ST 



no* 



« 



S9 

S 

a. 



CD 



ID 
A 

O 

s 
a 



»» 

o 



oa 

5 

o 



CA S> tt 

gSBB 

|s§s 

Saga. 

CTCVC 

» 5 '« 

pig'. 

« « f* • 

• 5*8 

ri. 



<* o 

ea a 

3 -;? 

C &> 

O.C 

B Q^ 

<t> B.* 



H 

o 

S" 

B 

n 
a» - 



99 



• J" 



le 



00 

bo 



• S 



B 

a. 

a. 
s 



5- • . 

B 

5* » I 



• I 



I • 

I I 



o o o 

CD *— — • 
•cJ B* w 

fS B ** 

Srft sf 

g.5 ® 

*♦ I-* 

- ■ **• ^* 

B tS 5;. 

6" 2 

-« • »• 

o ^ 
c 9-00 

f? 



t • 

o 
o 



^^B ^ 00 » k© 



I t 



d>i^ O^QO v*o 

c« cio^oo^ot 

^" ■" "~ k© OC* 






00 



00 

o 
•1^ 





SS 




OCuwt 



I 

Ci 



1 



I- 



? 






I 



& 



54 APi^fiNiHx:. [May, 

tion .IB aaereMuig in anaibeirs, and is eonstaatly growing. I b«1le?e there 
hat not boon a w&ik miee I have bfeen here, that one or more has not 
been impresped wllh a sense of sin. Blessed be Ood who has croWned 
'ray labours with success. 

I am now looking forward with fond anticipation to the period, which 
I tlnnk b near, when thiS' people will make an effort to settle a minister; 
and feel very confident that yout scHnety will continue to aid them fcNr 
one or two years more and that, then they will not only support the 
ministry among themselves, but, in tbetr turn, aid in sending the word 
of life to the churches which are sitting in the region and shadow of death. 

The congregation have since united in a call to Mr. Flagler, and he is 
now regularly installed pastor of the church. 

In his report just received, he states that since his laat account of his 
labours, seven persons have been added to the church. A nunrber at 
this time are anxious respecting their eternal interests, and one Or two 
have recently obtained a hope in Christ. A female Tract Society has 
been formed, and a small amount contributed fur missionary objects. 
Religion, in this place, receives more attention, the Sabbath is better ob- 
served, and the moral sentiments of the people improved. 

Mr. Flagler has b^n i^ppinted to labour for another year in this con* 
gregation. 

A short report has been just received from Mr. Page, who completed 
one year's service in Fredonia in October last, in which he states that 
between nine and fifteen had been added to the church. It being made 
on a journey, it is of course not perfectly definite. 

The proposal for the formation of the American Home Missionary 
Society is received. Some gentlemen from this region will attend, and 
you may rest assured of our most cordial co-operation, provided it adopts 
■ior its regulation the fundafMtM priniMes of our society. These we 
regard, and we feel confident that your Ex. Com. will hold, as the sheet 
anchor of hope, for the diffusion, and planting, and nourishing, and fix- 
ing pure religion throughout our country. 

For the committee, 

H. DwioMT, Sec'ry. 



MORAL WASTES IN NEW-JERSEY. 
Tbs ReT. N. A. Pratt, a misuonary stationed at Shrewvbiuy, ia New-Jersej, writoi 
at foUow» fe^eeti^g the religioiis vi^aat^ of the eastern part of that state : 

The county of Monmouth is large, extending from the sea coast in a 
westerly direetion aboot 80 miles. It varies in width from 25 to 40 miles. 
It has the county of Middlesex on the north-west ; Burlington count} on 
the souysf west ; and on the east the ocean. Its length of sea-coast is per- 
haps not fiir from 4A miles. Most of the south-eastern and southern parts 
of the county are barren and unoukivaled, and called, in the common lan- 

guage of the couoto^, ^ the Pinu/* On the borders of the ocean, the inha- 
itants are numerous; but in the Pines, strictly so called, the population is 
more sparse^ The people are mostly poor, and subsist chiefly by hunting 
and fishing. In this county there are but fourPresbyterian churches, two 
«f which are luge, and able to support the Gospel. The other two are 
feeble, and stand in need of help. And their peculiar circumstaocesi if 
known, could not fiitf of' exciting the sympathies of the friends of ZioQ. 
One of thetwo first named is at Allentown, or Upper Fraehold, under the 
pastoral charge of ^e<Rev. Mr. Perkins: the other at Freehold, now 



1826.] APPENDIX. 55 

vacant, bat reeentiy under the care of the veneralile DoH. WoodbtilL 
One of the last named, is at Middletown Point, which has been destitute 
of regular preaching for nearVy two years. The other is at Shrewsbury, 
14 miles southeast from Middtetown Point— which, under the fostering 
care of the friends of noissions, has recently almost literally been raised 
from the dead, and which is still very we»k, struggling with many diffi« 
cuities, but prays and hopes for better days to come. Besides these, 
there is one Dutch Reformed church in the township of Middletown, 
between Middletown Point and Shrewsbury, which embraces some 
families in Shrewsbury. This congregation is large and wealthy, and is 
under the care of the Rev. Afr. Van Vronken. There are also three 
small congregations of Episcopalians, six or seven of Methodists — all 
small, except the one in this place-- two, and perhaps three of Friends. 
The county contained in 1820 more than £5,000 inhabitants. 

Often when riding through the county, did I ask myself, and endea- 
vour to ascertain by inquiry and observation, is there the remotest pro- 
bability of collecting a permanent congregation here ? The people come 
out well to meetings, and are generally attentive hearers of tne word. 
But they are poor ; their houses are small, and there are no convenient 
places for meetings. Bibles and tracts might be distributed to great ad- 
vantage. I felt very much the want of a good supply of both. I have 
recently had a collection among my people, for the purchase of Tracts, 
for distribution, and shall soon be able to purchase the worth of ten or 
twelve dollars. The Tracts which I distributed were gratefully received, 
and pressing invitations frequently given by the Inhabitants to visit them^ 
and preach to them again as soon as possible. 

Lower down the sea coast I hare no acquaintance. The monft aspect 
of things, however, is not at all more favourable, and I have reason to 
believe, that for a hundred mik*s, even to Gape May, there is a most de- 
plorable deficiency in literary a« well as reKgious instruction. Schools, 
where there are any, are badly managed, and hundreds may be found 
who can neither read nor write. This, however^ is not the case in the 
Pines only. There are men of property and respectability in * * * * 
who, strange as it may seem, cannot read a word, nor write their own 
names ; and a lawyer at Freehold totd me not long since, that within 
twenty miles of Monmouth Court House, he cooM count a hundred men, 
to say nothing of their families, who crmld neither read nor write ; and 
•what is worse, they wish to make thdr ignorance hereditary. It is hard 
to convince sueh inen^ since they have got along in the world as well as 
their neighbours who knew more than thensdelves, that it is their duty 
to educate their chlidten. This, I confess, is a dark picture ; but I am 
not conscious df its being too deeply shaded. Persons of any pious 
sensibility, to travel awhile in the Pines must be deeply affected with the 
moral .desolations of the country; and what is peculiarly distressing, it is 
difficult even to form a plan for its amelioration. 



REVIVAL IN MOUNT MORIIIS. 
The Rev.B. F.Prau, one of the missionaries of the U. D. M. Society, stationed 
at Mount Morris, (Livingston coanty,) in a letter to the Corresponding Secretary of 
the Toong Men's Missionary Society of this city, dated January lOtb, after a general 
view of the present state of bis congreigationi proceeds to give the following account of 
a tevival of religion whidi lias lalneni^iaoe iiflfse be eatersd upon this field of labour : 



56 APPBHDix. [Mat, 

In tbe moolli of October, lasi, eoodasire eridenee wu dbnM of 
tltf tpociai iaflueoees of the Uolj Spirit. Tbe detsp soleinDit j, irhieh 
tbeo uj^pttared to evideot, had been iocreasing lor sevisral ireeks. Meet- 
iogf oovr became more frequent and crowded. About the 1st of No- 
▼emb«r the work amumed a atill more interesting appearance. A nioag 
the memberi of the church ^* there wen great Mearckings of heart.'* The 
question whether they had been born ai^n* came to their minds witii 
irresistible force ; the importance of settling it on the ground of gtiod 
•ubstaotial wisdom was clearly seen. As if the midnight alarm had 
been given^ all appeared to arise and trim their lamps. Many, on re- 
vie%Ting their lives, taking into consideration their backslidings, the cool 
Indifference with which they had treated the Saviour and bis religion, 
the unconcern they had manifested for the salvation of sinners, who were 
living under the awful curse of Jehovah's violated law ; began to be un- 
der serious apprehensions that their faith had been entirely du^d, aod 
their former religious experience a delusive dream. The word of God 
was to them like the fire and the hammer. They felt its power. For 
several days some were in deep distress, and almost ready to yield to the 
fear that they were utterly and irrecoverably lost But peace, at length, 
was given, and the joy of salvation was restored. Now all bitterness 
towards others was lost^and every difficulty removed. The love of Jesus 
obtained an ascendancy in their hearts, and they found, from experience, 
how good it is for brethren to dtoeU ami pray and labour together in unity. 
They remembered their first love, performed their first work, and the 
spirit of animosity lost its dominion. But while in the thronged assem- 
bly , the countenances of Christians beamed with heavenly light, the 
heads bf many were bowed down — their hearts sunk under a load of 
conscious guilt, and in fearful apprehension of the wrath to come. Al- 
though the house was so crowded that many were obliged to stand dur- 
ingtne whole of the exercises, yet all was silent as the house of death. 

This silence was broken only by the voice of the speaker, or the soia 
and sighs of those who felt as if they were arraigned, in all their sins^ 
before a God of infinite holiness. For two or three Sabbaths* it was 
almost impracticable to praise the Lord in the sacred songs of his tem- 
ple, 8o many of the singers were in such deep distress in view of their 
sinfulness, and of. the danger to which they were exposed. 

On Monday,?. M.November 5th. the first anxious meeting was held. 
About twenty-five persons attendeo, who appeared to have a distinct 
view of their danger as sinners against God. There was no effort made 
to induce un impression that this was a mistaken notion. Their danger 
WHS exhibited as a truth plainly taught in God's word. But in connec- 
tion with this they were exhorted to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, 
who is exulted to give repentance and forgiveness of sins* The meeting 
closed, hut they seemed reluctant to depart ; they went, and it was evi- 
dent they felt as if they were going to aestruction. 

The number who attended these meetings increased for the space of 
two or three weeks, when there were nearly sixty. Then the Lord, by 
his spirit, as we hope and believe, began to set them free from the bon- 
dage of sin, and to bring them into the liberty of the Gospel. They found 
peace through the blocM of the cross. Thus the work advanred, and the 
.commencement of the following year (18!?S) found us in the midst*ofan 
interesting revival. 

On the first Sabbath In February, 68 united with the church on exa- 
mination Since I commenced labouring with this people nearly one 



1836 J A^PDNDIX- &1 

hoedred hw b)9ftn added to tliig 4Aiaf«h-^tt!iore tlmii eighty a« the fMts 
•f the tttML Before thlii ateetiion there were ehbut forty members 
dnhr. 

Mmj interesting t^artienkrs might be mmtiooed relating to thisreTi* 
rtA; hut they would swell my re)>ort to an undae length. 

Now^ sir, We are not without hope titat another blessinK may be grsnt- 
od whidh sheR tend to beautify and increase thia 2fon. In Geneseo, our 
eounty eeat, a work has commenced under the labours of a devoted and 
jodkiious pastor* Fifteen are beginning to Cherish a hope of salvation 
through a crucified Baridur. About three months ago a tery powerful 
work of grace was commenced in Palmyra, Wayne county, add it it 
now attending through several adjoining towns. 

At the present time this eoagregatidb appears to be in a happy state* 
On the Sabbath our meetings are full, and people are attentive. Onl j 
one outward circumstance appears to embarrass them ; that \9jthdfOfffn 
inatUUy, mtfumt aidy to support the Ooapel, They accept, very grate- 
fttHy, the aid your Sodety has afibrded them. They have centributed 
to the monthly concerts and on other occasions, more than thirty dolhirs 
in the course of the last tear, besides the labour they have performed 
in Ote missionary field, of five acres, which has produeed probably 180 
bushels of corn^tbfs is tiow in the cdb under my cate. 

May Jehovah be as the dew imto this vine, that it may revite as the 
com and grow as the hly ; that its branches may spread, and Its beauty be 
as the evergreen olive. Let thi^ be our united prayer. 



FROM lA PRAIfa£, IN CANADA. 

The followms is an extract of a letter recently received from tbe Rev. Isiaac Porkis, 
t>ne of the Society*s missionaries at La Prairie, in Lower Canada. Mr. P. suggests 
tbe expediency of obtaining a French missionary to labour among tbe Canadians at 
Blontreal and the vicinity^ and to travel occasionally. Such a missionary, be thinks^ 
might be extenaiveiy useful in conversing with the people, and distributing among 
them the French Scriptures and religious Tracts, as well as preaching the Gospe]. It 
is ia eoQtemplatiom to establish a iDome ipiasion society for Canada, and Mr. P. thiaka 
it possible tbat such a foeieCy would soon prodace a sum equal to tbe soppcnt of one 
Pveiwh missaenary : 

Yotnr kind letter, accompanied with my conkmission for a year, the 
letter of iostructions, and address to the congregation, caine safely te^ 
hand ; On the receipt of which I thanked God, and took cotirage. It 
was aR calculated to strengthen my hands. 'The instructions coin^de 
to exactly with my own view:?, that on reading them, I derived satisfac- 
tion io reflecting that I was under the patronage of a Society Whose ser- 
Yice is perfect freedom. The instructions and address are well adapted 
to add weight to my labours among the people, as well as to turn the 
hearts of the fathers to the children, and, in its measure, to preserve the 
earth from the curse which has so often desolated it. I cannot refrain 
from tears of joy whenever I hear of any effort to unite the* hearts of 
Britons and Americans in bands Of the closest friendship. I am conft- 
dent that the committee woo)d have felt emotions of exquisite delight 
had they been present to have witnessed the manner in which the ad- 
dress was received by the congreealioo on the Lord's day February, 20th, 
and the cordial gratitude and auction with which the folTowmg rejiolu- 
tion was paaaefi : 

8 



58 APPENDIX. [May, 

lUsolred UDanimously, That the warmest tbftfiks of this eongv^Ea- 
tiiM] be presented to the United Domestic Missionary Societv of New- 
York, for their sympathy, liberality^ and generosity, in aiding the support 
of the Gospel ministry and the ordmances of religion in La Prairie ; that 
it is our desire to cherish a high sense of their kindness, as it has for its 
objects the best interests of our own souls and of those of our posterity ; 
Bor can we express the delight which we feel, while we reflect, that from 
the very quarter from which heretofore we heard the sound of the 
trumpet and the alarm of war, we are now called to listen to the glad 
tidings of the Gospel of peace ; that it is the fervent prayer of this con- 
gregation that the efforts of the New- York Society, in conjunction with 
others of the same kind, may be crowned with abundant success in has- 
tening forward that happy day when ^ the nations shall learn war no 
jnore ;" that it shall be our constant endeavour to show our deep sense 
of the Society's beneflcenee by co-operating with them so far as our 
limited means shall allow. 

I am happy to say that our Ladies' Bible Association is e:oing on vigo- 
rously ; they distribute the Scriptures both in the French and EogViab, 
and appear to be destined by Providence to be an eminent blessing to the 
vicinity ; they have lately passed a resolution to give a Bible to every 
newly-married couple, and already we perceive that it is likely to have 
a good effect. It was voted that it should be presented by the minister 
in the name of the Association, and accompanied with a suitable address* 

My six children are all subscribers of one copper (about a cent) a week 
each ; my eldest little girl, in prospect of receiving a copy of the New 
Testament, promised it to a little French girl about ten years of age, as 
she had already one or two of her own ; the copy, when obtained, was 
given and received with a high degree of pteasure ; the manner in which 
she prizes it is visible in the continued sense of gratitude which she 
evinces. A short time ago, three little girls, whose mother is a French 
Catholic, in the simplicity of their little hearts, knelt down and worship- 
ped with us in the school room among the other children. The mother 
heard of it, lectured them on the subject, sentthem to the priest to confess 
and obtain absolution, and for many weeks as regularly as we entered the 
school for family worship, these children left the room and stood in the 
hall until we had closed. But recently I have observed them to remain 
regularly in the room to worship with us, and to add to my satisfaction, 
the father has provided a New Testament for one of them, who has re- 
quested one of my little girls to read it with her. 

The other little girl, who received the present of the New Testament, 
has shown a great desire to be present at worship, and although frona pro- 
hibitions at home, she has sometimes left the room, she has generally 
stood close to the door, and in a day or two has again shown the incli- 
sation of her heart by remaining in the room. The same conflict I have 
observed in many other of the Canadian children, out of whose mouths 
I trust God will ultimately perfect praise. 

The anniversary of the Sunday School Union of Montreal was held a 
few weeks ago ; tnere were three ministers of the Gospel present besides 
myself; a lively interest was evinced, and the attendance was far more 
numerous than at auy former meeting. This is in accordance with the 
attendance at the general meetings of other similar institutions for the last 
year. I think, therefore, that it may fairly be Concluded that there are 
unequivocal indications, that the aspect of the times in Canada is favour- 
able and highly encouraging to exertion. The report also Is far morft 
iht^n^ting and encouraging thw that of any former year. ^ 



1 826] APPENDIX, 59 

RELIGIOUS STATISTICS OP VERMONT. 
Tbe Bev. Henry Hunter, a missionary stationed at Clarendon, in Ratland eonnty* 
(Vermont,) presents the following picture of the religions wants of that state : 

In compliance with your request. I forward you the following facts, col- 
lected from official documents ana personal knowledge, relating to the 
religious condition of this state. We have within our boundaries about 
OTie hundredand sixty churcheB;(Congregational and Presbyterian ;) tighbf 
of these have settled pastors ; ten more may be supplied hy candidates 
and missionaries, leaving about seventy churches, in about as'many tonnsi 
destitute. To these may be added five-and- twenty or thirty townships in 
which churches do not even exist, making an aggregate of something over 
one hundred destitute towns in this little state. This, considering the small 
extent of our territory, is certainly a mighty waste. The great majority of 
these towns are destitute of any regtdar preaching of any kind that de- 
serves to be called the Gospel, ft need not be added that the enemy, ever 
Tigilant, is successfully sowing his tares on those portions of the vineyard 
which the servants of Christ neglect to cultivate. 

Rutland, Addison, and Chittenden counties are among the most popu- 
lous, wealthy, and best supplied in tbe state. Both of our Colleges are 
within these counties ; and the number of ministers, tbe number of desti- 
tute towns and churches, and the ability to support the Gospel is so near- 
ly equal in the three, that I suspect I cannot give you a better view of 
the best furnished portiop of our state than by the following view of Rut- 
land county. 

Rutland county is divided into tufenty-six townships ; sixteen of these 
townships are supplied, and ten are destitute. The population of these 
towns varies from five hundred to twenty-thfee hundred ; most of the 
towns have from 1500 to 2,000 inhabitants. The number of towns " al- 
most able" to support th^ Gospel, which are still destitute in this vicinity^ 
is not very great ; though a number that can do something, would, with 
the proper encouragement, do one half or two-thirds for the support of 
a faithful pastor. But alas, that pastor and that encouragement are not 
to be had, for you see that in the most favoured portions of the state more 
than one4hird are destitute. The feebler churches and newer towos 
must remain destitute until they are more able, (should that day ever 
come without the help of Gospel meaos,) or until some more powerful 
effort is made by the u>iends of domestic missions to send them the bread 
of life, for which they are perishing. 

The moral wretchedness which pervades these wastes can scarcely be 
conceived by any one who has not been on the ground. Iniquity abounds, 
the Daughter of Zion weeps in solitude ; her ways mourn, because none 
come to her relief, or to her solemn feasts. It is enough to break the 
heart of Christian sensibility to see these feeble churches, as sheep with-^ 
out a shepherd, stretching forth their supplicating hands to plead but for 
the crumbs which fall from your tables, and yet plead in vain ! 

I ought not to omit to mention in this detail the Vermont Juvenile 
Missionsiry Society, an institution of somewhat recent date, bu^ which, on 
the excellent system of your society, is doing much for our waste places. 
Its means, however, are greatly inadequate to the demands of our state, 
and are chiefly appropriated in the large destitute districts which lie is 
the Northern and Eastern partsof this 6tate« 



^ APPENDIXr [MAYf 

RSLieiOVS iSTATlSTICS OF ESSEX CO. H. T. 

neReir SOu Wililnr>aBiaMOBaryA«^pfd«tL««i%uEflPwCan]|ty,g^ 
^lowiq^ «*yt»mgni of tbe coiyfilioii of the charches and people in his vidniiy. 

In regard to the moral and religious state of this country, it is indeed 
alarming and distressing to every generous and enlightened man. The 
great body of the people are evidently ^* without hope and without God 
in tbe worlds" — pressing onward in the '^ broad road ** to remediless 
despair and wo. Profane swearing, Sabbath- breaking, and intemperance ' 

Srevail in a degree which is truly appalliog. There are more than fifteen 
loosand inhabitants in the county, of many different sects. By far the 
greatest proportion of this number seldom or never attend the public 
worship of God — and if they do, it is very difficult for the preacher to 
gain their attention even on the most solemn occasions. Tbe people are 
generally in moderate circumstances ; and generally those who possess 
the greatest share of wealth and influence, are men of no correct moral 
or religious principle, and conseouently they had much rather use their 
property in gratifying the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, and the 
pride of life^than to devote it to the support of that for which they have 
no regard. There are fourteen towns in the county ; and there are some in 
every town who are friends to truth, sobriety, and good order, but tbe num- 
ber is comparatiFehr small. In the most populous, flourishing, and weaU 
thy towns, it is di^ult to obtain forty subscribers, and to raise two hun- 
dred dollars for the support of a minister. Some of those who love the 
truth are disposed to ao all in their power, and, in many cases, beyond 
their abililhr, to suppoft religion. There are twelve small churches ia the 
county. They are all, I believe, organized on the Congregational piaoi 
i|nd are consociated. The whole number of professors is between fiMir 
9^d five hundred. There are four houses of worship in the county, all in 
sin unfinished state. Thero are at present nine Presbyterian and Coof^re- 
gational ministers labouring in th« county. But two of this number are 
ordained and settled as pastors of particular churches, and the9# are about 
Ibrtyi miles distant from each other. There are twelve congre^tions able 
to raise from one to two hundred dollars each for the support of preach- 
ing. Such, in brief, is the moral state of this county. Its prospects^ when 
viewed with reference to the great interests of the soul, and awful day of 
iretribution, are truly distressing. Our case calls loudly for tbe fervent 
pr^^eni of all God's people. 



0OOD ACGOUPLISHED IN SODUS AND WILI.IAMS0I7. 

^e Bev. Oarrei Halleobeek has been labouriag aa a Btssioiiaiy ia Soda« and 
Williaipspai in Wayne connty, N. T. since November last At tbe tine ef his arri<* 
vail '^ the phan^ was in a low and broken state, the means of grace had for a long 
tiqi^ been neglepted ; and a great part of the community had become awfully indif* 
lenent to r^Hgipn. " On the 7th of July Mr. H. writes as follows : 

At preseqt, prospects appear much brighter in this region than pro^ 
bably they e?er did before. Religion is treated wjib more attention i^d 
respect than was ever before known. It is but seldom that an open 
contempt of religion is manifested. The professed followers of Christ 
have acquired new sseal and new activity. Not only among us, hut for 
some distance on the borders of lake Ontario, the people appear (o des 
sfire the estabUshment of a sts^^ ministry. 



A spirit mrevail9 in this rf^fion (doubUfW «i(«tt«d V^ the wMe vgant 
tnanifested io Monroe county) to supply every reader with a Bible or 
Testament. Jn Williamson^ a Society has been formed, and has com- 
menced its operations with great vigour. It has been ascertained that 
out of 1056 readers, 677 are destitute, and yet notwithstanding the mag^~ 
Bitade of this number and tbo poverty iof m«iiy- who ^Untemted, they 
are di^ermin«d to Qbtatn the supply. At Sodus the emimeraftion b M 
yet completed. . There is aowd ptoapect, howei or, tkuit they wiXt soon 
be prepared to follow the example of WiliaoiMiiH aad thft toweft mi 
Monroe county. The labours necessary for the accomplishiii^ntof this 
result have almost entirely devolved upoa nu?. I have pexsooail^r mit^ 
ed almost every family Id Soduaand. Willianisoa. dispersed over atuc* 
ritory 16 milps m leogtli and from 6 to 10 in breadth. 

There are two Sabbath schools in Sodiis and two in WiniaoMoo, with 
the prospect of additional one^^ There ave also two in Pen&eld) 9mi I 
expect to establish one or more soon in Ontario. Tract Societies have 
beent established in 'Williarasoj(i and SckLus* The nu>nthly concert ^nd 
weekly prayer meetings are also atteadedk Oa the whole, orosfects 
appear mucb brighter ajQd more cheering than they ever have done. 



•*»* 



Ejitraek of a loMer (\mm a missMnary of ilie U. D. MtssioiMry Ssciety, ststioned al 
Cttpe Vkiceat, Jeibrson cecmtj, IV. Y. dated Jtdy 18y t6S5. 

I Informed you in mj former letter, that this church, when I first visits 
ed it, consisted of nine members on^. We have now in commupioii 
with us rising of fifty. Vfe have a smalt Sabbath School which is in ^ 
flourishing condition. Our monthly concert for prayer is well attended. 
We have preaching three times on the Sabbath. One evening \n the 
week i lecture,^ and on every Saturday evening the church is convened 
for the purpose of preparing for the Sabbath, and of ascertaining th^ 
state of every indrvtouars mind during the week, by which means, con- 
nected with the blessing of God, tb» graces of the Spirit in the hearts of 
the church generally, appear to be flourishing. 

Some few weeks since 1 visited Kingston, U. €., administered the sa- 
eeament for brother Foele^ and reeetved several persons, on confessien, 
into the ebureh. I continued labouring with hior in visttiog from honae 
to hcMJAft, and holding pniyer-meetinga aiid conlerences, almost ever^ 
evening for ten days. Before .1 left that people, one individual gave evi'< 
denceof a saving change^ and many others were deeply impressed hy 
the Spirit. I have since received a line from brother Foote,. who inforraecl 
me of three other individuals that were rejoicing in Christ their Saviour. 

The intercourse between this country and the upper province of Ca- 
nada, is widening every dey. 



WAfft <^ T«S BI9L£ VH B0CK1»ANI> AVD ORANOE. 

The Rev. Hosea Ball, who was ap|>ointed by the t7. D. M. Society to labour ia the 
Highlands of Rodtlaod and Orange, reports, in a letter dated November !^th, that in 
eight neighbourhoods* which he visited, containing in all 4C3 families, 223, or mors 

*Thenames.oftbe neighbourhoods are 1. Buuermiik falls. ^ Ciouks. d. Fort 
Montgomery. 4. Forest of Dean. 5 Queensburgh, or Rushes* 6. Mpntville and 
GH>raltar. T. Saw^work's^ Dater'k and Sterling. 8. Green Woods aod JohnsonV. 
The five first namsd are within 10 miles of West-poinu 



n 



64 AWpn^ix. CMat^ 

• 

itriP0rtoat l i wid i ii tril<w,biittlieK>fc4ItmT€lMatleitttoiithaadred 

Most of the caontry, frmti BbrswilNirT, io MemiMHitii county, to tbe 
eoiMCy M Cape May, n titerelly a pine Mrfe^. A ^^aidl pofrahtioii Is 
scattered through this kniBeMe forest of pines, and here and there s 
■mall and pleasant Tillage sitoate on the rivers whieh empty into the 
oeean. Tlie people in the woods, like the soil from wMch they gather a 
scanty suMstenee. are poor, almost entirely destitute of religions instrueo 
tioD, and their children gtt>w up in fgDoranee of e?ery thing which they 
aoght to know ; hecanse, from the very nature of thehr ImsI sitoatioD, 
schools and churches cannot he maintained. The scattered populatiod 
forbids It. The few must su^r in these respects, because they 4trt few. 
In one tnstanoe I travelled nine miles, and in another fifteen, without 
seeing the Iboe of a man, or meeting with a single human dwelling. 

I will now specify some of the most hnportimt places through which 
I passed, and make such remarks respecting them as seem necessary. 

1st. Mana$&tMn, fourteen miles from Shrewsbury. There is here a 
Baptist choren of about twenty members. It has no pastor. Mr. Wil* 
kiasoo has been located here by a Domestic Missionary Society, with 
what prospect of success I am unable to say. 

Fourteen nnleB below this is 7bm« rwer, a villa^ of <btrty or forty 
hawses, and ef some considerable business. There is here no church of 
any denomination, and no place for preaching except private dwelliti(cs. 
8ome few pious Methodisto are found, but there are more violent op< 
posers of the truths of religion. 

If ext place Is caHed Good luck. Here is no church. 

Next, Cedar Oreeft. No church. 

Next, Weartmm, No church. 

Next, BatnegoL Here they are now making an exortton to build a 
church ft«e for all denominations. The people are generally Metho* 
dists, some few Baptists ; and Manff, like Gallio, ^ care for none of these 
things." Next place is RwMfig, a village of considerable size. They 
have a Baptist and a Methodist church. The Baptist church is vacant. 
They have some supplies appointed thera ^y the associating to which 
they bekMig, but fh>m-thc remoteness of their situation, not one in ten 
ever fulfils his appointment. There are some pious persons here, who 
shioerely mourn over their desolations, and are thankful for the privi* 
lege of hearing a preacher of any denomination. Here I found a young 
man fVom Mnceton, labouring as a missionary for a fow weeks, under 
the direction of the Missionary Society of West Jersey. He is a faith* 
fid aa^ laborioQs man. I believe he is doing good. His mission Is now 
nearly expired. Hocking is the last placp in Monmouth county. 

The next place is Tuckerton^ \n Binirogton county. This is a pleasant 
little village,, of perhaps ftfty houaes. There is here a Methodist and a 
Quaker meeting-house. People willing and desirous to hear. I think a 
preacher might oe located here, in connection with Hocking, eight mUes 
apart, with a good ptospect of success. 

Below this i travelled through the Pines, for forty-five miles, mfostty 
kSL GKotieetler coanty, and found no4 one ch«rcb^ and no place worthy 
of notice \ Ileainad, hatwever, that on the sea co«st« hetween the Great 
and LittlA Egg HaahoHr Bivers, there k a Methodist diuseh of some 
importance. 

Passing through the county of Cape May,, I found the wreck of one 
4{uaker<meet»g«hoase, oneBoptiflt, and tVro' Methodist churches: and 



1826. APPENDIX. 60 

* 

at the lower extremity of the Cape, a Presbyterian church. This Coun- 
ty is divided into three townships — Upper, Middle, and Lower. The 
Upper was originally settled by Friends, which have now become all 
but extinct ; the middle by Baptists. Their church is small, but the 
/Congregation is able to support a minister. The Lower, by Presbyter 
rians. This congregation has just erected a new and handsome church, 
and though now vacant, is abundantly able to support a minister. They 
will probably call one in the fall. 

Returning, I passed within sixteen miles of Philadelphia. PasSe4 
through Ikeaham^ Medfordy Vincenitoum, all Quaker settlements ; and 
JVew Mills, where is a j^aptist and Methodist church. At Egypt, twen- 
ty miles south-west of Freehold, though a place of considerable busi- 
ness, and inhabitants enough to fill k large church, there is no church at 
all. On the whole, the country through which I travelled presents a 
very gloomy aspect to the eye of Christian philanthropy. The Metho- 
dists have been instrumental in doing good, and deserve much credit for 
their indefatigable labours. I found little sectarian feeling — ^much hos- 
pitality and kindnes — the people affectionate and attentive Whenever 
time permitted, their churches and houses were freely opened for the 
preacning of the Gospel. The country, as a whole, is not so destitute 
of schools as I expected, especially where there are inhabitants enough 
compactly situatea to support them. Bibles and Tracts might be dis- 
tributed to great advantage, and I felt very much the want of a good 
supply, especially of the latter. On the east side of Delaware river and 
bay, below Philadelphia, there are seven or eight Presbyterian churches, 
in connection with the Philadelphia Presbytery. Most of them, 1 be- 
lieve, are supplied at present with the regular preaching of th^Mjrospel. 



THE PECULIAR VALL'E OF MISSIONART LABOURS. 

One of the missionaries of the U. D. M. Societj', stationed at Clarendoo, in VejrV 
mont, writes to the Corresponding Secretary as follows : 

Our churches in Vermont present a most melancholy aspect. While 
we have to bless God that we are not plagued with heresies to the ex- 
tent that afflicts the churches in some sections of the country, and that 
we are generally at peace among ourselves ; and while there is much to 
commend in the zeal and activity of many of our ministers, and the pie- 
ty and liberality of many private Christians, still ther^ is much to de- 
plore. The love of many waxes cold, and iniquity abounds ; the Laodi- 
cean spirit of lukewarmness, the bane of all that is lovely or excellent in 
Zlon, has chilled the ardour of our first love, and palsied the arm of pious 
exertion to an awful extent in the churches in Vermont. It should bo 
recorded, however, for the encouragement of domestic missions, and to 
the praise and glory of divine grace, that missionary efforts have almost 
invariably been crowned with success. In nearly or quite every instance 
where missionary aid has been afforded to our feeble churches, and to 
buHd up our wastes, the dews of divine grace have fallen, and, in a num- 
ber of mstances, showers of refreshing have descended. And that, too, 
irhen all around them have been like Mount Gitboa, on which nelthe'r 
r'ain nor dew descended. 



» 



66 AFPEJNDIX. [MaV, 

VIEW OF A MISSION IN MICBIOAN TEBRITOET. 
The Rev. Isaac W. Ruggles has been labouring in Michigan Territory since Decem- 
ber last. The following account of his 'labours is given in a letter to the Correspond- 
Tng Secretary of the U. D. Misssonary Society, dated Pontiac, August 29: 

The Lord's people had anxious desires for the upbuilding of Zion« 
They had continued with one accord in prayer that an Ambassador of 
Jesus might be sent among them. They appeared glad when one arriv- 
cjd, and expressed their gratitude to God tor his loving kindness, and to 
your Society, for their compassion and liberality. i 

My labours have been confined almost entirely in Oakland county. 
Havmg no fellow labourer in the county, I have been constrained to vi 
sit and to preach in a large circuit ; and owing to the scattered condition 
of the church, it has been expedient to administer the Lord's Supper in 
three or four several places. Since the first of December, 41 have been 
added to the church ; 22 from other churches, and nineteen by profes- 
sion. We hope that five or six have passed from death unto life during 
the past season. The whole number now in the church is 55. Several 
others willsoon be added. I have baptized twenty-one ; seven adults 
and fourteen children ; and have dispensed the Communion eight times, 
I have ordained in this church two Ruling Elders and one deacon- Pas- 
toral visiting has been mj employment almost every day ; and in this 
duty I have generally met with a kind reception. The people have often 
expressed their thanks for my labours of love. 

Three Sabbath schools are instituted in the county, three concerts of 
prayer, and two female weekly prayer meetings. A Female Tract So- 
ciety is now in operation, and a Bible Society is contemplated. Meet- 
ings are in general well attended, and it would seem that the means used 
kave not been altogether in vain in the Lord. 

The Lord's people are desirous that the same means should be con- 
tinued, and also that more missionaries of the cross should be sent over 
to help them. None, but those residing in this destitute region, can be 
adequately sensible of the need there is, that more heralds of salvation 
should be sent to this part of the Lord's heritage. 

Two weeks since, I organized a church in the south part of this county^ 
styled The Second Church of Oalriand county, consisting of eight mem- 
bers. One was added the Sabbath following. The one added is a re- 
markable instance of conversion from notorious profanity to the zealous 
worship of the living God. His conversion took place about three or four 
weeks ago. In this church I have ordained a Deacon and a Ruling £lder ; 
and one Elder is from a church at the east. There are seven or eight 
others standing in readiness to unite with this church as soon as they may 
have opportunity. Here, in the wilderness, where eighteen months agOt 
no civilized man resided, the standard of the cross is now erected. Here 
are excellent ones who love to meet and pray, and sing, and learn the 
wav of truth. This township, into which no family emigrated tilllast year^ 
in May, is now entirely settled. 

Brother Frontiss, a missionary recently sent out by the General As- 
sembly, is now labourin^g with good success at the River Raisin. Broth- 
er Wells, who has, the summer past, been preaching at Detroit, is about 
to be settled there. One or two labourers are needed in Oakland county. 

The Second Church of Oaklan^county desire me to request that a 
missionary may be sent to them. 



1826.J APPENDIX. 67 

The following letter from the Church at Pontiac, under date of August 2^, cqii- 
taining an application for continued aid from the Society, bears honourable testimony 
to the faithfulness of Mr. Buggies, and exhibits the necessities and wants of that poj,- 
ion of the territory : 

Your Missionary has been industriously labouring since December last 
to advance the cause of the Redeemer. The Great Head of the Church 
has smiled upon his efforts. A blessing has pursued him. The scatter- 
ed sheep of God's heritage have been gathered into the fold — ^the wan- 
dering reclaimed — the weak strengthened, and some instances of hope- 
ful conversion have taken place. 

You, sir, are the almoner of God's bounty to us. Accept our warmest 
acknowledgments, and through you, the Society of which you are Se- 
cretary. It is through your instrumentality that the Gospel is preached to 
116 this year — that saints have been edified, and sinners converted. 

The labours of your Missionary, since he has been among us» have 
been great and unwearied. He has spent most ef his time in this coun- 
ty, though he has visited others. He has often heard the Macedonian cry. 
Notwithstanding there is much to animate and en.courage him and us, 
there is much to excite our sympathy and sorrow. The^ profanation 
of God's name and institutions, particuJarly the Sabbath, intemperance^ 
and many other vices abound. O ! sir, nothing but the pure lignt of the 
Gospel, accompained by the influences of the Divine Spirit, can root oat 
these demoralizing habits — these soul-destroying sins. 

We rejoice in the prosperity of your. Society, which has engaged in so 
great a *^ labour of love," — the establishment of 9l faithful ministry in 
every village and town in our country. This plan, viewecT but politically, 
is one of the most excellent upon earth. One would think all Americans, 
who love their country, would cordially unite in it. Intelligence and vir- 
tue are alone the basis of our Republican inslitutions. Wherever a 
learned and faithful ministry is established, there science i^nd virtue are 
most flourishing. 

We solicit the continuance of your charity to us still longer. For the 
support of the Gospel at present, we are able to do but little. It is not 
seven years since improvements commenced in this county — people in 
general are poor, and come here because they were so. All that we have 
been able to do for the support of Mr. Ruggles since he has been among 
us, is simply to furnish his hoard. Were he not a man of much self-de- 
nial, and one whose great object and delight is, to promote the glory qf 
God in the salvation of souls, he would not have consented to spend a 
year in the wilderness for the «ma2/ sum of one hundred dollars. 
Some arrangements have been made, and by the assistance of your so- 
ciety we hope to retain him still longer. 

O ! sir, we wish the funds of your society were such that you could 
send many missionaries to this territory. Even in this county there is 
much need of three pious able, ministers. 

The local situation of Pontiac, is eligible. It must, necessarily, soon be- 
come a place of business and importance. It possesses good and exten- 
sive water-privileges. The climate is salubrious, and the soil fertile. The 
customs of this place will no doubt h.ave much influence upon contiguous 
countries, and do much toward giving a tone to their moral oharactipr^ 



68 APPENDIX. ' LMaY» 

SECLESrSIOV OF CHUaCHES IN OHIO, FROM WANT OF FEOUNIART 

ASSISTANCE. 

From tlie following letter from a clergyman in Ohio, dated July 16th, our refers 
will perceive the melancholy consequences resulting from a minister of the Gospels be- 
ing so straitened in his worldly circumstances, as to be unable to bestow his full and 
undivided attention on the great objects of his calling and profession : 



mestic 



Having lately seen a summary of the third report of the United Do- 
estic Missionary Society, I am encouraged to communicate a state- 
ment of my own particular case, and some hints relative to the state of 
religion generally within the bounds of this Presbytery^ (Richland.) I took 
the charge of two congregations in Ohio in the beginning of the year 
18£0. At this period there were about thirty-five members in commu- 
nion in each Society. The first three years after my settlement, f gave 
myself almost wholly to the work of the ministry ^* preaching publicly, 
and from house to bouse;" and although no very specicU revival took place, 
yet a blessing was afforded, and the church wasincreased in that period 
by the addition of from sixty to seventy new converts, 30 of whom were 
added in one year to one of the Societies ; and with the additions by certifi- 
cates, and some few converts since, the two societies noiDContain 2S5 mena- 
bers in communioi^. But unhappily, about the close of the third year of my 
settlement, I found myself embarrassed and straitened in my temporal 
circumstances, tha Societies not having been able to make good their en- 
gagements. Indeed, there had been such deficiency, that through dire ne^ 
cessity (yet with grief) I was constrained to contract much of my former 
viinisterial services, and resort to labour in order to procure necessary 
subsistence. And this abridgement I have had to continue and increase 
up to the present time, and the consequences are but too visible ; reli- 
gion languishes, and the Societies are by no means in as promising cir- 
cumstances as they were two or three years ago. You will be the more 
readily able to judge of the importance of constant ministration to these 
Societies, not only on the Sabbath, but at other times, when I inform you 
that the memliers of Wooster Society, in which I reside, are scattered 
in nine different townships, each six miles square, lying around Wooster 
is a centre. The members of the other Society live in a tract of about 
eight miles long, and five or six miles wide. All the above territory is 
filled with a tolerably thick population, many of whom are not connected 
with any denominaton whatever ; in fact, the congregation in which I live, 
with its territory, is a good missionary field itself, which if well cultivated, 
larould, through the divine blessing, yield a good increase. I would ob- 
serve, that I had no other means on which to depend to support myself 
and family, of a wife and six children, than the stipulated salary from 
the people, nor did I ever want to resort to any other. I am far from 
intending any reflections upon the Societies, as such. The most of the 
people are in low circumstances, being in a new country, having their 
tanas to clear, and to pay for, and in most cases depi^nding on the pro- 
ducts of fheir labour to furnish the means. Each Society also has a brick 
meeting bouse on hand getting along slowly, which, when finished, will 
be decent, durable, and sufficiently capacious for the prospects of the So- 
cieties. Through you, dear sir, I submit my case, and that of the So- 
cieties, to the consideration of your charitable institution. ShouM any 
aid be afforded, it would greatly animate and strengthen hands that now 
hang down, and revive the desponding heart of one, who thinks, as far 
as he knows himself, that his most delightful employment is to be 
gaged in endeavoring to win souls to Jesus Christ. 



1826.] APPENDIX. 69 

APPLICATION FOR ASSISTANCE FROM A CHT7RCH IN DSCATUR 

COUNTY, INDIANA. 

About eighteen months ago, a Presbyterian Church was organized in Decatur 
County, Indiana, consisting of about 30 families and about 70 communicants. Since 
then they have been visited by several Missionaries, and among them, by one from 
the U. D. Missionary society. They are now anxious to have a settled minister 
among them, and are willing to contribute what they can for his support, the follow- 
lag is the letter from the c hurcb, under date of September 18| requesting aid for the ac- 
complishment of their object, 

A few Weeks past a member of the Cincinnati Presbytery of Ohio, 
preached several times and administered the Lord's Supper, the season 
was precious to those who had formerly enjoyed the pririleges of God's 
House, and several that had been under serious concern about their souls 
were enabled by grace to come forward and profess their faith in the Lord 
Jesus, and unite with his people. 

He has no stated charge, and appears disposed to come and settle with 
us, and there is reason to nope that the stated ministration of the Go&^ 
pel would have the happiest efifect. There are about ten or twelve 
large counties l3ing together in this part of the state, in which there Is not 
one Presbyterian Minister living, and in most) if not all, of these coun- 
ties small congregations have been organized. This congregation have 
made an effort to get Mr. Lowry, and have proposed to give him two 
hundred dollars for one half of his labours, and the balance to be employ- 
ed in the vacancies around, until our strength may enable us to support 
him wholly ; the country being new, our number and strength we nope 
will increase bjr emigration. 

Having learned something of the nature and objects of your Society, 
from your Missionary, Mr. Johnson, and from the Missionary Register, 
we are encouraged to lay oftr case before your Board. Our proposed 
minister is a young man with a rising family, who has expended his small 
patrimony in preparing himself to preach the Gospel. If your Society 
think proper to aid us with a small donation in money the favour wiJI 
be gratefully acknowledged. 

LETTER FROU FRANKLIN CO. IN THE STATE OF NBW-TORK. ' 
The foUomring eipondon of the want of assistance in Franklin County, N. Y., Is 
from a Clergyman at Malone. More than fifteen years ago he took the pastoral 
charge of the Church in that place, under circumstances peculiarly discouraging, in a 
temporal point of view : but with the hope of doing good, he was encouraged to 
persevere. 

Since my settlement my labours have been uncommonly arduous, 
having submitted to all the inconveniences of a new country, travelled 
every year more than two hundred miles to attend Presbytery or other 
ministerial meetings, and through a wilderness wher^ the roads were in- 
tricate, and sometimes pronounced impassable. I have preached fune- 
ral discourses and lectures in every part of the county, for most of 
which I received ho teniporal remuneration — ^have never had a neigh- 
bouring ordained clergyman to afford me assistance by way of exchange 
or advice until within two years, and the one to whom 1 now allqde is 
not settled. When ordained over this people, the inhabitants were few 
and poor, and the subsequent war made them poorer. ' They could not 



70 APPENDIX. [MaIT, 

do for me as they wished, and as my Decessity demanded. They gave 
me DO parsonage, and fixed ray salary at about jf400 annually, the great- 
est part of which was paid in produce at a price far above that of your 
city. In addition to all this, I have had, for many years, an uncommon 
share of domestic afi9ictions. Often have I been tempted to 4esert my 
post, (having had offers of a flattering kind,) but the solicitations and 

3;>iritual necessities of an affectionate ppople, together with a sensie of 
uty, have retained me. 1 have barely had a subsistence. I am lite- 
rally poor and embarrassed. 

My people are friendly, and, to an individual, wish me to continue 
their minister ; but they are unable to give me the necessary relief. The 
Church and Society have recently made extraordinary efforts to build 
a house of worship, and such has been their anxiety in this matter, that 
it has carried them beyond their ability in their subscriptions. 

This country is very needy, and although at a remote part of the 
state, ought not to be overlooked. The people here have immortal 
souls, and are destined to the same bar of judgment with all other men. 
The infant churches and the two Presbyterian clergymen in this region, 
have wants and trials, which we desire might not be forgotten. It is 
sometimes as necessary to strengthen a weak and afflicted church and 
people, as to create new churches and send the gospel to those who 
never heard it. The minister who resides in Constable, seven miles 
from this, preaches to the people of that place and Chateauga alter- 
patelv, and does not receive more than ^250 annually for his labours, 
which are abundant and overwhelming ; and this pittance, which barely 
keeps him from freezing and starving, is psyd by subscribers who give 
very liberally in proportion to their means. This brother told me, the 
other day, that unless relief should come from some quarter, he roust 
leave this part of the country, which would leave me without a neigh- 
bouring minister nearer than twenty -three miles one way, and fifty the 
other. Indeed, sir, we know not what to do. 

DESTITUTE STATE OF THE CHURCHES IN STEUBEN CO. N. T. 
The Presbytery of Bath, N. T., have addressed the foUoiring leuer, dated Prattji« 
borgfa, Sept. 2d, to the Board of Directors of the U. D. Missionary Sociely, staUng 
the destitute sitaation of many churches in their connexion, and soliciting aid for the 
supply'of their necessities. 

This Presbytery has under its care twenty-one Churches. Ten of 
these are entirely destitute of the preaching of the gospel by Presbyte* 
rian ministers, except an occasional Sabbath by a neighbouring minister 
or travelling missionary. They are all of them, under present circum- 
stances, unable to support the ministry among them, without foreign 
assistance. We know that the calls upon your funds are numerous and 
pressing. We think, however, that no part of the state of New-York, 
more imperiously demands assistance than the region embraced by the 
Presbytery of Bath. We particularly solicit your assistance in behalf of 
the congregation of Cohorton. Rev Statham Clary has been labouring 
in that congregation for nearly two years. He is, in our estimation, an 
eminently pious, iaithful, and . prudent minister ; and his labours have 
> been blessed to the conversion of souls, and the increase of the church. 
The church at the commencement of his labours^with them was at the 
lowest state of depression. Under his ministry, there has been a small 
addition to the number of its members at almost every season of the ad- 



WJS.] APPENDIX. ^ 

• 

ministration of the Lord's Supper. It now consists of about fifty mem^ 
bers. They have no appropriate house for public worship. Mr. Clary's 
support has been almost wholly supplied by eight or ten individuals, 
IV ho are not themselves in very eligible circumstances, and must shrink 
from the burden unless assisted. Our hope is, that could they be as- 
sisted by a grant of one hundred dollars annually, for two or three years^ 
they would acquire that strength which would enable them to support 
the ministry without further aid. The town of Cohocton is large and 
populous, probably not less than two thousand inhabitants. The diffi- 
culty of supporting the minister arises wholly from the want of disposi- 
tion in the body of the people. Indifference to all religion characterizes 
a numerous class. Sectarian principles have an extensive influence. 
These are the circumstances which render your assistance necessary* 
Mr. Elam Bridges, of this town, informs us, that he has in bis hands 
three dollars, collected at the close of the sacramental service, durine the 
meeting of the Presbytery of Bath, which is appropriated to aid the 
Amds of your Society, and that on condition that the sum mentioned in 
the preceding is appropriated to aid the congregation of Cohocton, he 
will further pay into your Treasury thirty dollars, to constitute him a 
life-member of your Society. , 



BOMBSO^XO BCXSSXOKS. 

The cause of Domestic missions is increasing in interest with tbe 
growth of our land. All missions now command a sympathy, unknown 
to those who projected them twenty-five years ago. But the missions 
which supply our own countrymen with the Gospel, which endeavor to 
fill this land of freedom with the liberty of the sons of God, exceed all 
other efforts in interest. The topics are already familiar to the minds 
of those who love thetie missions by whi^h their importance is urged. 
The number of souls to be saved, being the million? of these Umted 
States — the facilities for labouring in this cause, springing out of the call 
of these millions for help — our common language, and, in some con- 
siderable degree, a ministery prepared to preach the Gospel among 
them — the important bearing of this work upon foreign missions, as 
creating a supply for the demand of the unchristianized world — all these 
topics have been frequently pressed with much earnestness and much 
success. 

We are induced to advert to them in general for the benefit of oor 
readers, and in particular for the advantage of the United Domestic 
Missionary Society. In a few weeks the members of this Society are 
to be convened to consider what measures shall be pursued, to enable 
the Executive Committee to answer favourably the supplicating appeals 
from the counties of our own state, and from the states on the frontier 
of the Union. We hope that none will be absent,' who in sincerity ofier 
the prayer. Thy kingdom come. This Society embraces a large number 
who intelligently apprehend, and fervently love the Gospel of Christ. 
That the Gospel can be propagated without means, no intelligent Chris- 
tian believes. In the very age of miracles, when St. Paul worked as a 
tent maker, he necessarily withdrew so much time from ministering the 
word of life. But it was a peculiar aspect of Providence, which induced 
bim to this course of labour, and that for a wise purpose, for a short 
time ; in common, it was a doctrine he practised as well as preached, 
^t they who serve at the altar should live of the alt^r. And \rhe.n 



^il APPENDIX. [May, 

evil disposed persons would misinterpret bis motives, be then refused 
to live of the altar at Corinth — but was supported at opulent Corinth 
by Phillippi, comparatively poor. But he must be supported, if he 
would night and day with tears exhort to repentance and salvation. 

The case is not dissimilar in the present day, only the absence of mi- 
raculous direction gives our reason more play, and perhaps calls into 
exerclSe a justifiable prudence— *if it be not too much a prudence of this 
world. If our ministers now are to preach, we do not ejrpect thera to 
be tent makers : if they become le-arned in the Scriptures, we know that 
it cannot be attained, if they are forced to gain a manual proficiency as 
respectable artisans. That the institutions of religion cannot be sus- 
tained without ministers of the Gospel, is evident ; and that ministers 
cannot keep pace with the intellect or the country, and clothe religion 
with heavenhness of attire, without leisure tp study the wisdom that is 
ft*om heaven, is acknowledged by all, who believe that the gift of 
tongues, with other miracles, is departed. But on the other hand, that 
it is not possible, and perhaps not adviseable, to organize an institution, 
which shall give to all .settled ministers of the Gospel this leisure, is 
Quite manifest. Here much must be left to the good sense and piety of 
tne Christian laity. Those who are to sit under the droppings of the 
several sanctuaries of our land, must determine how much leisure and 
what facilities for learning, they will give the minister, by whom their 
souls are to be trained for the life everlasting. 

Yet that some institution should be prosperously governed^ which 
may create a taste for the Gospel, by sending a minister into villages 
where there is none ; and which may sustain him a little time there, un- 
til the people learn their strength and unfold it, is very plain. Such a 
Srosperous institution, the United Domestic Missionary Society has 
een. One hundred and thirty churches aided in one year— its funds 
increasing from almost six thousand to almost twelve thousand dollars 
in the same year^ these facts attest its prosperity. So much has been 
done through the extreme economy, as well as activity of its Executive 
Committee. But surely none will say that enough has been done — 
that now' we may arrest our efforts and fold our arms, while our people 
and our ungospelized villages branch outward to the Pacific. Who is 
the poorer for what he has done ? Can this city be impoverished by such 
an expenditure ? Can they pay no more for such a celebration as was 
seen at the anniversary of the United Domestic Missionary Society, 
when our most distinguished citizens presided, and pronounced their 
emphatic approbation of this Institution ? 

The members of the Society are soon to be convened that they may 
inform their committee whether more or as much may be done We 
hope they will receive cheering proofs, that prudence itself tells them to 
go forward. It will be among the very noblest monuments of the 
munificence and piety of this city, if it will prepare and keep up a fund, 
out of which every little town in our state may have f 50 or $100 for 
two or three years ; provided it will raise $200 or $S00 more, and call a 
minister and erect its church. Our merchants will find no ill account 
in this, if they believe that the conscience of an honest country customer 
is a better safeguard than the laws. Our OHnisters should forward this 
enterprise, if they believe that where there is no vision, the people perish. 

This Society aoes not first of all seek to relieve ministers in the coun- 
try from embarrassment ; it seeks to give to a people what they ask, the 
rjlfle additional sum by which they may secure so much time as their 



1826.] APPKNDi¥. 73 

own souls and the souls of their children require, from one who can guide 
them. This Society leaves its missionaries in great embarrassments at the 
bestywith enough to prove them good soldiers of the New Testament^ and 
followers of Him, who makes self-denial the test of discipleship. It might 
move to deep commiseration to consider the condition of some of these 
missionaries — amidst a poor, hv± a|E^ctionate people — in indigence and 
sickness oftentimes. One of the missionaries writes : 

*f l^Q.EL wlllsf ^, a country clere|man ought qot t;o spend, half a day in 
traversing ihe cbitimons to find ms bbrse, afid often a day or two to ^nd 
his cow. We can support no servant for this task. I doubt not good 
men would weep at tne tale of a single week's trials of this descriptsion^ 
which we have suffered week after week for almost four years. 

*< We last spring lost the third cow, which we have purchased at the 
sacrifice pf almost every other convenience of family stores or livelihood ': 
it perished in the woods for want of an inclosed pasturage ground. This 
winter will be the second time that! have sent my family more than iStOd 
miles to enjoy the protection of a father^s roof, because I cannot hear a 
tender family complaining with the cold and the want of those cheap 
but essential^conveniences, of which we have been repeatedly deprived bv 
the want of suitable iiiclosures. Were tre on the territory of the hea- 
then, I would apply to my friends * in the land of my birth.' "^ 

Such circupfistances of trial, however they present a scene without the 
interest of poetry, may have the adorning of real piety ; and in such 
trials, graces may be elicited which shall not expire in the grave. But 
this Society does not seek nor expect to relieve its Tnissionaries from the 
various hardships of a life in the new countries or in the older towns — 
all that it does, is to answer the justifiable expectation of those who are 
too poor to support the Gospel, that they may have some help from th6 
tables of their richer neighbours. Surely the churched of New- York 
are able, at the very economical rate of expenditure pursued by the Uni- 
ted Dom. Miss. Society, to support 260 churches in our new settlements*. 
That they must feel willing to do so before the millennium can come, is 
manifest. And that the millennium is to be brought by the offerings of 
the rich, and the circulation of such a benevolence, as shall consider the 
misery of one the sufieriog of all, and the fullness of one the sup- 
ply of all, appears to us clear from the nature of the sacred pre- 
dictions. How much does Isaiah tell us of kings being nursing 
fathers, and queens nursing mothers, to the church, when he speaks 
of the wilderness and solitary place budding as the rose— how much 
does he say of gold of Sheba — and that instead of brhss, gold shall be 
brought ; and for iron, silver ; and for wood, brass ; and for stones, iron ? 
The Lord is to be honoured with our substance and with the first fruits 
of our increase. Nor can we conceive of any reasonable prospect of the 
conversion of all the inhabitants of our land, which shall not include en- 
larged liberality on the part of those who have the Gospel, to dispense it 
to those who have it not. An atheist, who held that benevolence to men 
was praiseworthy, would scarcely believe that Thebes with its hundred 
gates, would not so honour our land as the United Dom. Miss. Society 
with its 1^ missionaries. The love for our country cannot better ex- 
press itself than by sending the Gospel to all who live under the covert 
of its legislation — and we cherish Che hope that this institution is to grow, 
until all the land taste the fruits it bears, and give God the glory. 

The present is a season critical in the history of the United Dom. Miss. 
Society. We repeat, that in a few weeks the members are to be con- 
vened, to say whethet their Committee shall go forward. . Hundreds of 

10 



"74 APPENDIX. [Mat. 

churches, and thousands of souls, are concerned in the momentous result^ 
that the Christian public give to this question an affirmative answer, and 
add to it the pledge or their names and their money. B. 

Nov. 182d. 



vmnaB bokbbtxc mxsbzoita&t soczBvr. 

While the United Domestic Missionary Society has hitherto received 
with gratitude the fostering care of the churches, its Executive Commit- 
tee have indulged an unshaken confidence in God. that he would not per- 
mit the effects of an institution, so benign in all its consequences, to be 
impeded for the lack of that liberal pitronage from the Christian com- 
munity, which is very deeply needea at the present time. Aware, also, 
that the claims of the "American Tract Society," and other kindred ob- 
jects, were especially under the public eye, we have omitted, during the 
last two months, to present to the friends of this Society the usual e^x- 
tracts from its correspondence. That portion of our fellow-citizens, 
however, who have assisted in the planting of this Tree, that its leaves 
might be for the healing of the nations, have a right t» be informed, that, 
in answer to their prayers, and their alms, it has been yielding its fruU 
every month. 

It ought also to be distinctly understood, and deeply felt, by every 
friend to the intellectual, political, and moral advancement, and spiritual 
salvation, of the American people, that the claims of this Society have 
not grown less pressing and imperious, while its voice has been silent^ 
Souls have been dying for the lack of vision in this professedly Christian 
nation. In many portions of it, the people yet sit m^ darkness, and un- 
der the shadow of death. The importunate and reiterated cry for a lit&e 
aid to secure that blessing, which to them that believe is the power of 
God unto salvation, has reached us from the JVbrth, and the SouA^ and 
the West. But the Executive Committee will be compelled to refuse these 
applications, and leave these interesting portions of our common country 
to starve and die under a famine of the hearing of the word of (he Lord;, 
unless the friends of Zion can be induced to give more liberally of their 
abundance to supply these wants of the needy. Indeed, the amount 
which will become due, in the course of the present month, from the 
committee, to missionaries.already engaged, is fourfold the amount now 
remaining in the treasury. 

Some new impulse, therefore, must be given to the benevolence of the 
Christian community in reference to this object, or the United Domestic 
Missionary Society must cease to be the dispenser of those extensive 
spiritual blessings, for which it was instituted. Let it be remembered, 
then, that this Society was called into being at first, and that it has since 
been sustained, by the blessing of God, upon such sympathies as move 
in a brother's heart, when he seeth his brother have need. They are the 
feelings of Christian patriotism, excited and rendered ardent by the 
spiritual desolations which are seen to pervade many portions of our 
land. These feelings, connected as they are in the minds of those who 
cherish them with the knowledge^ and not the ^^ hare imagination^^ oi the 
wants which they commiserate, cannot fail, we think, to meet an emo- 
tion kindred to themselves, in the heart of every enlightened American, 
who will lift up his eyes, and look on the field, which has waited too lon^. 



18^.] APPENDIX. 75 

and still waits, for (he cultivatiiig hand of the UniUd Domestic Mission-' 
€ary Society, 

The foliowiog extracts, in connection with the numerous details here- 
tofore presented to the public, we hope, will serve to extend and render 
more enective the impression on the minds of Christians in our country 
that the great Head of the church does look with approliation on all our 
efforts to forward the object of <* Home Missions.*' They will also be 
regarded as evidence in point, that more, mueh mort^ must be done by 
the sons of the pilgrims and the servants of God, in this work of patriot- 
ism and Mercy, before w& can expect a blessing at all commensurate 
•with our wants. F. 

Feb. IBU, 



GOOD EFFECTED. 

A letter from Hartford, Washington county, dated Jan. 23, states that 
in that town, recently occupied as the station of one of this Society's 
missionaries, there is now a very encouraging attention to religion. 

The following is extracted from a letter received firom ome of the Misnoaaries ef 
this Society, stationed in Greene county, N. T. dated Jan. lOy 18S6. 

^' Your special and timely favour was received by the good people 
here with very lively expressions of gratitude. I delayed not to read to 
the congregation your address, and I have reason to believe it had the 
effect to make them feel their obligation to improve the means of grace 
thus gratuitously afforded them." 

<* Good order and decorum pervade all our meetings. In this respect 
there has been a great Improvement, for which I feel very thankful tp 
Him who has condescended to crown my efforts with any kind of suc- 
cess. Some of these scattered inhabitants begin to prize the privileges 
afforded them. When I see a whole family coming four or five miles to 
meeting, in an ox-cari, I thank God, and take courage." 

The Rev. Samuel Sweezey, missionary in Florence, Oneida county, N. Y. under 
date of January 25» 1826, writes thus to the Corresponding Secretary. 
« Rev. and Dear Sir— 

" My appointment as a missionary in Florence has been duly re- 
ceived. My stated labours in this town commenced the 1st of October 
last. I have found great encouragement to preach the Gospel here« 
There is a deep interest manifested in the great truths of divine revela- 
tion. There are some hopeful appearances in the church and society ; 
and we cannot but anticipate the season near, when we shall enjoy a 
" refreshing from the presence of the Lord." Such a time has, perhaps, 
never been witnessed in this region, as is now enjoyed at Rome. Almost 
the whole population appear to be under the influences of the Holy 
Spirit^nd the effects of this Divine Agent appear to astonish all behold- 
ers. You have probably received, or will soon receive, many interest- 
ing particulars concerning this work. It appears now to be spreading m 
the towns adjacent, and hope is cherished oy the friends of Zion, that 
the Lord is about to visit all this region with the Almighty energies of 
Ills Spirit." 

Such are some of the good results accomplished, under God, by the 
system of charity to the destitute pursued by the U. D. M. Society. Let 
the reader have patience to peruse the following, and we are sure it can- 
not fail to excite his pity, and if he be a Christian, it will call forth his 



fg- APPENblX. {M 



AY, 



prayers and alms in behalf of htindreds of churches and destitute tiercfa- 
Dourhoods,. whose claims on the assistance of this Society* are no tess 
pressing and irresistible, thanttfose here presented. Yet, with their |ire- 
sent means, the Society can do but little towards supplying these thou- 
sands in the wilderness with the bread of life. 



eLAlMS or THE NEEDY. 

TIm following letter is from a Committee of the cong^gatlon at La Prairie, Lower 
Canada, ander the care of the Rev. I. Porkis, Missionary of this Society, dated 0ec. 
!^, 1825- 

RcT. Mid Dear Sir- 

. The IjBtter directed by you to our worthy clergyman, the Rev. Fsaac 
Tufkis, dated the 21 St ult we are sorry to understand intimates a'^ttoubt 
whether ^our Society dan continue the support you have sokiAdly given 
to our minister in this place for any further period. In communicating 
to you ouftei^tetf we beg to refer you to the resolutions adopted by our 
tongregation,liereto subjoined, v^e cannot suflSciently express how 
deeply we feel indebted to you for having aided us so long. We trust 
that a kind Providenee will remunerate you, and hope that that phiTan- 
thi'opic and generous sympathy vrhich is so characteristic of your So- 
ciety, will still gbvern and stimulate ybu to act with the same Christian 
and benevolent Spirit towards us. We acknowledge with gratitude to 
God, that a visible change has taken place in this vithige srn^e thearriral 
of so good a man ; apd to be deprived of the services of this pious and 
ze^lotis servant ofGod,' would be to tins congregation an irreparable loss. 
"With best wishes for your prosperity, we' are, Rev. and Dear Sir, 

Yours truly, 

T. Af DoNAtB, 

Jiro. RtAN. 

SeMvedy That this Society feels deeply sensible of tile obligation which 
they owe to the United' Domestic MisSronaiy Society of New- York, for 
the kind assistance which they have afforded in the support of their min- 
bter, the Rev. Isaac Purkis, for the last two years and a half, and they 
pledge themselves to exert themselves to the utmost that their limited 
circumstances will allow, in order to become as little burdensome as 
possible to their Christian brethren, be^ng fully aware that there are 
many plaices equally as necessitoiis as La Prairie ; at the same tinae this 
Society regrets that their most sanguine hopes do not exceed the amount 
of £40 for the ensuing yeajTi and although they feel reluctant to name 
any particular sum that may be needful to make up the deficiency, yet 
it IS difficult to conceive that a minister, with a' family of six children, 
can subsist upon a less sum than |[400 a year : but as petitioners to the 
copimittee, they beg to leave their case to their benevolent consideration, 

.and only presume to add, that should it be deemed absolutely needful 
for the JDoipestic Missionary Society, to withdraw their aid, the cobse- 

. ^uence must be an entire deprivation of the means of grace. That there 
IS no fund br' Society, to tlieir knowledge, in existence, to which they can 
look with the least confidence for aid, and no other place to which they 
can resort on this side the river; and Montreaf being nine miles distant, 
and the ^t Lawrence twice in the year impassable for six weeks to* 



1826J AP1»KNDIX. IK 

get!i6r— thct^ifbre, #e VcntUfc to eti<!6ttrafge thte hbpe that a cotiflidera- 
tion of our spiritual necessities will awaken their ChrfeliAn compassion, 
and that this trte, pltont^d by tht Bdci^ty's tmta harids, althomih cote- 
paratively Barren, ^ill'he allotr^d to stand *yetiinothtr^itor«it'tta»t. 

The following is a very brief extract frtm AeRev. Mr. Purl^is's letUr in ntpportof 
the above application of the people at La Prairie. 

<< Theie is at present a genfiral seriousness, order, "and sobriety ,-tiBlble 
in the congregation here, altogether different from ^hatl had tbenovM- 
cation to witness for a long season aftfer my first comk% to tbistplaee. 
The forming of a little Society, and administerii^ the oYdinanevs of thfe 
iLord- s Supper, have obviously contributed not a little to this bappy effect. 
This aho has given rise to two weekly meetings for prayer, singing, read- 
ing, and exhortation. Indeed I would fain hope that-~ 

< God, on his thirsty Zion'shiil, 

< Some mercy drops has thrown.' 

At r\cadie, and at Sherriagtbn aho, do I think there are appieni^anciea 
that call for gratitude and Inspite hope. 

«' Allow me then to plead for my flodcs. True it is, they are KNie 
flocks; but thegoOdShepberdiaiddownhielifefortheta. True^also, th«}r 
are odor ; but shall not the poor have the Gospel preached totfa^n ? 

** It is probably true, as I have oftCYi been toM, that, in the Stilttoyl 
might find a lai^«r congregation, atid more comfot-table Siipport ; but 
toitk tjtfhom shaU I leave iheH few shtep in the fMldifne8$^ It I am^un- 
williDg myself to endure privation on their account, what reason4Mit« I 
to expect that any other person will doit ? And is it* possible that a 
country, situated as this is, should be enlightened without it ? 'Ofthepri- 
Tati6o of Christian and ministerial society I will say nothing, for I k«ow 
nothing of an earthly nature that is worthy to be compared fo suehUass- 
ings ; but if, in temporal cotnfort, I am wiiliog to sufFerfirfy'dMtrs'ki 
thecourfteof a year, I can, without fear or shame, solicit Muropiileiit 
citizens of New-Toris to contribute an equal amoant, and thusffive^f'lM 
(orie poor man and four rich ones) may be the means of 8u)>plyii;gihfee 
or four settlem^nts^ith'the OTdinances of thegospel, and «f -layitlg^ tile 
foundation of three or (bur Gospel churehesi and thereby ben4|Alii|gfN>8- 
teritythroughOBt 'an extensive district 

<**For my own part, 'while I think of the wonders wh^icb God has 
wrought in the short e|>ace of forty years that I have been* in the "Woild, 
I dare not say that the people in this viciaityr will not ill' three -yeArs'be 
aUe afid wfllhsg to support the Gospel. Be this a&it maly, rd^i^ ufMn 
the great head of the church, and the gracious influences of his Spinlf'I 
will endeavour to go forward, hoping even against hope, aided rtrufltby 
your prayers. Brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Ii0ifd>ni8y 
have free course and be glorified' with us,- as it is with you." 

The Rev. EleasE^r* Latbtop, iDbsionaiy at St. Augustine, £; JTlorida, writes, under 
date 6f !9oVember'22d, 18S5, as folMwi: 

Amidst the multitude around us Who are enemies to the efods 6f 
■ Christ, or indifferent to the transforming truths of his Gospel, there al-e 
a few who can acknowledge, with feeling hearts, the timely and Impor- 
tant aid granted by your Society the last year. I humbly trust that the 
labours which your assistance has enabled me to perform, ^vill'not be 
. altogether in vain, I can truly say, I have been with this people **^in 
weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling." I am alone in the midst 



78 .APi»ENOJX. [Mat, 

of melancboly desolations ; not only shut out from all ministerial inter- 
course, but have not even the solace of thinking that within sidy miles 
there is one fellow labourer acting in concert with me in building up the 
uHuU places of many gemralions. There are two or three Methodist 
circuits formed in the Territory, but it embosoms no Presbyterian church 
but this, and no other Presbyterian clergyman, unless a missionary has 
recently gone to Pensacola. 

It is a thing of course, that in such a place as this, obstacles and dis- 
couragements abound. But amidst them we have cause of gratitude, 
and some reason to hope, that, through the blessing of God, something 
has been done towards laying lor this Territory the deep, imperishable 
foundations of religion and virtue. Our assemblies on the Sabbath have 
been, through the summer, increasing in number and solemnity. The 
deeply interested attention has often been apparent, and some Instances 
of serious inquiry have transpired. At our prayer meetings, frbich are 
frequent, and which I always endeavour to improve in giving more or 
less religious instruction, the children of God nave had their hopes re- 
vived, tneir faith strengthened, and their hearts encouraged. Some of 
these little meetings have been marked with a high degree of interest, 
and the power and preciouuness of divine grace on the heart seemed to 
befeli. On returning to this place, one of my first objects was to revive 
a Sabbath School, which had been established during ray first visit, but 
had languished in my absence. The Institution is now fixed on a per- 
manent basis, and is flourishing. It is supported by a Society auxiliary 
to the American Sunday School Union. There are in this school about 
sixtv scholars, many of them making the most pleasing progress in the 
study of the Scriptures. Another object to which I directed my 
earliest attention, was the institution of a Bible class. At first, this ex- 
ercise, entirely novel in this community , was looked upon with indif- 
ference, and even a degree of contempt. But by perseverance, under 
the blessing of God, the class has become highly respectable, and pro- 
mises the most desirable results. Some have thus been induced to study 
the word of God who were before treating it with the most criminal ne- 
glect. The distribution of Bibles and Tracts, both in the Spanish and Eng- 
lish languages, is in this community a duty of the first importance, and 
one in which 1 have had some success. Of these I procured a large supply 
before leaving the north. The prejudices of the Catholics have been 
somewhat excited, but they now appear to be subsiding ; and I trust 
€k>d is about to remove out of the way every obstacle to the progress 
of his truth and salvation among this hitherto unhappy people. Should 
He be pleased to make me the privileged instrument of carrying for- 
ward this glorious enterprise, I'should have greater cause to rejoice than 
those ** whose corn and whose wine are increased." But it will be ut- 
terly impossible for me to remain here another year without further as- 
sistance. I am now engaged in teaching a school ; but neither health 
oor ministerial duties will suffer me to do so longer than is absolutely 
necessary to satisfy the demands against me for expenses already incur- 
red. Could your most useful Society renew the donation made the last 
year, it would enable me to remain here another season, and afford the 
most needed assistance to our feeble congregation, which, feeble as it is, 
seems in a measure to involve the Protestant cause in this Territory. I 
hope, my Dear Sir, that you and the benevolent gentlemen associated 
with you will not be compelled to say that our Sabbath School and Bi- 
ble Class, which promised so much in behalf of the rising generation, 
and other institutions which have been begun here, must be abandoned, 
and left to die in hopeless infancy. 



1826.] APPENDIX. 79 

The following remarks are extracted from a letter lately received from 
one of the Missionaries of this Society, stationed in Ohio. We give them 
a place here because they appear to be the result of experience, and 
though written in reference to a particular congregation, they are impor- 
tant in their applic-ation to the whole field of Home Missions. It should 
be the object of each church or congregation, if possible, to secure and 
maintain the preaching of the Gospel evt^ry Sabbath, and the labours of 
our Missionaries should be as little divided among two, three, or more 
Societies, as their means of support will warrant, 

*^ The reason (says our correspondent) for my requesting the aid of 
your Society, to assist this people to establish the ordinances of the Gos- 
pel among them constantly, are numerous. The following are some 
of them. 

** In the first place, the settlement of a Minister for half the time, does 
not appear to be suited to the best interests of the church in such a place 
as this, nor to the present state of benevolent effort in the Christian com- 
munity. 

'* It does not appear to be suited to the interests of the church and to 
the cause of the Redeemer ; because, lat the people becoming accus- 
tomed to hear the Gospel but half the time, become satisfied with it, and 
forget or neglect to exert themselves to obtain a fuller supply. 2d. The 
di.fierence between the services of the Sabbath on which there is preach- 
ing and that on which there is not, induces a great part of the community 
to neglect the worship of God altogether on the alternate Sabbath. Sd. The 
impressions made by the Gospel are generally effaced before the next 
season of preaching, and a habit is acquired of regarding the Sabbath mert" 
iy in relation to hearing a sermon, and being entertained. The manner of 
acquiring this habit is obvious. First, the people neglect the Sanctuary 
on what is called the ** vacant Sabbath,'^ (strange term,) because they are 
not so well entertained. Then, they pretty naturally attend the Sanctuary 
en the supplied Sabbath, merely to be entertained. Hence the impression 
made when the Gospel is preached is not so deep, not so likely to be saluta- 
ry. 4tb. In relation to some places, and such seems now to be the fact in re- 
lation to this, there is aconfederacy of error to supplant the true Gospel. A 
wonderful advantage is afforded to the adversary, by the necessary absence 
of the minister for one half of the time. The Society is not yet moulded 
into shape and form. Regular habits have not been established, and 
the mass of the people who would attend the preaching of the stated 
Pastor will sooner go to hear a flippant, though ignorant man, talk fol- 
ly and error, than to hear a modest Christian prav and read a good ser- 
mon. Thus, while the souls of some are destroyed by the corrupting sen- 
timents they imbibe, others are no less certainly destroyed by the con- 
tempt the^ contract toward the Gospel, by hearing those who pretend 
to preach it. And a people who might in a little time have acquired sta- 
bility^ and been guided in something like the right way, are scattered, di- 
vided, destroyed. 

** That such estate of thing? is not accordant with the benevolent spirit 
of the Christian community at the present day, I need not attempt to 
show your society 

'' I will only add, that from an acquaintance with several congregations 
ID this region, fof several years, I am confident that in some of them, 
which have had the labours of an active, faithful, and able Pastor for one 
hdfthe timey for six, eight, or ten years, and which are now overrun and 
nearly broken down by the prevalence of error, all this evil would hare 



80 APPENDIX. (May, 

been prev.entefl, and they would now easUy 9ii^9port the go^l (he whole 
(tne, and do mudi to hdo otherSy had they io the first place been assisted 
QO as to enjoy the whole, or nearly all the labours of the 8ame PtutoVj 
who may ere long be obliged to leave them altogether. I need not say 
that 1 8p«a^ throughuut this letter, according to the usual connexion of 
means and end in Divine government 



To the Corresponding Secreiaryffrom the Ret^ Luther G. Bingham. 

MarieitOj March S27, 1826. 

Kev. and Dear Sir, 

I have the pleasure of informing you that on the SIst of J(anuary 
last was formed 'm ti^is place a Society^ under the^ame of the Wash- 
ington County Domestic Missionary Society, auxiliary to the 17. D. M. S. 
of New- York. Its officers are, 

Hon. John Cottozi, President, 
Wm. BlEowaino, Vice- President 
I^UTHBR 6. BiMOBAis, Secretary^ 
Au«VBT(TS Stone, Treaaurert 

with a Board of seven Directors, including the above-named officers. 
The Society owes its origin, in a good degree, to the exertions of your 
inlssloBaries, Messrs. ChambeFlin and Pomeroy, and was formed about 
three weeks after the first-named gentleman left this place, Mr. Pomeroy 
having gone on some time before. We trust that these missionaries were 
v«ry useful while they wore providentially detained here ; and we have 
reason to rejoice, and we truat the Society of New- York will have, that 
He who overrules all things thus ordered it. 

We have been able to raise neai4y 400 dollars. Belpre has raised 21 1 
dlollari, Fearing and Salen 100 dollars, Union 80 or 40, and this town 
about CM^ dolhirs. Some of the small subscriptions will probably pro%'e 
bad, but we apprehend that a misaionary on the ground might make an 
addition to this sum. 

We are very desirous that a missiooary may be sent out this spring. 
The subscriptions are taken up for the present year, and with the expec- 
tation that the labours of a missionary shall be enjoyed at least a part oC it 

There is in general a good degree of willingness to support the Gos- 
pel in this part of Ohio, but they cannot procure ministers. They are 
as destitute nere as in Missouri. There is onlv one Presbjrterian niinister 
within forty-five miles of me, in any direction. In the immediate and 
extensive good which imght be realized, I know of no better field for 
missionary operations. The people will go many miles to hear an en- 
lightened and well-educated minister preach. The population of this 
county are possessed of uncommonly bold and independent minds, and 
they require that a minister or missionary should possess something of 
the same characteristics. 



Bev. Charles 3. Robinson writoB ^s follows: 

St. Charles, March 29, 1826. 
Respected Sir, • 

Since tlie formation of jrour Society, I have contemplated its grow- 
ing importance with a lively interest, and the more I think of its object 



1826i] APPENDIX. 81 

and mode of operation, the more I am led to wonder at the indifference 
T^hich many manifest toward patronising it. The utility of its plan can- 
not be reasonably questioned, and its object is as important as the eter- 
nal welfare of millions of our kinsmen according to the flesh. 

That our destitute brethren have claims upon the charities of the wise 
and good, no one can doubt. Have these claims been answered ? It is 
admitted that much has been done to establish the Gospel in our new 
settlements ; yet with all the exertions that have been made, the deso- 
lations of our Zion have yearly increased with the growing population 
of our country* This shows that some more efficient and systematic ef- 
forts must be adopted, if we wish the wilderness to become a fruitful 
field, and if we would furnish with religious instruction the rising gene- 
ration, and the thousands that are moving on to the grave, without the 
means of grace. 

This fact should call forth the mental energies^ the prayers, and united 
charities, of Christians, and awaken such a spirit oi enlarged benevo- 
lence as has never been witnessed in America. The time has arrived 
for cvmbined and powerful effort. The question is to be decided whether 
truth shall triumph over error ; whether the name of Jehovah shall be 
revered, and his word and ordinances regarded, and whether virtue^ the 
ornament of Christianity, the friend of social happiness, and the pillar 
of our government, shall be cherished and perpetuated. 

The Western country, rich in soil, is rapidly growing into importance, 
and in future years its influence will be telt through the United States. 
Such is .the spirit of American enterprise, that this tide of emigration 
cannot be rolled back. Something mtMt he done to raise the standard of 
mt>rartty, by giving to vice its own native deformity. And what better 
means can be employed, than to bring all classes of men under the 
influence of the Gospel ? But such is the intelligence of the Western 
country, that this cannot be accomplished unless we are furnished with 
pious and intelligent ministers. It is contrary to. the principles of human 
nature, and to our daily observation, to suppose that a man, without 
even a Common school-education, can be extensively useful among the 
more intelligent part of the community. A man may be a good man — he 
may flatter himself that be is inspired to preach — he may have much 
boldness and zeal,' and yet not be competent to elucidate and enforce 
the great truths of the Gospel, in a way calculated to interest and in- 
struct the more enlightened part of his audience. 

I anticipate that much good will result from the labours of the young 
men you have recently sent us. Yet you will not indulge the thought 
that we have a supply : one only opens the way for another. Of our 
denomination, only brother Fomeroy and myself are north of the Mis- 
souri river, and there are upwards of 40,000 inhabitants. Do we not 
want more help 7 I have appointed the first Sabbath in June to. visit 
the little church at Buffalo, and administer the sacrament. This destitute 
church is 70 or 80 miles north of me. In Pike county I shall probably 
form a small church at Troy this Spring. It would be very desirable if 
I could visit Howard county, and aid brother Pomeroy in revivins the 
little church ready to die, at Franklin and Boonville. And indeed it is 
important that some of the more populous and remote counties should 
be visited by some one of our denomination. But we have no ministers 
to spare for this excursion. 

Dear brethren, pray for us. Our eyes are still directed to you for 
help. I know you feel for us, and the infant churches in the wilderness. 

11 



82 Avrznmx. .[May^ 

May your Society increase in zeal and aVilUy, and become instnimental 
in converting ooyriads of immortal souls ! 



The ibUowi«|f letter b«i been rcoaiTed from the Rev. Augustus Pomeroy : 

51. Lmiis, Missourif Mart^ 15, 18^. 
Vtry Dear Sir, 

I should have written you lone before this, btit was anwilling to do 
go till I could tell you of something done in Missouri. Our delay ia 
Ohio, of which brother ChambeHin has informed you, '%vas a severe 
trial, though we were not idle, and I hope not useless, dfy time was 
mostly spent in the destitute settlements, preaching wherever thepeopie 
could be collected. Some of these meetings were very ioterestiog and 
solemn. When we first learned that we must be detained in Ohio, I de- 
signed to leave my trunks with brother Chamberlin, and'to comc'on by 
land, but for a time was dissuaded from doing so by the good people of 
Ularietta. After remaining Tour weeks,* my anxiety to reach the place of 
destination became so great, that! could be detained no- longer, and, De- 
cember i5th, started alone, on horseback, for Missouri, and this, too, 
against the advice of all who spoke on the subject. My journey was 
fatitniingt pleasant^ prqfitahle. The time spent ioOhio, and that occu- 
pied in travelling to this place, I beKeve was worth more to me, to the 
Society, and to the Church, than the same time could have been in this 
state. January 12th I crossed the Mississippi, at 'St Louis. I found the 
Rev. Mr.'Robmsonin poor health, and at his urgent request consented 
to preach in St. Gharies and its vicinttT for two weeks. I then look my 
course for Jefferson city, and arrived there February 4th. This place is 
situated on a broken blulTof the Missouri, about 190 mfles from Its mouth, 
is in a forbidding section of the country, near SO miles from any settie- 
ment of importance ; has 200 inhabitants. After three days and two 
sermons, 1 left the place with a heavy keart,. 

In Boone ' I found things more promising. This county ranka second 
or third in the state in point of interest and importance. Here I spent 
two weeks, visited the principal settlements, am! preached wherever the 
people could be collected, and visited from house to house. The inha- 
bitants are many of them wealthy, intelligent, and respectable. They 
are anxious for good schools, of which there are none at present io the 
county, for the want of good teachers. Columbia, the county seat, is a 
flourishing village, four years old. The surrounding country renders it 
an important point. 

From Boone I went to Howard county, but my visit here was shorf. 
In Franklin I spent one Sabbath. The situation of the little church in 
this place and yicinitjr afiected me much. 1 could find no one to tell me 
of how many it consisted, and for two years the sacrament has not beea 
administered. The door for great usefulness in this county is open wide. 
The people seem pleased with the prospect of having a minister, and I 
think Will soon be able to give him a competent support. 

On the river Avause, Callaway county, 35 miles north of Jefferson 
city, I found an interesting settlement, mostly of Presbyterians. Since 
my first visit to them, they have put up the body of a log meeting-house, 
and will finish it soon. The people here are anxious to have regular 
preaching, and will do all they can to support it. I think a small church 
inray soen^ be formed in this pljsce. 



1326.] APKmtx. 83 

I have just returned to attend the meeting of the Mittouri PreebTtery 
in this placet and am not a little rejoiced to find brother Chamberlin 
here. He arrived the 8th inst The way seems prepared for him to re- 
main in this place. This is a point of great importance. An impres- 
sion made on St. Louis will extend an influence to a population of 
£,000,000. I hope brother C. will be able, in connection with Mr. Gid- 
din^, to make such an impression. (Messrs. Oiddings and Robinson think 
it best for me to occupy Boone ville, Franklin, and Fayette, and I shall set 
out for those places immediately. I not only go tdone, but I go near 150 
miles from any of my brethren in the ministry, and to an important and 
extensive field, where much is to be done. Dear Sir, may I not expect 
that some brotbet will join me soon 9 Since I came into the state I have 
travelled 400 miles, or more, preaching whenever an opportunity pre- 
sented, mMl every day has increased my conviction that now is the time 
to possess the land. But for this we must hare piore hdp> 



SUBSCRIPTIONS, DONATIONS, &tc. 

TO THE 

UNITED DOMESTIC MISSIONARY SOCIETY, 

Frtm May IS, 1825, to May 12, 1826, 



ConsUtvUng Directors for lAfe. 



Solomon Allen, Esq. Philadelphia, his 
own subscription $100 

Van Braeh Livingston, Esq. Calender, 
Westchester CO. bis own subscription 50 

Heman AveriU, in addition to $90 before 

' paid, his own subscription 3D 

p. W. C. Olyphant, Esq. on his own 
subscription, by A Falconer 60 

Rev. Jonathan Hoyey, on the sabscrip* 
tlon of members of his congregation 
at Wiufield, by Rev. Orange Lyman £0 

Rev. Moses Giilet, (in part,) do. do. at 
Rome 14 25 

Rev. William R. Weelu, (in part,) do. 
do. at Paris 21 50 

Thomas Welnter, in addition to $30 
formerly subscribed by him 20 

Rev. Aratus Kent, on the contribution 
of sundry members of his congrega- 
tion, toward constituting him a direc- 
tor for life 34 60 

Ezra Hawley , Oatskill, in addition to 90 
dollars before paid 20 

Rev. Samuel Miller, D. D. Professor, &c. 
at Princeton, do. 20 

Peter Hawes, N. Y. en the contribution 
of the Female Juvenile Missionary 
Society, 4th payment 20 

Rev. Htttchins Taylor, by Salina Fem. 
Benevolent Sec toward same ol^ect 10 



Nathan Munro, collected by Rev. Orange 
Lyman, and forwarded by Mr. S. 
Stoclung $50 

Robert Gosinan, Esq. Upper Red Hook, 
on his own contrilNition 

Rev. Nathan 8. S. Beman, Troy, by la- 
dies of his congregation 

Rev Absalom Peters, Corrnpundlng: Se 
cretary, by a ffiend. 

Rev. H. Smith, in part, by Aaz. Society, 
Camden 

Zechariah Lewis, Esq. on lus own con- 
tribution 

Rev. Richard 6. Corning, Otisco, Onon- 
daea, do. 

Rev. Dirck C. Lansing, Auburn, by Fe- 
male Domestic Miss. Soc. there 

Rev. Samuel Tomb, Salem, the young 
ladies and several gentlemen of his 
congregation 

George Gallagher, N. Y. his own sub'n 

Winthrop H. Chandler, Aufusta. Onei- 
da county, in addition to 9o dollars in 
August last 

Rev. Joseph Sanford, Brooklyn, in ad- 
dition to SO dollars, formerly contri- 
buted 

Rev. Aratus Kent, Lockport, In addition 
to 34 dollars 50 cents, by Female Do- 
mestic Miss. Society there 



50 
50 
50 
36 



£0 



50 
50 



50 
100 



20 



20 



Mtmhtrsfor lAfe, 



Shepherd Knapp, Esq. by the band of 

' Abigail Fisher, his own subscription ao 

The Rev. Oliver Hill, on the contribu- 
tion of the Female Benevolent Soc 
of Union, Broome county 80 

Levi Coit, Esq on his own subscription, 
by A. Falconer SO 

Rev. A. S. Norton, by the Female Reli- 
gious Charitable Society at Clinton, 
by Rev. Orange Lyman, agent SO 

Winthrop H. Chandler, Augusta, N. T. 
on his own subscription, bv do. 30 

Miss Frances D. Bnien, by her father, 
Rev. .VI. Bruen. Cor. Sec. 50 

William Few, Esq. his «>wn subscrip- 
tion, by the hand of Cor. Sec. 80 

Jacob Porter, 91. D. Plainfield, Mass. on 
his own contribution, by Rev. Mr. 
liallock 80 

Isaae A. Hallenbeck, Coxsackie, do. SO 

Wm. Henry Van Sinderien, Brooklyn, 
L. I do. 80 

Roswell Hotchkiss . IlarpersAeld , do SO 

Mrs. Hawley, wife of Exra Hawley, 
Oatsiiill, do. SO 

Henry Dwight Baldwin, Victor, Cayuga 
county, by H. A. Oooley and Dwight 
Baldwin 80 

Benjamin Chapman, Durham, Greene 
Co. on his own contribution 80 

J>eacon Wheeler, Deposit, Delaware oo. 
in part, do. 15 

]ftev. Joseph Sanford, Brooklyn, L* L on 

'blfi own contribution SO 



Rev. Alfred Chester, Hartford, on the 
contribution of Wm. W. Chester 

Mrs. Harriet W Condit,hy Rev. Robert 
W. Condit, Montgomery, Orange co. 

Rev. Daniel Wateroury, forwarded by 
Rev. D. Porter, D. D. Catskill 

Deacon Isaac Piatt, do. 

Rev. Mr. Wisner, Ithaca, on the contri- 
bution of a number of individuals 
there 

Rev. John Keep, Homer, by ladles of 
bis congregation 

Rev. Calvin Bushnell, Mount Vernon, 
b^ the Female Oharitable Society or 
his consTegation 

Rev. Ralph Robinson. Hanover, by 
members of his congregation 

Rev. William Gray, t^ the United Fe- 
male Domestic Missionary Soc N. T. 

Thomas Smith, N.T.on his own contri- 
bution 

Rev. Samuel Blatchford, D.D. by the 
Benev. Sewing Soc Lafisingburgh 

Rev. William Evans, by the Union Soc 
Windham, Greene county 

Selden Huntington, Haddam, on his 
own contribution 

Rev. John Whiton, Granville, N. T. do. 

Deacon Reuben Skinner, do. 

Col. Derick Lane, Troy, do. 

Dr. Amatus Roblnns, do. do. 

Rev. J. Kennedy, by sundi^ individuals 

George H. Tracy, Troy, by Jedediah 
Tracy, Esq. 



15 £q 

SO 

80 

30 
80 

80 
80 

80 

SO 

80 

SO 

SO 

SO 

80 
80 
SO 
SO 
80 
80fi0[ 

80 



1826.] 



FOURTH REPORT. 



85 



Rev. Sayref Galley, on kis own oontri- 
tmtioii $S0 

Rev. David Kimball, by Female Gent 
SocieQT, Lowville, in addition to 16 
dollars 10 cents, in October last M 

Re^. Ssdmon King, on the bequest of 
Amos Coburn, deceased 30 



Mrs. Dr. Thomas Kae Antey, hj the Fe- 
male Gleaning So^ety, Ratgers-st. 
Ghurcbt Miss Gautier, Treasurer 

JHrs. Philip Livingston, oa lier own con- 
tribution 

James Barboar, Tom^ins, Delaware co. 
in addition to 15 dolls, formerly given 






From AuxUianf Socieiiea. 



12 



Auxiliary Society at Sag Harbour, by 

Henry T Dering, Eso. 
Young Bien*s Evangelical Missionary 
Society, Sonthhold, by Rev. Jonathan 
Uuntlog, 
Anxiliary Society, Norway, paid Rev. 

Samuel Sweexey, 
Aaxiliary Society at Henderson, Jeffer- 
son CO. A. Asberton, £sq. Secretary 
United Female Domestic .Missionary 
See. No. 1 1 . paid Mrs. Bethune, Treas. 
Female Miss. Soc. at Mendon, Monxoe 

CO. paid Mr. Tbeda Garritt, Treas. 
United Female Domestic Wss. Soc by 

Mrs. Bethune, Trc«a- i2tb payment 
Blissionary Society at Bainbridge, Che- 
nango co. by Bev. Say res Gazley 
Vonng Men's Missionary Society, New- 

Tork, 9th payment 
Female Evangelical Society, Farsippa- 

ny. N. J. by Jane VV. Howell, Treas. 
Auxiliary Society at Rome, per Rev. 

Orange layman, agent 
Do. do. at Paris, per do. 
Female Cent Society, Paris Town, Miss 

9. Bianchard, Treas* do. 
ReUgioas and GhariUble Society, West- 
moreland, do. 
"Young People's Miss. Society, Hunter, 

Greene co. David Ingersoll, Pres. 
Nyacfc Female Gent Society, N. Y., S. 

Hart, Sec. by John Niichie 
Yoong Men's Missionaiy Socie^, a. Y. 
' llth payment, by N. W. Sanford, 

Treasurer 200 

Anxiliary Society at Jeney City, by the 

liand of Rev James 6. Olcott 
Brooklyn Missionary Society, by Selden 

United ^miale Domestic Misaionary 

Sodeiy, N. Y. iSth payment, by Mrs. 

Bethune, Treasurer 
Female Gent Society. Lowvilie Village, 

by Rev. D. KlmbMt 
AnHiary Society, Galen, Wayne co. by 

Rev. Obarled Mosher 
u£a Agency, Iqr Samuel Stoektog, 



Association at Scotcbtown, by Samuel 

W. Brown, Treasurer 
t^emale Cent Society, Nyack, 2d ^pmrter- 
ly collection, by Henry Hart 
8 25|Utica \gency, by Samuel Stocking, 

Treasurer 
656 



16 



17 75 

4 37 

28 SI 



Society, Hejdco, QfwegD 



CharitaUe 

eo. do. 
Auxiliary Society, Angnstajdo. l 

Do. Copenhageoi Town of Denmark, do. 6 
Do. New Hartfonl, do. 6 

Do.Utlca, ^^ 

Do. Olinton, «>• W ^ 

Do. Verona, ?»• ? S 

Da Vernon Center, da i « 

Female Oha«itableSofllety,yemoD,d<x t 50 

Female Cent Society, Paris, do. 12 31 

Missionary Sodety of the Coonty of 

Rensselaer, by D.Saeket,Treasawr 100 00] 
Female Association, Spdng'Sl. Chardi, 

byMissRussett 
United Female Domestic Mias. Soc M. 

Y. by Mrs. Betbane, l«h eonttUNrtSoa 41 351 
i||ixiiiary Boc of the eonrty of Renf- 

selaer, oolleeted aad to w ii dwt by 

Rev.J.Haltby lOO 



Auxiliaty Society, Elmira, Tioga ca 

from Rev. Henry Ford 
Auxiliary Soc. county of Rensselaer, by 

Kev. J. Maltl^, Agent, 2d contrib^n 
Auxiliary Society at Sacketts Harbour 
Do. at Stow's Square, Lowville, by the 

Rev. Phiheas Gamp 
Fairvale Female Gent Society, West 

Granville 
County of Rensselaer Miss. Society 
United Female Domestic MIm Soc N. 

Y. 16th contrib. by Mrs. Bethune 
Yoong Men's Missionary Soc. N. Y 12tb 

contribution, 1^ N. W. Sanford 
Fragment Society of Brick Church, N. 

t. by Mrs. St. John 
Auxiliary Soc. Clarendon, Vt. by Rev. 

H. Hunter 
Da Prattsburgfa, Efaun Bridges 
United Femue Domestic Missionary 

Soc N. Y. i7th contribution, by Mrs. 

Bethnne 
Clinton Auxiliary Soc by their lYeasn- 

rer, throueh the Utica Agency 
Sherburne ao. do. da 
Clinton do. 2d payment, <Ib. do. 
Utica Agency, by Samuel Stocking, 

Treasurer 
Sundry Individuals for annual dues 
Young Men's Misswnary Society, N. Y. 

by N. W. Sanford, Treasurer, l8th 

payment lOO 

Young Peopled Miss. Soc. Catakill, by 

VITm. Day; Treas. Middle Dist M. 8. 
Anxiliary D. M S. Antwerp, Oneida ca 

1^ Rev. R. R. Deming 
United Female Domestic Miadonary 

Soc N. Y. by Mrs. Bethnne, Ko. 18 
Do. do. do. Ma 19 

Anxiliary Soc West Farms, by Rev. J. 

D* Wickham 
34 91 Do. Warren, Bradford ca Penn* by 

Rev. Salmon Dwight 
4 49^uvenile Female Mifsionary Society, 

5th contribution, by N. P. H. 
Caxenovia Domestic Missionary Soc 

by Selah Munson, Treaforer 
Anxiliary Society, Oxford, by A* A. 

Franklin, Treasurer 
Female Mite Society, Prattsborgh 
Female Missionary Aswciation, do. 
YoungMen's Benevplent Sodety, do. 
Elam Bridges, lyeasurer, fcc 
Auxiliary V. D. M. S. Schenectady, by 

G. F. Yates. Treasurer 
FemaleAuxUiaiy Society, Sfcemrafelrt, 

by Alexander M. Cowan 
Gentlemen's AnxUiaiy Society, of da 

by da 
Female WIsshwiaTy Sodety, noontiag 

efwe,Onacn CQaaty,h7 Sdward W. 

Brcwfter 



12 
41 60 

12 60 
12 

13 50 
900 

12 

10 

24 251 

17 
25 
36 
10 68 



11 



26 



23 60 
16 10 



18 



60 

49 
S3 ^ 

18 42 

15 

73 75 

39 

400 

50 

85 
25 



76 50 

35 

13 50 
46 57 

80 45 
365 



50 

6 45 

57 12 
34 12 

16 

35 
30 

66 

27 

13 68 
9 81 

6 63 

4 

16 90 
30 

17 60 



51 



86 



rOVR1» REJPORT, 



mai. 



jMpm from the late Vr^ OlMrlotte 
Bradt'y*, of Watertownt Jefferion ei>, 
hir ih« luuid of her brother, O. Stone, 
Eiq. $flO 

O. SUine, Baq. of mim plaee lO 

From a Friend at Danby, N. T. by the 
hand of Re?. Samael Parker 1' 

The birtfa-dajr e«rann of a member of 
the SiKlety 30 

Arthur TappaQt Esq. Us annoal sub- 
serlption 100 

ICbt. Oardioer Sffiag, amount allowed 
by CFeneral Ainenibly, in part of ex- 
pen&et a» Oommiisioner to General 
Awijciation. New- llamMhira, in 1B34 37 

WlUlam Johnson, En. Lebanon, St J. 

Sthe hand of II Wilbur 5 

end of ati«8ioat, Owego, Tlogm eo. 
paid Rev. itoratio T. Lombaid 3 

B* 9cvin, Em; New Bierlin, Gbenaago 

eountv, by J. D. ICecae 1 

A Mena to Domestic MiasionSf in a let- 

ter to OorMtttimdinv 8««wuiry 1 

Rev. 8ylvant|s Chapin $ 

OoneUus J. Bhiavelt, by the hand ef 

John P. lleven 8 

AsorS iaarvin,bf the ha«l of A, Fal- 
coner 6 
BiiAis L. Nevins, do. 10 
Daniel I*y>|^ do. i 
Rev. John waters, by Rev Orange ty- 

nen, Agent 3 

Sundry ipdIvUuals a* Whi*«^boro% do. 18 
Mrs. B. AeeiTi do. 1 

«n. T. Carrmgtmi, of Soklthfiekl, do. h 
arrittSeaH^Ss^. do. 10 

Jtoesaf Society^ New frovidencei N. J. 

by Mrs. Maiteanit RIggs, Treosarer t 
Jftmes Scott, 1^ J«may4i| li. I* iO 

A Friend to Dsmestik lllissitoni, endos- 
^ ed to Cor. Sec 2 

dpeeeer KeUMn> Kaf, Pleialleldi Oisego 

coni|t7i by Ann p, Reese 6 

Late ¥Ming Ben's Mlisionaiy^ of the 

dty of New-York f 

A FeaMle frlciid tu HisBiDps. East- 

hamften, 1. 1, by Rev. E. Philips 8 

S. Sidney Breese, Shonsndoa 10 

A IHend to Domestic wssions 6 

Rev. Jaa^ 8. Olcotl. Jersey Oity 14 

PemnnBlUah Fish^oomiel4y MIchi- 
. gen, by Rev. Isaac W. Ruggfes 2 

Hon. Ilenry R. Storrs, Whitastown, by 

Rev. John ttoii S 

Oynu OooMloek. Iiewim Essea ooanty 6 

' A hRiy in Newark, by Rev. Itf r. Hamilton 1 

A lady, hrUorreapondlng Secretary 3 

Seadry Individeltu of Presbyterian Oh. 

Owego^yJBBaha Ooit 4 

Wittiam W. Towasend, K.T.hy Archi- 
bald Falconer 3 
SUns Brown, ^ §?< ^ 
Mm, Saiah S. Afmt^n, Kev-Haven Sfi 
profits of on6 day's builnesi, endoied 

tothe.1Vensureri 5 

proceeds of 8 yards of doth, by a peiw 

ion UDkamrn, forwarded by Samuel 

BtoddngjtirAca 10 

Rev. Jeh« Watenb ^ do. 10 

Swdi^ Individuals;. D^IU, collected bs 

Rev. 9. IiynMB^ and forwarded by S. 

fltocUng 9 

£.Uiu«Pempagr, ^e. l 

HoraS8li5d;0eiiiUhii» dp. 3 

Bffhraim Bhead, do. do. 1 

Jacob Oampbell, Elbridge, do. 3 

Sundry IndividiMls, Oasenoviai do. 14 
EheoeMT Rowe, HanlhM S^oaie, do. i 



An individual^ 6fcuientele», eoUeeledlty 

Rev. O Lyinan 
A. ft 8. Hitcheoek. Hanover, db» 

Mrs. M. Bruea. N«w-Vork 
Rev..Amo6 SavHge 
John Buyd,HonnceIlo, Sullivan county. 

New- York 
jLadies of QreenvUle, Greene county, 

• by the hand of Mr. Levi Oallender 
'George DouglaaS) New-York, by the 
i hand of Thomas Webster. 

• Samuel Wood, Sen. Carlisle, Penn. by 
; Rev. Mr. Dnffield 

I Gen- Van Wyck Wickes, Jamaica, by 
i Rev. Dr. Macautey 
^Rev. Samael Ezra Oomish 
John J. Knox, Augusta, Oiiddk co. Iiy 

John O. Keese 

Henry WhitUesey, OatsUll, by Rev. i>r. 
Pocter 

Mrs Bowers, Meiredith, do. 

From Watertown, JeCwsonco. with a 
note siffned ** B," as follows v-^ I de- 
vote all my nuurriage foesto benevb- 
lent purposes " 

Abraham Osborne, Squan, New-Jersey 

Several persona at Qreenbush, Rensse- 
laer CO. bv Rev. Thomas 6. wickes 

Elisabeth Nitchle, by John Nitthie 

Obarles Starr 

3% S— , Newbun^h, by John D. Keese 

A Friend, Northmnpton, do. 

A Friend 

A Friend to D<Hnestic Missions 
fiO A Friend, rulhkUI, East Parish 

Do. do. do. 

Rev. Sblomon Lymait. Pittstown 

Edgecomb H. Blatchtord, Lansinbttrgh 

Henry Biilkley 

Sundry mdividnals, 8alem«WaAingtd& 
CO. collected by Itev. J. Maltby 

A fiee-wilt offering of * few itiMmn 
of Sunday schoolNo. 96. N Y. 

Rev. E. W. GULert, WUthington, Oal. 

Thank-offinrliigof a lady for family Mess- 
higs. by Rev. E. W. Gilbert 

John Adamiv New-Yorkt b;^ DiF. Alteii 

Rev. WOllam Nevins, Bt^hnorir 
16 Ho» Charles March, WeodsllKft, Yt 
^Oor. See. 

A Female friend of Mialeii*, Ntoth St* 
SO lem, West-Chester, do. 

A Friend to the Retteemel^ Oiutfe^ De- 
laware CO. do. 

A Friend 

Wllliara Q. FonJ, Hanover, N. J. 

James Of. Hudtting, EAi(t-Hempton,C. I. 

A Female frie«d to Missions, Eatt- 
75 Hampton, by Re^. E. nUllpS 

Sundry in<Rvidhab, Gi^«ene, Chettango 
CO. by Rev. John B. Hoyt 

Obarles Robinson, Granville. Mass. 

Female Prayer-meeting, Illeecker-st 
churdi, by Rev. M. Braen 
ISJMiss Matilda MXlonb do. 

SCts.0. doi ^ 

egaqr of Otholel Sinitb; I*te of Ja< 
60L ow^dteeaMtf, by E. Wickes, ExV 
GaKn Ptesbytertab Society, by the 

hantf of Sylvester Olark 
Several friends of the Oatee, MoAlh, 
47 > Es8ei<M.byOyruiOontstock 
[Rev. AXMS Mitchell, MtfWlbh ceuttty, 

by £.Cotd 
Dr. Isakc Thoitti^n, N^-toiidott;p^>* 
ceeds of 1 groce eye-wat^, bylaw- 
36 rence k. Keese 



X 

£0 
2 



8 

90 

10 

10 
2 

10 



S 
I 



5 
4 

11 
10 
90 

6 
50 

3 


1 

2 

S 

I 



9) 



(13 30 



1 

5 

10 
40 
it 



12 



ao 



lOO 

s 
s 

iO 

35 

5 

t 

3 

5Q(ll 



10 



Arthur Tappan, t^gti. 



IK 

1080 



I 




87 



t .' '. fi 8 s*"* S 




-1 _ ." ■<o&i 







'»"»"»••«••«' 



89 rouBTH B»oKT. EMat, 



tU 35 
b S^. Ji " - - - 

ObeaUT, Onuge eo. ThmakMgmmg dUt. 4 
Ctarck ia 8«rte a rtw ttpftof M— Ih* 

ft. V. "rr^ S6 ISf 

H 



II» Fhff -^^-^ - = ^ "^— ■ * 



fay ftcv.Hr. CnwiNd lO 97 
[b CeMal T nA g te i 'm m OhBCh,X. T. 

by B«T. Mr. Tm.tum 5 

•ft UMIe Fans S 



bj Bcv. at. WdMcr 4 611Ab0m1 dan fron M^iy iBiliiiilBtli S4 



MINISTERS DIRECTORS FOR LIFE, 

By fi^ cowtnbuHan of Fifty DoQars amd wipwards. 

AikeD, Rev. Samuel C. — by ladies of bis coDgTeg;atioiL. Paid to die 

agency there. 
Alezanoer, llev. Archibald, D. D. — by a iriend. 
Axtell, Rev. Henry, D. D. — by ladies of his congregation. Paid to 

the agency there. 

Beers, Rev. Daniel, Greene Co.— by members of his congregation. 
Beman, Rev. Nathan S. S. Troy, N. i . — by ladies of his congregation. 
Bnien^ Rev. M., of New- York — ^by his own sobscription. 
Btarchard, Rev. £li~by his own subscription* 

Carle^Rev. John, Marbletown, Ulster co. — ^by friends in his ccMigir- 

gation. 
Clark, Rev* Azariah, New Canaan, Col. county— by friends of bis 

congregation. 
Coroing, Rev- Richard S. Otis co N. Y. 
Cox, Rev. Samuel H— by an association of ladies of the Presbyterian 

church in Spring-street, New- York. 

De Witt, Rev. Thomas, of New Hackensack and Hopewell, Duchess 

county — by ladies of the Reformed Dutch Church there. 
Dwight, Rev. Henry, Geneva — by his own subscription. 

Hovey Rev. Jonathan, Winfield, N. Y. by members of his congre- 
gation. 

Kent, Rev. Aratus,— Lockport,N. Y. by members of his congregation. 

Lansing* Rev. Dirck C. Auburn, N. Y, by Female Domestic Mis- 
sionary Society there. 

Livingston, Rev. Gilbert R.^ of the Reformed Dutch Church, Coxsac- 
kie^by the Female Missionary Society there. 

Lyons, Rev. Luke^ by Female Missionary Sodety and Young Men^s 
Missionary Society at Esperance. 

Mac Auley, Rev. Thomas, D. D. LL. D. — by ladies of his congrega- 
tion, New-York< 

Mason, Rev. John M., D. D.— by his own subscription. 

Miller, Rev. Samuel, D. D. Prof. Theol. Sem.-~.Princeton,N. J. by his 
own subscription. 

Nott,Rev. Eliphalet, D. D., President of Union College, Schenectady 
—by his own subscription. 

Peters, &ev. Absalomi Cor. Sec. New-York,-— by a friend. , , 



1826.] FOURTH REPORT. ^ 89 

Rice, Rev. John H*, D, D. Hamp. Sid., Virginia— by a friend. 

Sluyter. Rev. Richard, Reformed Dutch Church, Claverack, Colum-. 

bia county— by members of his congregation. 
Spring, Rey. Gardiner, D. D.— by ladies of his congregation, N. York, 
Stanton, Rev. Benjamin F., Hudson, Columbia county — by members 

of his congregation. 
Sheldon, Rev. Luther, Easton, Massachusetts — by donation from Gen, 

Shepherd Leach. 
Sanford, Rev. Joseph, Brooklyn, L. I. 
Sickles, Rev. Jacob, Reformed Dutch Church, Kinderhook — by men^-. 

bers of his congregation. 

Tomb, Rev. Samuel, Salem, N. Y. — ^by the young ladies and several 
gentlemen of his congregation. 

VaiLRev. Franklin Y-i by ladies of the Spring-st. Presbyterian church. 

New- York. 
Van Vechten^ Rev. Jacob^ Reforoied Dutch Church, Schenectady, by 

ladies of his congregation. 

Wickes, Rev. Thomas S. — by Lis own Subscription. 

lYiUiston^ Rev. Seth, Durham, Greene county, New- York -—by mem- 
bers or his congregation. 

Whelpley, Rev. P. M., deceased^by ladies of the Presbyterian church 
In Wall-street, New-York. 

Woodbridee, Rev. Sylvester, Greenville, Greene county. 

Wyckoff, Kev. Isaac N., Catskill — ^by members of his congregatioQ. 

Wynkoop, Rev. Peter S., of the Reformed Dutch Church, Ghent, CoK 
county—by men^bers of bis congregatioiii 



OTHER DIRECTORS FOR LIFE. 

By the payment of Fifty Dollars and upwards. 

Allen, Solomon, Esq. Philadelphia. Gallagher, George, New- York. 
Averill, Heman, N. Y. Hawley, Ezra, Catskill, N. Y. 

Adams, John, New-York. Hawes, Peter, Esq. New-York, 

Allen, Moses, New- York. 

Austin, Mrs. Sarah £. Livingston, Van Bnigh, Esq. Cal- 

ender. West- Chester co. N. Y. 
Beal^ Matthew, Austerlitz, Col. co. Lewis, Zechariah, Esq. New- York* 
Bissell, Josiah, Rochester, N. Y. Little, Jonathan, New- York. 
Bradhurst, Dr.. Samuel, New-York. Lord, Eleazer-i— by ladies of the 
Bronk, Leonard, Cozsackie. Spring-st congregation, N. Y* 

Chandler, Winthrop H. Augostai Metcalf, Daniel, Esq., of Lebanon, 

N. Y. Connecticut. 

Cooke, Thomas B., Catskill, N. Y. Munro, NathaOf 

pay, dnin, Catskill, New-York. Ohn[>bant, P. ^W. C. Esq. New- 
Pavenport, Frances L. York. 

Gossman, Robert, Esq. Upper, Red Pbdps^ Aason G.. New-Yorki 
Hook, N. Y. Post, Joel, New-York. 

12 



90 FOtfRTH REPORT. iMAXf 

Reed, Eliakim, Esq., GreenviQe, Thompson, Thoiuas, Esq., Lob* 

New-York. don. 

Roosevelt, James, Esq., N. York. Van Benschooten, Jacob, Hope- 
well, New-York. 
S^orm, Stephen, New- York. Varick. Col. Richard, New-York. 

Smith, Peter, Esq., Peterborough, Van Rensselaer. Gen. Stephen, 

New- York. Albany. 

Taylor, Knowles, New-York. Webster, Thomas, New-York^ 
Tappan, Arthur, New- York. 
Tracy, Jedediah, Esq., Troy. 



MINISTERS MEMBERS FOR LIFE, 

By the contribution of Thirty DoUars and ypvmrds. 

Bushnell, Rev. Calvin, Mount Vernon, N. Y. — by Fom. Char. Soc« 
of his congregation. 

Blatehford^ fier. Samud, D. D. Lansingburgb, N. T. by Beoev. Sew- 
ing Society there. 

Beatie, Rev. Johm of the Reformed Dutch Chmrch in New Utredit, 
L. 1. — by the Female Bible Blissionary and Tract Society there. 

Benedict, Kev. Joel, Chatham, Columbia county. 

Blair, Rev. Allen— by the Auxiliary Society cf PhHip^own and Oar- 
mel, Putnam county. 

Brown, Rev. John, Cazenovia— on contribution of Mis. Helen Litick- 
laen. 

Chester^ Rev. Alfred, Hartford, Conn.-*ln^ WillkuD W. Chester. 
Churchill^ev. Silas, New Lebanon— by friends in that congregation. 
Corning, Rev. Richard 8., by the Toung fe(»fMu Misflionary^Society, 
Broome county. 

Dewing, Rev. Jared, Presbyterian church, Fisfakill, New- York — ^by 
ladies of his congregation. 

Evans, Rev. William, Windham, N. Y.— by Union Society tiiere. 

Fisher, Rev. William, Meredith, Delaware county-"-by members of 

his congregation. 
Fimck, R«v. Seymour P. --by friends in Jamaica, Long-Island. 
Ford, Rev. John, Parsippany, New-Jersey. 

Gray, Rev. William, New-York — by the United Dom. Miss. Soc* of 

Gazlay, Rev. Sayres, by his own contribution. 



Hill, Bev. Oliver, Union, Broome Co. N. Y. by Female Ben^voleiit 

Society there. 
Harrowar, Rev David, Lexington, Greene county, New- York — ^by 

members of his congregation. 



1826J FOURTH REPORT. 91 

Hotchkioy Rev. Beriah| Greeneville) Greene couoty-^y members of 

bis congregation. 
Hotchkin, Rev. Jame^, H., by sundry Societies of Prattburgh, N. Y. 
Heyer, Rev. W. S. Reformed Dutch Church, at Fisbkili landing, by the 

Foung Ladies' Benevolent Society. 

Johnston, Rev. William, Scipio — by Ladies' Society there. 

Keep, Rev. John, Homer, N. Y. by ladies of his congregation. 
Kennedy, Rev. John, Whitehall, N. Y.— by sundry individuals. 
Kimball, Rev. David, Lowville-— by Fern. Cent Society there. 
King, Rev. Salmon, by bequest of Amos Coburn deceased. 
Knox, Rev. John, of Reformed Dutch Church, N. Y.— by a friend. 

Lord, Rev. John, Morrisville. 

Ludlow, Rev. Henry C. — by Fem. Mis. See. of Perth-Amboy, N. J. 

Mathews, Rev. James IVL, D. D. of Reformed Dutch Church—by la- 
dies of the Garden«-st. congregation. 

Mills* Rev. Henry, Auburn — by the Female Missionary Society there. 

Mc Clelland, Rev. Alexander— by ladies of the Rutgers-st. congre- 
gation* 

Mc Leod, Rev. Robert, 6. C. — by ladies of the Cedar^st. congregation. 

Marwell, Rev. Ebenezer — by gentlemen of Delhi and vicinity. 

Monteith, Rev.W., by ladies of bis congregation, Schenectady. 

Norton, Rev. A. S., Clinton, N.. Y. — by Fem. Rel. Char. Soc. there. 

Patterson, Riev. Nicholas — by members of the Presbyterian church in 

Greenville, Greene county. 
Patton^ Rf V. William — bv ladies of the Centre Presbyterian ch. N. Y. 
Phillips, Rev. William W. — by ladies of the Presbyterian church in 

Pearl St. New- York. 
Porter, Rev. David, D. D. Catskill— by his own subscription. 
Perrine, Rev. Mathow L. R., D. D. Auburn — by the Female Mission* 

ary Society there. 
Proudfit, Rev. Alexander, D. D. Salem, New- York. 

RobinsoU} Rev. Ralph, Hanover, N. Y.— by members of his congrega- 
tion. 

Robertson, Rev. Samuel— by ladies of the Presbyterian church in 
Huntington, Long Island* 

Richardson, Rev. Lyman, Wysox, Penn.— by the Ben. Soc. there. 

Rowan, Rev. S. N. D. D. New-York — by a friend. 

Roosa, Rev. Egbert, Masonsville, Delaware county — by members of 
his congregation. 

Stansbury, Rev. Abraham O. — by his own subscription. 

Stebbins. Rev. George — contribution of the Mafis Benevolent Socie- 
ty of Middletown, Orange county. 

Stimpson, Rev* flenry B., Windham, Greene county — by seven mem* 
bers of his congregation* 

Somers, Rev. Alvan, Presbyterian church of Austerlitz — by several 
members of his congregation. 



92 FODKTH RfcpORl'. IMaV, 

Vermeule, ReV. Cdrnelius C, Reformed Dutch Church Harlaem, by 
a lady of his cougre^ation. 

Watei-bijry, Rev. Datiiel, Franklin, N. Y. 
Wisner, Rev. W., Itbica, N. Y. by a number of individttals. 
Whiton, Rev. John, Granville, N. Y.— by his own subscription. 
Webster, Rev. Charles, Hempstead, L. I.— by a friend. 
Wickham, Rev. Joseph p — by several gentlemen of his Society in 
Oxford, Chenango county. 



lOTHER MEMBERS FOR LIFE, 

By contribution of Thirty Dollars and Upwards. 

Allen, Solomon, N. Y. Cornelius. Miss Sally, Somers, 

Atidtew, Henry, N. Y, WeJJt-Cfh ester county. 

Condit, Mrs. Harriet W. Mont- 
Baldwin, Mh Hezekiah, Dur- gomery, N. Y. by her husbands 

ham, Greene county. 

Baldwin, Mrs. Hezekiah, Dur- Davenport, Miss Mary Ann, now 

ham, Greene county. Mrs. M. Bruen. 

Bagley, Bernard^ Durham, Day, Mrs. Demmis, Gatskill, N. Y 

Greene county. De Forest, Alfred, N. Y. 

Barbour, James, Cookers settle- Davenport, John A. 

ment, Greeue county. Denton, N. 
Benson, John, N. Y. 

Bethune, Mrs. Joanna, N. Y. Eiliot^ Nathan, Catskill, Ni Y. 
Blake, Robert. 

Bogart, James, Jr. Esq. Fanshaw, Daniel, N. Y^ 

Brewster, Lemuel. Falconei^, Archibald, N. Y. 

Brewster. Joseph. folsom, John, Glen's Falls. 

Brinckernoff, Albert A. Few, William, Esq., New- York. 
Brnen, Matthias, Perth-Amboy^ 

New-Jersey. Garretson, ttetiry \\ 

Bruen, George W. New- York. Gibson, James R. 

Bruen, Herman, do. do. Gregory, Henry, Deposit, Del* 

Beal, rhebBj Austerlitz, Col. co. county. 

Bruen, Miss Frances, by her fa- Glezen, Levi, Kinderhooki 

ther, Rev. M. Bruen. Gould, Abraham, Falconer— by 

Baldwin, Henry Dwight, Victor, Archibald Falconer. 

New- York. 

Barbour, James, Tompkifts, N. Y. ttalsey , Abraham A., N. Yk 

Chester, William W.> N. Y. Hill, Henry, Boston. 

Clarke, Ezekiel, Austerlitz, Col. Hawley, Ezra, Catskill. 

county. Havens, Rensselaer, N. Y. 

Cooke, A polios, Catskill. Haines^ Richard T. do. 

Couch, William, N. Y. How, Fisher. 

Chapman, Benj., Durham, N. t. Hyde, WHkes, Catskill. 

Chester, Lewis, N. Y. Halsey, John C, N. Y. 

Chester, Willtato W., N. Yv Holbrook, John D., N. Y. 

Coit, Levi, Esq., New-York» Hyer, Garrit, N. Y. 



1826.]' 



FOURTH REI^OKT. 



93 



Huntington, Selden. 
Hallenbeck. Isaac A. Cozsackie, 

New-Yofk. 
Hotchkiss, Roswell, Harpersfield, 

New-York. 
Hawley^ Mrs. £zra^ Catskill, N. Y. 

Jackson, Alexander C, N. Y. 
Jennings, Chester, N. Y. 

Keese, John D. 

Keese, John Mumford — by his fa- 
ther. 
Kellogg, Jonathan W^ . 
Kidney, Abraham. 
Knowles, Ezra, CatskilL 
Knapp) Shepherd, Esq. 

Lethridge, Labin^ 

Lovett, James. 

Luyster, WUliam. 

l.yall, John. 

Lynch, Miss Jalia. 

Livingston, Mrs. Gilbert R.> Cox- 

sacKie — by Female Miss. Soc 
Lord, Thomas, N. Y. 
Lane, Col. Derick. Troy, N. Y. 
Livingston, Mrs. Philip, N% Y. 

Mathews, Miss Catharine J.— by 
the Rev. J. M. Mathews, D. D. 

McKinstry, Henry, Catskill. 

Mills, Philo L., N. Y. 

Morrison, John. 

McCrea, Wm., Cooke's settle- 
ment. 

iVfaltbie, William D. 

M'Auley, Mrs. Dr. Thomas^ by 
the Female Gleaning Sociiety 
of Rutgers-street church. 



Nitchie, Johtt) Esq. 




Nitchie, Miss Elizabeth. 



Olmstead, Ralph. 
Oakley, Charles. 
Osborn, William. 

Pierson, Elijah. 
Porter, Addison, Catskill. 
Pratt, Mrs. Louisa, Austerlitz, 
Columbia county. 



Promdfit. Mrs. Susanna — by Dr. 

Proudfit. 
Powisi-s, John, Hudson 
Post, Ezra, Durham, Greene co. 
Perit, Pelatiah, N. Y. 
Porter, Jacob, M. D. Plainfield^ 

Massachusetts. 

Ralston, Robt., Esq. Philadelphia. 

Reed, Mrs. Sarah, Greenville, 
Greene county. 

Roe, Peter— by a Female Asso- 
ciation of Spring-st. church. 

Ruthven, James, New- York. 

Rockwell, Benjamin — by his mo- 
ther, Mrs. John M'Comb. 

Robinson, J. E. 

Robbins, Dr. Amatus, Troy, N. Y. 

Scofield, Jesse, New- York. 
Smith, William. 
Steward, John, Jr. 
Smith, Ira. 

Sayre^ Daniel, Cain, Greene co. 
Sandtord, James N. 
Swan, Benjamin L. 
Starr, Charles. 
Smith, Thomas, New- York. 
Skinner, Deacon Reuben, Gran- 
ville, N. Y. 

Tompkins, John E. New- York. 
Tappan, William, Esq. Catskill. 
Tracy, George li. by Jedediali 
Tracy, Esq., N. Y. 

Van Rensselaer, Philip— by Gen. 
Van Rensselaer. 

Van Rensselaer, Wm. P.-— by do. 

Van Sinderen, Adrian, L. Island. 

Van Dyke, Abm., Kinkerhook. 

Van Sinderen, Wm. Hen. Brook- 
lyn, L. I. 

Wallace, William, Esq., Newark, 

N. Jersey. 
Webster, Thomas, New- York. 
Williams, Eliphalet, Noithamp- 

ton, Massachusetts. 
Woodhull, Ezra C. New- York. 
WoodhuU, Mrs Hannah. 
Woodworth, Hon. John, Albany. 
Willis, N. R. Esq. 
Wickes, Eliphalet, Jamaica, L. L 
Wheeler, Deacon, Deposit, N. Y. 



•»» 



94 FOURTH REPORT. [182^. 



Porm of a Constitution for AuxiUaty Societies. 

The following is inserted for the convenience of those who may 
be disposed to* form associations auxiliary to this Society, it is 
desirablt^ that the annual meetings of Auxiliary Societies should be 
fixed as early as the middle of March, that their Reports may be 
forwarded in season for the Anniversary of the Parent Institution. 
The Committee earnestly hope that the friends of Domestic Missions 
will, wherever it is practicable, form associations auxiliary to this 
Society. By multiplying and Concentrating small contributions, and 
uniting the efforts of all, in one steady and energetic plan of opera- 
tions, the destitute churches and new settlements any be supplied 
with evangelical Pastors. 

Art. 1. This Society shall be known by the name of the I)<h 
mestic Missionary Society of ^ ; and shall be auxiliary to the. 
American Home Missionary Society, for spreading the Gospel among 
the destitute, and assisting congregations that are imable to support 
the Gospel ministry. 

Art. 2. The affairs of the Society shall be conducted bytl Board 
of Directon, consisting of the President, a Vice-President^ Trea"> 
surer, Secretary, and thred o^ber members of the Society, to be cho- 
sen at the annual meeting ; three of whom shall constitute a quonim^ 
at any meeting regularly convened. 

Art. 3. It shall be the duty of the Directors to meet once a 
month, or as often as shall be necessary, for the transaction of busi- 
ness; to fill their own vacancies; to solicit donations, and procure 
subscribers to the funds; to report their proceedings at the annual 
meeting, and to forward a copy of their Report to the Parent Insti- 
tution. 

Art. 4. The funds of the Society, after defraying incidental ex- 
penses, shall be paid over to the Treasurer of the Parent Institution, 
with directions as to the section of country in which it shall be ex- 
pended in Missionary labour, sliould the Board deem It Important to 
give such directions. 

Art. 5. Every person who shall pay to the Treasurer 
annually, shall be a member of the Society. Every person paying 
ten dollars at one time, shall be a member for life^ 

Art. 6. The Society shall meet as often as called- by the Direc- 
tors ; and annually on the second Monday in Maroh> wlien the Offi- 
cers shall be chosen, and the Report of the Directors be received; 
and when this Constitution may be amended by a vote of two-thirds 
of the members present. 



