BX 

1 



^^^y:!/^?-^-^.^*?^— y^^^^-T'-T'-z.-^!'-^-^ 



~, OUN ^, 
\ ' IIBRARY ^i 



DATE DUE 











UW / V.f] 


M/\V '' f 


-!QD_ 


,^ 










NCF Syj 


'^<^ 




\ 








\ 








^ 
























































] 


















































CAVLORO 






PRINTEDINU.S.A. 




Cornell University 
Library 



The original of tinis bool< is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924011511197 




"I found myself suTTOunded by my fellow youth and ofheTS ' 



THE GODLY PASTOR. 
LIFE 

OF THE 

REV. JEREMIAH HALLOCK, 

OF CANTON, CONN. 

TO WHICH IS ADDED 
A SKETCH OF THE LIFE OF 

THE REV. MOSES HAliLOCK, 

OF PLAINFIELD, MASS. 

LABORERS IN THE GREAT REVIVAL OF THE WORK OF 

GOD AT THE BEGINNING OF THE PRESENT 

CENTURY. 



'He gave some . . . pastors and teachers. Eph. 4 : 11. 
Feed the cliurch of God, which he hath purchased with his own blood. 
Acts 20 : 28. 

r. '■'■ BY REV. CYRUS YALE, 

m 
'•L. ' , OP NEW HABTSOED, OOIW. 

■it --r 



A NEW EDITION OF THE MEMOIR, REVISED BT THE AUTHOR, AND ENLARGED, 
UNDER HIS SANCTION, BY THE SKETCH FROM ANOTHER HAND. 



PUBLISHED BY THE 
AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

NEW YORK: 150 NASSAU-STREET. 
* BOSTON.: 28 CORNHILL. 



CONTENTS. 



Intcgductiou . ' ■ 7 

CHAPTER I. 

.EARLY LIFE— CONVERSION. 

Birth — Ancestry — Occupation in early life — In the army — Seriousness 
in childhood — ^Narrow escapes from death — Deep sense of sin and 
ruin — Conversioii — Efforts for his fellow-youth — Usefulneaa in re- 
ligions meetings — Enjoyment of a revival .'..... 11 

CHAPTER II.:*' 

PREPARATION AND LICENSE TO PREACH THE GOSPEL. 
Thinks of preswihing the gospel — Commences study — ^Severe trial at 
Northampton — ^Return to the farm — Pleasant reflections — Rej 
Buraes his books — Makes a profession of' religion — Activity and 
usefulness in the church — Resolutions — Goes to Connecticut — 
Enjoys a religious revival — Useful labors — Visit from his brother — 
Earnest desire to preach-jF-Studies -with Rev. Mr. Mills and the 
late Rev. Dr. West — His opinian of Edwards on Religious Affections, 
and of Taylor on Original Sin — -Applies for license to preach — Dis- 
appointments — Labor in the circle of .his relations — Receives 
license to preach .... 23 

\ CHAPTER in. 

LABORS TILL HIS INSTALLATION AS PASTOR. '^ "^ 

His sermons — His maimer in preaching — Entire devotion to his new 
. and delightful work — His pleasant grove — ^Unexpested trials — 
Supplies the pulpit in West Simsbury, afterwards Canton — General 
practice at funerals and social meetings — Some seals to his min- 
istry— "Receives a call to West Simsbury — Preaches in several 
places — Invitation to settle at Ware and at Goshen — Returns to 
West Simsbury — Severe trials — Day of fasting and prayer-^ 
Desire to be an evangelist — Asecond invitation fcom West Sims- 
bury — Address from the youth-rOrdination 42 



4 CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER IV. 

FIRST TWELVE YEARS OF HIS MINISTKY. 
Motto after ordination — 'Entire devotion to his work — Marriage — Ees- 
olution in view of increasing cares — Private fast — Dedication oi 
his dwelling-honse. to Sod — General view of his family — Libe- 
rality — Feelings in a near View of death — Tast — Forgiveness ol 
enemies — New year resolutions — Parting with a Christian 
friend — Receives the degree of A. M. — Thoughts on a letter ot 
reproof — Useful journey — A time of thick moral darkness — Anec- 
dote — Illustrations of human dependence^— a youth rowing up 
Niagara — ^floating ice — lost sheep — imskilfnl boatmen — Death x>f 
a sister — Uefuge in trouble: — Harvest thoughts — Supply of forage — 
Planting an oiohard-r— Course to reclaim a Christian brother — Re- 
proof of an infidel — Admonition of thoughtless youth — Anecdotes 
as to a new house of worship . . 72 

CHAPTER V. 

■REVIVALS AT- THE BEGINNIN& OF THE PRESENT CENTURY. . 

Revival among his people in 1798 and 1799 — Letters describing the 
vifork — its commencement — rapidity and power — ^false hopes re- 
nounced — critical moment — awful impressiveness of the scene — 
means of increasing the work — sovereignty of God — ^plain truths 
of Scripture— conversion of infidels — His texts^- Address to those 
joining the church — Specimen of an extempore sermon . . 106 

CHAPTER VI. 

FIRST MISSION TO VERMONT— LABORS IN REVIVALS. 

His motto on leaving home — Trials on the way — Favorable recep- 
tion — Visits an old friend — ^Universalists — Letter to his wife — 
General view of his labors — Letter to a Christian friend — Desire 
for the conversion of his children — Tonrs of preaching — ^New year 
reflections I49 

CHAPTER VII. 

REVIVALS IN 1805 AND 1806— CORRESPONDENCE. 

Anecdote, test of genuine conversion — ^Letter to his brother General 

visit through his society with lay-brethren — Two letters to a 
Christian friejid — Birthday reflections . .... 169 



. CONTENIS. 6 

CHAPTER Vin. 

SECOND MISSION TO VERMONT— CORRESPONDENCE. 

Second mission to Vermont— Sickness eimong his people — Letter to 
his brother — To a son — Death of a sister — His elder son grad- 
uates — Special prayer and fasting — Trial in his son's choice of a 
profession — Letters — Tonr of preaching — Letters to friends — Joy 
in the divine government . . . . .... 193 

CHAPTER IX. 

■revivals in 1812 AND 1813 — DEATH OF HIS ONLY DAUGHTER- 
CORRESPONDENCE. 

Uevivals among his people in 1812 and 1813 — Letters to his elder 
son — His younger son called to New London — Sickness and death 
of his only daughter^— His younger sun's sickness — His prayer — 
Mrs. Hallock's sickness— His own sickness — Kindness of his 
people . 214 

CHAPTER X. 

liABORS IN THE MINISTRY— CORRESPONDENCE— REVIVAL OF 

1816. 

Tour of preaching — Letter to a nephew — Anecdote — Letters to a son — 
Kevival in 1816 — Illness at Southampton — Letter to a son 236 

CHAPTER XI. 

CORRESPONDENCE- LABORS IN ADVANCING YEARS— REVIVAL OP 

1821. 

A pleEtsant trait of character — Letter to one who had long been a 
member of his family — Letter to his children and to a nephew — 
Ordination of missionaries — Birthday reflections — Anecdote, 
council of physicians — Labors in the revival of 1821 — His vener- 
able associates in the ministry — Letter to friends at Flainfield — 
Death of his beloved physician — Letter to a nephew — Missionary 
field . .' 253 

CHAPTER XII. 

CONVERSION OF HIS SON— CLOSING LABORS— TRAITS OF CHAR- 
ACTER. 

Conversion of his elder son — Happy meeting of father and son — His 
appearance at ministers' meeting- His worth in eoolesiastioal 
councils — Traits of character . . , 273 



6 CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

SICKNESS OF ms WIFE— LAST PUBLIC SEEVICES— DEATH. 

Severe illness of Mrs. Hallock — Letter to a nephew — His increasing 
inHrmities — ^His lafet labors — RenewaJ of his will — Death- — Fune- 
ral — ^Address left with his will — Death of Mrs. Hallock . 291* 



SKETCH OF THE LIFE OF REV. MOSES HALLOCK. 

Early history — In Yale college — Blessing on his labors in the ihinis- 
try — Students^ he instructed — Requests a colleague — pleasing in- 
cidents — Love of the Bible — Confidence in God — Traijiing of his 
fainily — ^Family worship — ^Death 3H 

HIS CHAUACTER AS BRAWN FROM HIS CORRESPONDENCE. 

Interesting revivals — Counsel to a teacher — ^Death of a daughter — 
Ancestry — Letters to his sons in college — Rev. James Richards, 
Ceylon — Spiritual counsels io his absent sons — A sou entering on 
a foreign mission — ^Prosperous state of the churches — Days of fast- 
ing — Feelings in viewof death — Temperance and the Sabbath.^ 
Solerrm appeals — Charge to a colleague — Death of his wife — ^His 
epitaph 333 



INTRODUCTION. 



In the great revival of the work of Grod which 
began about the close of the last century, the Rev. 
Jeremiqh Hallook was associated in prayer, counsel, 
and labors, with some of the worthiest of men. His 
congregation was contiguous to that of the Rev. Dii 
Edward D. Griffin, who has said, "In 1799, I could 
stand at my door in New Hartford, Litchfield county, 
and number fifty or sixty congregations laid down in 
one field of divine wonders." Another fellow-laborer 
in that glorious work of grace, was the youthful pas- 
tor of the church in Washington, Conn., the late Rev. 
Dr. Bbenezer Porter, who succeeded Dr. Griffin as 
Professor of Sacred Rhetoric in the Theological Sem- 
inary at Aijdover. Another distinguished laborer in 
that good work, was the Rev. Dr. Nathan Strong of 
Hartford, who with others reported these mighty 
works of God in all directions, through the Connecti- 
cut Evangelical Magazine. And then there were 
his well-beloved brethren, the Rev. Samuel J. Mills, 
whose son, of the SEune name, had so much agency 
in the establishment of foreign missions from this 
country, and the Rev. Messrs. Alexander GUlett, 
Ammi R. Robbins, and Peter Starr, with whom Mr. 
Hallock often met for religious improvement, mutual 



8 • INTilODUOTION. 

counsel, and social prayer. Some of these men of 
prayer would at times resort to the retired grove, and 
there, after the great Model,in Gethsemane, would 
■ lie on their faces upon the ground, with strong sup- 
plication and tears for the descent of the Holy Spirit 
upon their people. 

The oldest class ,of ministers now alive in the same 
fieldj love to look back to that memorable revival, and 
recall the great purity and extent of the work ; the 
great power of Grod, as on the day of Pentecost, in 
connection with human feebleness ; the humility and 
harmony of the favored pastors, in their -abundant 
and successful labors; the lasting benefits to Zion, 
in the large increase of her numbers and graces, in 
the happy exchange of her cold formality and half- 
way covenant for vital godliness and the only true 
covenant with God and his people, and in the few 
apostasies among the many hopefuF converts and 
new members of the churches. And then 'that glo- 
rious revival soon yielded the appropriate fruits of,| 
Christian missions, domestic and foreign, with the 
long and bright train of other benevolent institutions 
which characterize and- bless this age. 

The Eev. Jeremiah Hallock, as appears in his 
Memoir, was an honored pioneer in this great work. 
Twice*, at the call of his brethren in the ministry, did 
he leave his beloved people, aind go forth as a mis- 
sionary to the then "new state" of Yermont. As a 
young preacher was leaving the house of Dr. Strong 
to go on a mission to ^he states of New York, that 
great and good map ^aid to him, " Go and stay a day 



INTRODUCTION. 9 

with brother Hallock ; he can give you more of the 
instructicm and assistance you will need on your mis- 
sion, than any other man." 

A venerable father, who labored side by side with" 
Mr. Hallock during the latter half of his ministry, 
and who is now deprived of his natural sight, as if 
to give greater clearness and brightness to his spirit- 
ual vision, lately said of him in his calm, well- 
weighed words, " He was a most spiritually-minded 
man. I don't know as Paul or John was more spirit- 
ual than he. They were inspiredr^—he was not.'' 
This aged servant of Christ, with others, has ex-, 
pressed an earnest desire for a new edition of this 
Memoir. It is thought to present a fair and instruc- 
tive specimen of the spirit and course of that brother- 
hood of departed and worthy pastors, with whom Mr. 
Hallock acted in " the times of refreshing from the 
presence of the Lord." 

Soon after his death in 1826, by request of the 
monthly -meeting of ministers with which he had 
long been connected, the compiler prepared-a Memoir 
of the venerated and beloved man. Two editions 
were issued; he has now revised it, with a view to . 
a more general circulation. Whatever has seemed 
to be of only local interest, or unnecessary to illus- 
trate the grace of God in him as a Christian and a 
pastor, in his various relations, is omitted, while some 
new matter has been introduced. 

The compiler is happy now to add to this volume, 

&om another hand, a brief, yet invaluable Menioir of 

Mr. Hallock's only brother; a man of like spirit, to 
1* 



10 INTRODUCTION. 

whom he often alludes so affectionately, and with 
whom he held sweet communion through Ufe. The 
two narratives may well stand side by side, as they 
shed on each other a mUd and pure light, and toth 
beautifully and strongly illustrate the power of divine 
grace. 

The design of the volume is not to praise those 
who were the last to seek honor from men, and whose 
record is on high ; but to honor the grace of God, 
which, in connection with means, forms every char- 
acter of great moral worth, and to present for. imita- 
tion examples of piety, fidelity, and success in the 
Christian niinistry. It has been the steady aim to 
let these men of Grod stand forth before the eye of 
the Christian pubUc, in their own grave, plain, inim- 
itable thoughts, words, and actions. And if these 
mild stars in the- late clerical constellation may still 
shine on our churches steadily, thoiigh. more dimly, 
after nearly all the lovely cluster have risen to their 
fixed position in a brighter sky, the influence will 
surely be happy upon Zion and Zion?s friends. 

New Hartfokd, January, 185,4. 



MEMOIR 



REV. JEREMIAH HALlOCK. 



CHAPTER I. 

EARLY LIFE— CONVERSION. 

"I WAS born," says Mr. Hallook in a brief sketch 
of his early life written about the year 1815, " on 
Monday, March ' 13, 1758. My native place was 
Brookhaven,* Long Island, in the State of New York. 
My father, William Hallook, was born on Loiig Island 
in 1730. My mothfer was Alice Homan. My grand- 
father, Noah Hallock, lived and died at a place called 
' The Old Man's.' nearly opposite New Haven." 
* After stating his confidence in the piety of more 
remote ancestors, he says, " I have often heard my 
dear father date his hope at about eight years old, 
though he was more than forty when he made a pub- 
lic profession of religion. He always prayed in, his 
family, atid I have repeatedly found him at prayer, in 
sonie retired place. He appeared to regard the holy 

* He was born at "Tireplaoe," in Brookhaven, on the south 
side of the Island. His ancestors had resided on Long Island 
from the early settlement o? our country. ■ See page 341 . 



12 JEREl^IAH HALLOCK. 

Sabbath, to delight in the public worship of the Lord, 
to respect the Bible and preachers of the gospel, to 
love Christians, to value awakenings, and cordially 
to believe in the doctrines of grace. He ever appeared 
to think very lowly of himself, and to feel that, if a 
Christian, he was the least of all. He was hospitable, 
and felt in the distresses of the afflicted. He was gifted 
in prayer, apt to speak in conferences," or prayer-meet- 
ings, •" and to converse on religion. I know of none 
with whom I could talk more freely on religious sub- 
jects than my dear father. My mother, I believe, 
made a profession of religion when I was about eight 
years old,- and I trust from her life and conversation 
she really js what she professes to be. 

" My father had nine children, who lived to grow 
up, two sons and seven daughters, all of whom except 
the youngest daughter settled in the family state. 
I was the oldest child. When I was about eight 
years old, my father removed with his family to a 
part of Chesterfield now called Goshen, in Hampshire 
county, Massachusetts. Here I lived with him till 1 
was twenty-one, and went through privations and 
hardships in assisting him to bring under cultivation 
an entirely new farm." 

Besides these early toils on the. unsubdued Green 
mountains, Mr. Hallock was twice called, in the war 
of the revolution, while yet in his minority, to ex- 
change the .tranquillity of agriculture for the turnult 
of arms. By this discipline in his youth, God was 
preparing him for that "hardness" which he after- 
wards endured so joyfully as a good soldier of Christ, 



EARLY LIFE. 13 

In 1777, he was in a tody of troops selected for a 
secret expedition, and closely packed in boats on lake 
George. A tempest came upon them, and his hoat, 
was carried down side wise tetween two tremendous 
waves. At this moment, an old sailor sprang to the 
helm, and ordered another to the bow. There was 
now a dead silence, except when the man at the helm, 
as the boat plunged;- sung out, " Steady, boys," and 
when the man at the bow, as shprose again, answered, 
" All 's well." Alluding to this night of terror near 
the close of life, Mr. Hallock said, " I have often been 
cheered, in times of commotion and peril, by remem- 
bering those words : ' Steady, boys' — ' All 's well.' " 
" I have a fresh remembrance of serious impres- 
sions when I was about six or seven years of age. 
Similar feelings, I believe, young children often ex- 
perience. If I mistake not, this anxiety was in a 
season of some awakening, in the neighborhood. In 
my ninth and tenth years, death would sometimes 
appear real and near, and for a short time my mind 
would be filled with inexpressible alarm '; I think I- 
had some sense of my sinfulness. But these impres- 
sions would soon wear offj and leave me almost 
totally careless of my soul. From ten to eighteen, I 
took much delight in reading the JBible, espepially 
the historical parts of it; and could repeat almost 
whole chapters. These I sometimes repeated to my 
father ; and this early reading of the Scriptures has, 
I trust, been profitable to me, in maiiy respects, to 
this day. As I lived in a very new country, far from 
meeting, and' with little advantage from schools; as 



14 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

I neither saw nor heard of awakenings ; as the parents 
seemed to be wholly after the world, and the children 
and youth thoughtless and attached to carnal mirth, 
I grew up with little mental improvement, and gener- 
ally indifferent to spiritual things. Yet, on a certain 
Sahhath, which 'is still fresh in my mind, a sermon, 
preached in "Williamsfcurgh hy the Eev. Mr. Hooker, 
excited, my attention, and I think my . mind was 
deeply impressed with eternal realities. But I said 
nothing to any one, neither, so far as I remember, 
did I once think what it was; for conviction, con- 
version, and rfevivals, were terms with which I was 
unacquainted. These impressions, so far as I recol- 
lect, continued till about the middle of the week, 
when they left me as unconcerned as I was before. 

" Once I almost miraculously escaped being in- 
stantly killed by the fall of a tree, where I was at 
work with a number of giddy creatures. "When in 
the army at Tioonderoga, in 1776, I was brought 
near the grave by the prevailing sickness. And in 
1777, as I was in a scouting party with Colonel 
Brown, after travelling in the dark woods all night, 
I became very sleepy about daybreak, when getting 
over a log, f set my gun down on the ground and 
accidentally snapped it with my foot. It had just 
been loaded, and the muzzle was at this moment 
under my chin. These narrow escapes from death 
would alarm me only for a little while. Thus I lived 
until the close of my twenty-first year, flattering my- 
self that there was time enough for repentance yet 
to come, and hoping that I should somehow escape 



EARJiY LIFE. ' 15 

hell aird be admitted into heaven. I had no con- 
viction of the necessity of the new hirth, as a moral 
meetness for a hplj: heaven ; but supposed that, if 
Grod in his-mercy would only admit me there, I was 
already fitted for the place. 

" But on entering my t-xfenty-second year, March 
13, 1779, being of age, and vfishing to obtain the 
wealth of this world, my mind began to be impressed 
with a sense of my dependence on God for his bless- 
ing. While at work alone, I used to pray that God 
would bless and prosper nde. One day, as I closed 
with these words, 'And wheh^I come to die, fit me 
for death;' the thought occurred, 'But why put off" 
this preparation for death till the closing scene Y 
This appeared inconsistent. I saw that this great 
work ought to be first, and not delayed to a dying 
bed. Not far from this time, I had: a sudden sense, 
like a flash,- of the sinfulness of my heart. • This, I 
scarcely remember to have thou^t of before, certainly 
not with an equal degree of feeling. Soon after this, 
my heart, v?hile I.was ia bed, seemed so black and 
polluted, that I could hardly avoid crying out ; but this 
deep sense of guUt soon abated. This was in the latter 
part of March, and I think my mind was on the whole 
more and more impressed in April and May, thdugh 
in a gradual manner. I do not-remember that I had 
any name for my feelings, or that I made" mention 
of them to any one, or thought myself awakened. 

"In the latter part of May,, I met two of my 
mates, one evening, to arrange for 3, ball at the ap- 
proaching state election. We were together till past 



16 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

nine o'clock, but no arrangements were made, and 
the tall was hardly mentioned. It was a sober meet- 
ing ;- no one of us appeared to have any wish for vain 
mirth, and finally, by the desire of the youth, a ser- 
mon was preached, on the, day of election, at the 
meeting-house. As there had been some attention to 
pinging the -previous winter, it was called a singing- 
lecture. At the close of the meeting, all the youth went 
home, and nothing more was said respecting the baU. 
In June there was to be an ordination in a neighboring 
town, and some of the youth purposed to go and have 
a season of mirth, but this also came to nothing. 

^' About this time, a, lecture was preached at 
Groshen by a minister from abroad — for we had then 
no settled minister — at which the youth appeared 
still more solemn. Some of them now agreed to meet 
at a private house, on the next Sabbath evening, for 
a religious conference. This, I believe, was the first 
religious meeting of young people ever held in the 
town. It was the first religious conference I ever 
attended. "We read the Bible and convfersed together, 
and as aU refused to pray, I made the attempt. As 
I had never before led in social prayer, nor even asked 
& blessing at table, it was not a little trying to pray 
with my fellow-youth, with whom I had been accus- 
tomed to associate in things remote from religion. 
Sobriety and solemnity marked the meeting, yet, on 
account of the shortness of the evenings, no other 
meeting was then appointed. 

My general impressions continued till some time 
in the month of August, when, as I retired one even- 



HIS CONVEaSlON. 17 

ing, my mind, as I have hoped, was enlightened into 
a saving knowledge of Gfod and Jesus Christ, and the 
way of salvation by him. The law of Grod appeared 
just, I saw myself a sinner, and Christ and the way 
of salvation hy him looked pleasant. I thought it 
was a happiness to be in the hands of God, and that 
I -could trust fiiyself. and my all in his hands, as the 
place of entire safety from every foe and evil. I saw 
a spiritual beauty and excellence in these things 
which I had never seen before, though I have no re- 
membrance that it once turned in my mind, at the 
time, what aU this was. But I have a fresh-recol- 
lection that when I went down in the morning, and 
looked into the psalm-book, it was a new book ; or 
there- was a new spiritual, weighty importance and 
beauty in it. I cast my eyes on the 144th Psalm,' 
' Happy the city,' etc. This and the second stanza 
appeared excellent ; but when I came to the lines, 

" ' But more divinely blest are those, 
On whom the all-sufficient G«d 
Himself, with all his gricfi hestows,' ^ 

there appeared to be in them a peculiar beauty and 
excellence. Wheii I went into the field to work, the 
glory of God appeared in all his visible creatiojji. I 
well remember we reaped oats,, and how every straw 
and head of the tiats seemed, as it were, arrayed in a 
kind of rainbow-glory, or to glow, if I may so express 
it, in the glory of God. Yet I mentioned my views 
and feeUngs to no one. There were three of us, I 
think, at work together, and it was a silent day, but 
one of sweet mental peace. It still never occurred 



18 JEREMIAH. HALIiOCK. 

to me, that I had experienced any thing like a change 
of heart. . " 

" Not many weeks after this, I was called to do 
military duty. On the release of the company for a 
little refreshment, without any plan or intention of 
miiie, I found myself in a barn, near the place of 
parade, surrounded hy my fellowjyouth.and others, 
and exhorting them on the things of religion. Some 
of them- gave deep and affectionate attention. One 
of my mates was then awakened, who afterwards 
ohtained hope. 

"iihotit this tinie the awakening, which had 
been secretly advancing, began to break forth, and 
by the- first, of January it was spread considerably 
over the town. . And though the season was cold and 
the snow very deep, the meetings were frequent, full, 
and solemn. As we had' no minister, and I was the 
first of the apparent converts^ the lead of the meet- 
ings -often devolved upon me ; and my dear mates 
looked to me for instruction, showed me great respect, 
and put confidence in what I^aid. I frequently led 
in prayer, read, and spoke- a word of exhortation-^ 
sometimes with freedom. - I lived this winter with 
Mr. — ^ — . As we were dressing flax, February 9thj 
in a back roomj the flax took fire, and buriit so quick 
and furiously, the wind being high, that in a few 
minutes the flame pervaded the whole house, and it 
was consumed with all its contents, except what was 
carried out perhaps in fifteen minutes. The sudden 
burning of the house, and the shock it -produced, gave 
me an impressive sense of the great burning-day- at 



HIS'COWVERSION. ]9 

the end of the world, and the inexpressitle conster- 
Hation of poor thoughtless sinners, who only mind- 
earthly things, and think as little of that dreadful 
hour as the old- world thought of the flood, or as we 
thought of this fire till it came. 

" Looking over the daily account which I kept at 
this tinie, I find that during March and April I 
attended meetings most of the evenings, went some- 
times as fer as six mUes, and spoke in them as much 
as a short sermon, generally from some passage of 
Scripture. I sometimes went beyond my strength, 
my hodily health was reduced, and ouce I was threat- . 
ened with sickness. I had no special refreshings— 
sometimes' was ready to give up my hope — ^yet it 
was a new and pleasant scene, of which I hefore had 
no idea. My mind for the most part was clear and 
oomfortahlg, and .1 trust the Lord was graciously with 
us, and -hlessed my poor exhortations to his children 
and to some thoughtless sinners." 

An eye-witness of Mr. HaUock's activiiy and use- 
fulness in this revival, Dea. Jamfes Richards, long an 
oflSoer in the church of Mr., HaUock's only brother at 
Plainfield, Mass., and father of the foreign missionaries, 
James and William Richards', says, -, 

" My first acquaintance with him was in the sum- 
mer of 1779, in the .place now called Groshen.- The 
season. was remarkable for the display of the power 
and mercy of God, in bringing lost men frorti ,th& 
bondage of sin into the liberty of the gospel. Mr. 
Hallock, I think, was the first who manifested a 
Christian hope. From this time, it seemed that his 



20 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

whole soul was engaged to promote the glory of God, 
the advancement of the Redeemer's kingdom, and the 
salvation of souls. I attended conferences with him 
constantly, through the awakening, or till near the 
close of it. It was his general, and perhaps I may 
say his constant practice to give an exhortation. In 
these exhortations, he did not want for ideas, nor for 
words to express thein. They were fervent and 
affectionate. The spriag following, I returned to the 
place of my nativity. There I continued till 1788, 
when I came with my family to this town. In the 
autumn of 1790, he made his first visit in this place. 
On renewing our acquaintancie, I found him to be the 
same humble, pious, devoted Christian, that he was 
eleven years before. "When we came together, after 
the usual salutation he addressed me in these words : 
' I hope our interview will be spiritual'.' And indeed 
it seemed that this was his aim in all his visits ; for 
he was eminently a spiritually -minded man. I do 
not recollect that he ever visited at my house with- 
out prayiijg before we parted. I loved, esteemed, and 
revered the man ; and the recollection of the delight- 
ful seasons I have passed with him still affords a 
solenm pleasure." 

It is not a little gratifying to find so good a begin- 
ning to that course of unwearied effort in the cause of 
Christ, -which, by the grace of God, Mr. Hallock was 
enabled steadily to pursue for almost half a century. 
Though not without seasons of darkness, yet on the 
whole the time of his spiritual espousals seems to 



HIS CONVEilSION. 21 

have been emphatically, "the day of the gladness of 
his heart." In conversation yrith a friend, some years 
since, he expressed the following-sentiments in nearly 
the follovring-manner. 

',' The most pleasant revival, I think, which I ever 
witnessed, was that in which 1 obtained my hope. I 
then knew little of Satan's wiles, and the deceitfuLr 
ness of the heart. I was free from the care and" anxiety 
of a settled pastor. The. scene was new, and I gave 
myself up to the enjoyment of it. But since I receiv- 
ed the charge of souls, it has been different. I have 
found revivals to be such critical and important seasons, 
that my soHcitude and sense of responsibility have 
greatly checked my joy. Now, on seeing a person 
altogether careless in a time of God's special mercy, 
I tremble for fear he wUl be left without a share in 
the blessing. If I. find one under, slight serious im,- 
^pressions, I am in distress because he has not a deeper 
sense of his sin and ruin. If I discover a case of 
pungent conviction, my joy is limited by a fear that 
this; person wLU yet grieve the Holy 'Spirit,' and be 
given over to a reprobate mind. . "When I meet one in 
the first transports of hope,. I trust I feel a peculiar 
satisfaction, yet I cannot but remember the ' stony- 
ground' hearers, and pray God, in my poor way, to 
save from fatal delusion. When I find a professor of 
Christ fast asleep, my heart sinks within me; and on 
seeing in professors or young converts a forwardness 
to promote the work, I am sometimes afraid they will 
do serious injury, through a want of knowledge or of 
prudence. And Q, how anxiously do I watch any 



22 - • JEREMIAH HiTLLOCK. 

changes in the -work ; how exceedingly trying to see 
evidence of its decline! How do I treniWe, for. fear 
our sins as a church, and especially my own defects, 
should 'provoke Grod to withdraw Jiis gracious influence. 
Thus, brother, turn what way I wiU, a revival, with, 
all its animating tlungs, is to;ine a scene of amazing, 
!|plemnity." • 

But these feelings of pastoral solicitude rnust not 
he taken for a distrustful spiiit. No man, in a sea- 
son of religious revival, seenied to have more entire 
reliance on the arm of Jehovah. Yet he was trem- 
blingly alive. in the use of divinely appointed means. 
It stould also be stated, that Mr. Hallock ever held 
in high estimation the judicious efforts of laymen, and 
that he had great 9onfidenGe in the leading members 
of his own church. Few clergymen have given equal 
encouragement to meeting^ of youth, in which con- 
verts^ might take an active part. This we might 
indeed expect, from a knowledge of his own early 
practice in such meetings.; "Within a year of his death 
he spoke with strong emotion of the assistance which 
he had received in revivals from members of his 
church; and expressed his conviction that it was even 
more valuable than the labors of an evangelist would 
probably have been. He added, " I believe, that when 
God has a special work of grace to perform in any 
place, he usually provides some prominent instru- 
ment—that this is sometinies an obscure individual 
in the church, who ;receives for this purpose- a fresh 
anointing, and then is peouliaily active and useful 
in arousing his more tardy brethren to duty." 



PREPARATION FOU THE MINISTRY. 23 



CHAPTER II. 

•PREPARATION AND LICENSE TO'PREACH THE 
.' GOSPEL. ■ ' 

"I WOULD here notice, that for several months I 
had had almost a constant impression of my having 
a call to preach the gospel, and a strong desire to be" 
thus-ernplciyed, if it were the will of G-od. Several of 
iny frieads mentioned the subject to me, and' asked 
me if it was not my duty to devote myself to the 
^ gospel ministry, and some,, to encourage me, made 
me small- presents. - , 

"Jn April, 1780, I went to -Northampton to see 
Mr. Dwight, now president of Yale college, to know 
if I could attend his school the e;nsuing summer. 
The 20th of May was -the- noted dark morning. 
While others around me were terrified, I do not know 
that I felt the least- agitation, hut spoke to them con- 
cerning, Jesus. In the afternoon we had a meeting, 
and I addressed them with unusual freedom; the 
attention of the people was greater than common. 
May 25th, I began to study with Mr. Joseph Barker, 
who was preaching in Groshen as a candidate. My-^ 
board was given me by the neighbors. Abotit this 
time I had, 1 think, rather a greater sense than com- 
mon of the wickedness of my heart, the temptations 
of this world, and my exposure to be overcome by 



21 JEREMIAH HALLOCK.. 

them ; also of my absolute dependence on the Lord, 
and that if saved it must he all of free grace. 

" On the 9th of June I wrote thus: ' Things do 
appear more clear than they did. Blessed be God for 
it, for ever and ever. my soul, praise the Lord, and 
call upon his name ; praise him, while you have 
strength to move.' I was now much in the habit of 
writing a sort of verse, like the following which I 
find in my diary, June 21. 

" 'I am a sinner, and most vile 
Of all the human race; 
Lord, wash away my sins, I pray, 
By thy free sovereign grace.' 

" On the 7th of August, I went to Northamptoii 
and joined Mr. Dwight's school. I was one of the 
oldest scholars, and yet the most deficient in learn- 
ing. My mind was seriously impressed ; the school 
in general were light and vain. The dry study of the 
Latin was also a great trial. to me ; for I wished to 
spend rny whole time in reading the Bible and 
religious books, in connection with other spiritual 
duties.* 

" My health at the same time failing, it was not 
long before I sunk into the most distressing melan- 
choly, and soon became entirely discouraged and 
went home with a view to be a farmer if Grod should 
spare my life, despairing of ever being a minister of 
the gospel. The distresses of these days and. weeks 
no one can have any idea of, except by experience. 

*'0n the cover of his Virgil was written, " Alas,Uhe poor 
heathen could not find Christ." 



- PREPARATION FOR THE MINISTRY. 25 

My soul hath the hitterness of that season still fresh 
in rememhrance. I was ready, to conclude that all 
was against me as a Christian, and trembled for fear 
I should become an apostate. But He who pitieth 
the afflicted and hear'eth the cries of the distressed 
and helpless, kept me in this dreadful day from total 
despair and utter ruin, and praised be his name. To 
the Lord Jesus I made my sorrows known and looked 
for relief. I greatly feared theCt having given- up all 
idea of the ministry^ I should soon get buried in the 
world, and care nothing about. religion. } 

^'My mind became more calm, and contrary to 
my fear, I found that though I had given up all hope 
of the ministry, yet, if eve? 1 loved religion, I loved 
it still. This, mstead of destroying my hope, strength- 
ened it. On the 7th of September I wrote, , ' Thiiigs 
appeared to me more clear to-day; my soul SQemed 
to long after God; his people and his -kingdom still 
appeared lovely.' After bitter complaint of coldness, 
worldly-mindedriess aud the like, I find written, No- 
vember 4, ' Ldst "Wednesday night I experienced a 
great revival of religious feeling — ^whether true or 
false Grod knoweth ; 1 felt grieved to see or hear any 
tiling against the ministers of Jesus, and I thilik iiiey 
looked beautiful for their- work's sake. I also felt a 
degixq to be made, though unworthy, an iiistrument 
of the glory of God and of good in the world.' In the 
forepart of December, my hope rgspeoting the gospel 
ministry began to revive, and on the fifteenth of this, 
month I went to sohool agam to Mr, Barker. I find 
written, December 9, .'It appears to me that I am 



26 JEREMIftH HALLOCK. 

the most ignorant, and that I never shall he fit for 
any service in the world ;' and also these lines : 

Though I am dark, yet Christ is light, 
Though I am weak, yet Christ is strong, 
And he can give'me h^eavenly light, . 
A^id in his service make me strong.' " 

Mr. Hallook spent the next year in the study of 
Latin, a part of it at Northampton, in the aokdemic 
school of the late- Dr. Dwight. He afterwarfls pur- 
sued his studies, for ahout eighteen months, with the 
Rev. Mr. Strong of Williamsburgh. 

" On- the 8th of March, 1781,. I madje a public 
profession of Christ, and united with his church in 
Goshen. Among the things I then -wrote are these 
words : "-O tjie- solemn oath that I have made this 
day. that God would give me grace to live accord- 
ing to my promise, that I might so walk as not to 
bring a reproach upon the religion of his dear Son.' 
In September, 1782, when I supposed I was fitted for 
college, I was^'for some time unwell, and threiatened- 
with serious illness. I then wr^te, ' Dark symptoms ': 
of sickness seem very different frorn what they once 
did. They do not appear terrifying or awful, but 
more like friends than enemies, because they are 
many times used as instruments to open the, way for 
saints to their Father's house. Lord, search me 
and try me, and leave me not to build upon a false 
foundation.' 

^' About this time, I began to make -Qie following 
resolves, and "from time to time continued to make 
them, according to my situation and the occurrences 



PREPARATION FOR THE MINISTRY. 27 

of my life. These I resolved to renew once a week, 
unless unavoidably interrupted ; which I have done, 
and I trust to my spiritual profit. Endeavoring to 
lean on the Beloved for strength to perform, 

" ' 1. I am resolved to avoid all known sins, and to 
practise all known duties ; to read the word of God 
and other good hooks, and go according to the lig|it I 
find in them. . ' ^ ^ 

" ' 2. Resolved to watch over iny conduct respect- 
ing my aged parents, never to give them' an unkind 
word,, tut to love and honor them, as enjoined in the 
fifth commandment, and to ohey and follow them 
wherein they follow Christ. 

"-'3. I am resolved, three times a day, unless my 
circumstances render it impossible, to retire and read 
a portion of Scripture and pray ; "to be much in ejac- 
ulatory prayer, and in timfes of unusual trouble to be 
more than commonly prayerful. 

"'4. Resolved to keep a general journal of' the 
most, remarkable occurrences of -my life; 

" ' 5, I am resolved to be faithful to my dear 
consort, to seek to instruct, watch over, and bring 
up my children in Hie fear of Ood, and to' pray and 
travail in birth, for them, until Christ is formed in 
thein the hope of glory. 

" 6. I am resolved to show my superiors, inferi- 
ors, and equals, dUe respect at all times, and not to 
have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect 
of persons. 

" ' 7. I am resolved. to be careful of another's char- 
acter, and to say nothing against him directly or indi- 



28 JEREMIAH HALLO.CK. 

reotly., unless I think the interest of religion and the 
honor of (Jod caU me to it. 

" ' 8. Resolved, never to look upon myself to liav.e 
attaioed;^ but to press forward. . 

" ' 9. Resolved, never, to put myself forwa'rd in 
any thing, especially in matters of religion, but al-^ays 
to takiB the lowest place. . ' 

'"10. Resolyed, in all niy troubles to b& carefiil 
how I complain or speak of them; and to say and- do 
that which may be most for the glory of God, who 
is as worthy of praise in my adversity as in my pros- 
perity. 

" ' 11. Resolved, the first thing in the morning 
to give myself up to the Lord; to study what > I can 
do most for his glory that day, and by prayer to set 
about it; "and tha:t this shall be the la^t thing at night. 

" ' 12. Resolved to receive aU unkindnesseg with 
patience ; to keep counsel, and speak against^ no one, 
unless I think I am in duty caUed to it. ' 

" ' 13. Resolved, if in my power, to read at least 
four portions of Scripture, or hear theml:ead, every day. 

'"14 Resolved" to try all my sermons by G-od's 
word, and endeavor to get good from them befcwe I 
preach them, and to deliver them as if I was about to " 
give up my last account. , ■? 

'"15. I am resolved not only to preach what I 
find agreeable to the word of God to others, but to 
endeavor to' practise it myself.' 

" ' 16. Resolved, that nothing be lost, but that 
what little time and strength I have be spent in the 
service of ^od. - ' 



PREPARATION FOR THE MINISTRY. 29 

" ' 17. I am reselved to pray for all people, espe- 
cially for the church, and for my enemies. 

" ' 18. Eesolved, never to be too much lifted up, 
nor too much cast down, but to hope in Grod and not 
to indulge despair. 

" ' 19. Resolved to watch against the love of this 
world, as a slq which doth easily "beset me. 

" ' 20. Resolved to inquire with candor after the 
truth for the truth's sake, taking the word of Grod as 
my only guidcj^lookiag up to the Holy Spirit to guide 
me into a right .understanding of it. 

" '21. Resolved to watch against a murmuting, 
fretful spirit. , 

" ' 22. Resolved, to watch in th6 day of pjdsperity, 
lest I forsake the Lord. 

"'23. Resolved to' 'remember the Sabbath-day 
to keep it holy.' 

<' ' 24. Resolved to avouch the Lord Jehovah, the 
Father, the Son, and the Holy Grhost, . as my God 
and Father, my Redeemer,. SanctLfier, and Comforter, 
through the everkistiug atonenient of Jesus phrist.' 

" The preceding resolves I have generally renewed 
Saturday evening, with- a covenant, in which I have^ 
endeavored to give my heart, soul, body, name, inter- 
est, and happiness, for time and eternity, to v God in 
Christ ; also my wife, children, and friends, my peo- 
ple, the world, and dearer Zion, that all might be 
consecrated^ to the fear, service, kingdom, and glory of 
God; at the. same' time praying 'that God, would be 
my father, and, put me among his children — ^that the 
Lord Jesus Christ would be my prophet, priest, and 



30 ' JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

king, my righteousness, wisdom, sanotification, and 
redemption, and the Holy Spirit my sanctifier, sup- 
porter, and comforter. And although, as I have said, 
I trust the weekly renewal of the preceding resolves 
and covenant has been profitaUe, and tended to pre- 
-pare my mind for the Sahbath, yet the practice has 
taught me this : ^;hat it is one thing, to covenant and 
resolve, and another to do, or in other words, how 
much easier it is to covenant than to perform ; and 
that I am absolutely dependent,' after all, on the gra- 
cious and quickening influences of the Holy Spirit. 

"I have considered 1783 an important year to 
me. I suppose I was fitted for college in the preced- 
ing September. On the invitation of Mr. Abraham 
Fowler, who had preached at Goshen as a candidate, 
and with whom I had formed an agreeable acquaint- 
ance, I set out the 26th of May for his house in 
West Simsbury,* Connecticut, with a view to spend 
the summer with feim in study. The day I left home 
I wrote thus : ' Left one poor brother and' seven sis- 
ters, as I have reason to think, in an unconverted 
state; it is a cuttihg, thought; Lord, pity liiem.' 
I did not then know what I afterwards found to be a 
fact, that my youngest sister had a hope. I tarried 
with Mr. Fowler imtil the 1st of 'October. Mr. Ed- 
mund MUls preached this summer in West Simsbury,^- 
and Mr. Fowler at Salmon Brook. Mr. Mills was 
very spiritual- and had great assistance frorri above. 

* The place where Mr. Halloolc spent the remainder of his 
days, the name heing afterwards changed to Canton. 



PKEPARATION FOE THE MINISTRY. 31 

Not long after he came, a revival of religion began, 
I believe about one hundred manifested hope. Be- 
fore it commenced, the church and Sabbath were 
almost lost ; novr the church was gathered, reformed, 
and increased. About the middle of August, Mercy 
Humphrey, now Mrs. Hallock, obtained hop6. Be- ' 
sides meetings on the Sabbath, and lectures, I some- 
times attended three or four conferences," or prayer- 
meetings, "in a week: ' And often if there was no 
minister, I prayed, read a pprtion of Seripture, and 
made remarks. I wrote, nearly every day, what 1 
did, and the exercises ot my own mind — doubts and 
hopes, trials and comforts. But as they were nothing 
extraordinary, and quite similar; I shall only tran- 
scribe the journal of two days. 

"August 17, 1783. Lord's day, "West Simsbury. 
Some enlargement in prayer this morning, in' secret 
and in the family. .My mind last night dwelt on this 
things of religion. I am continually in trouble, by 
reason of darkness and sin. Talked considerably last 
evening concerning the agency of Grpd's Spirit ; 1 trust 
it has been profitable. Heard Mr. Edmund Mills — 
dull for the most part — find I have- a dreadfully 
wicked heart-T-«ome profitable discourse at night — 
think I have some sense of my dependence on Grod — 
had a conference this evening— people appeared very 
attentive. ' , - 

" August 29. Some life in closet prayer this morn- 
ing. Many temptatioiis to fight against. Three years 
ago to-day I was discouraged, and concluded not to 
study any more ; but God has marvellously sup- 



32 ■ JEREMIAH HALL0CK. 

ported me from time to time, untU now. I trust I 
can look tack upon all my troubles from that time 
to this, and repeat "Watts' hundred and nineteenth 
psalm, last part,' with applicsction to myselt "When 
one trouble comes another goes ; -in prosperity, the 
world is "bewitching; hut adversity .brings, a gloom 
upon it, and I can more easily, forsake it. . ^ 

' " ' Rise, my soul, from earthly things 

Thy better portion taTie.' " 

One of the surviving subjects of this work states 
that Mr. Hallock at this time was as interesting and 
useful as he was active; that he manifested not a 
little skill 4n his defence of truth against the assails 
of gainsayers; that no sooner was the regular service 
of a meeting closM, than he would be surrounde4* 
often by a group of listeners, who were unwilling to 
retire while one so able to give. instruction was will- 
ing to impart it. 

" One thing which occurred when I lived at Mr. 
Fowler's, I can never forget. It wds an unexpected 
visit iirom Moses,, n^ only brother, and about two 
year? younger th^ myself.. I left him, in May, de- 
Voted to the -worl(l. My feelings fbr him were some- 
times unutterable. To my surprise he came to see 
me, apparently pricked in the -heart. I had heard 
tWt he was unwell. The news, had given me much 
anxiety. Now his health was nearly restored, yet he 
was evidently under serious impressions. He remained 
with me several days. "We attended many meetings ; 
two public fasts, one at Simsbury and one at G-ranby, 
where we parted. To me it was a solemn parting, 



PREPA^EATION FOR THE- MINISIRT. 33 

and", I believe, to him. He viewed himself, as ITia^sre 
reason to think; was t-be 6ase, unreconciled to Grod 
and a chUd, of .wrath.* -^By him I sent letters to my 
friends in ©oshen and "Williamshfl,rgh, . in w^iich I 
gave some account of the awakebii^ in Coipiecticut 
These, I'aiterwards found, were much read^by those 
who_ felt an interest Jn such things. My father vrrote, 
to me in consequence, that if I wished to da good I 
must write more about the revival." 

It was possibly iioia this hint that Mr. Hallqok, 
through: life, made no small use of letters in his select 
circle of Christian friends, in the social meeting, and 
in the- house of Grod. ^ For this purpose^ he was accus- 
tomed to borrow emd copy religious Jetters of. marked 
I. interest, especially liiose which ■contained important 
, facts in respect to revivals. Jle had indeed a rare 
talent to turn to some good account this' kind gf 
information. . • ■ . 

The foUbwing passages show the state of his-mincj 
touching the great and good Wort of the Christian 
ministry: , 

" Pelt my heart gloW to engfige \a the work of 
the ministry. may Ood fit me for that great work, 
and use nxe for his glory in that- way, if it may seem 
gOod to him." 'T had a great desire, I believe to 
excess,, to turn my study wholly upon divinity." 

* This very dear and only hratlier soon -after obtained hope in - 
Christ, and pommenoed prefaraMon for the ministry. He graduated 
at Yale- college in 1788, and in 1792 was installed pastor of tte * 
churcti-in Plainfield, near Goshen, Mass., -where he had a prosperous'' 
ministry of forty-five years, till his death July 17, 1837, at the ripe 
age of 77. See page 311. 

2* 



34 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

" Felt impatient. to study so long before beginning to 
preatjh. tEat I might learn patience, and be quiet 
as a child." " "What it means I cannot teU, but I 
have a desire to be an itinerant preacher. If it be 
the wiU of Grod, Amen; but 0, may I never run of 
my own miad." 

" September 30, 1783, 1 left "West Simsbuiy, and 
■went to live with the Rev. Mr. MiUs of Torringford, 
with whom I had formed an endearing acquaintance. 
It was trying to part with Mr. Fowler, his family, and 
the Cteistian friends with whom- 1 had been for more 
than four.pionths, in a day of such iaterest, with no 
thought of meeting them again, at least to hve to- 
giether in this world. At Torringford I ^aw. many 
good ministers, heard them preach and converse,^ and 
was favored with theij instruction and counsel. They, 
treated, me with parental kindness and tenderness. 
I made a point of retiring three times a day for prayer 
and reading a portion pf Scripture ; sometimes set 
apart days for private fasting and prayer. Although 
I saw my heart to be sinful, and was troubled with 
carnal affections, yet I^oommpnly felt a peace witjiin — 
not greatly elated, nor yet overwhelmed with dis- 
tressing doubts and slavish fears. '. On the 20th of 
October I received a letter from my brother Moses, in 
which he gave me an account of his conversion. It 
was like cold: water to a thirsty soul. 

"November. 24, I left Mr. Mills' for home; wish- 
ing to go by the way of Stockbridge. Stopped with 
the Rev. Mr. Knapp of "Winchester. Attended a meet- 
ing with him in the evening, and at his request made 



PEBPARATLON FOE-.TJIE MINI§TRy. 35 

a prayer and said a few words. It was a time of 
revival- there. Next morning had some freedom in 
prayer. Felt, I thought, as strong a desire to lie an 
itinerant preacher as the thirsty traveller feels for 
cold water. • After . treakfast parted with the agree- 
able Mr. Knapp ; called a little whUe' on the Rev. 
Mr. ]8,obhins of Norfolk, and was deUghted with Icaax 
as a man and a minister of, Jesus. Lodged at Shef- 
field." Here I was peculiarly tried with a rude, pro- . 
fane company, which made me desire that I might 
be made a^ faithful in the service-of the Lord, as they 
were in the service of Satan. Next day rode to the 
Rev. Mr. "West's of Stockbridge, and agreed to study 
a while with him. 

"Nov. 28. Have been frorn home .six months. 
Think the past has been a profitable summer to my 
poor soul. - Hope to see my friends at Groshen to-day. 
May I conduct like a Christian,, so long as it shall 
please God to continue me there. 

" Dec. 4. Attended a wedding; prayed with and 
spoke to the young, people. They were civil and 
attentive. ■ , , 

" Dec. 10. Came to the Rev. Mr. "West's to study 
with him. And now, Lord, wilt thou be with me 
indeed and bless me while here, and I shall be 
blessed-. Had this evening freedom in mind and 
some sweetness in meditation and prayer. 

" Beg. 16. Thi^ day finished the reading of Ed- 
wards on the Afiections — approved of it O may. I 
grow in knowledge and in grace; 

^' Dec. 17. Resolved to keep this as a day of pri- 



36 > JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

vate fasting and prayer, Found it in some measure 
pleasant. 

""Dec. 20. Finished reading Mr, Taylor on Orig- 
inal Sin. I know that his sohen;ie will not answer 
fcff me ; my wound is too deep. Lord, deliver me 
from ike horrid belief, that we are not sinners by 
nature. 

" I>EC. 31. When I am well and hungry, I delight 
to be called out to breakfast; ,0 may I delight stiU 
more to be called out to pi^ayers. May I hunger 
more after G-od ^haii for my necessary food. I am' 
now brought, to the close of a year in which I have 
received great and innumerable mercies ; but my sins 
have been infinite every day. may! sink in my 
own view, and may the Lord Grod only be magnified 
in my heart. 

" Jan. 1, 1784. I now enter upon a new year ;. 
may I enter on a new life. Now I ain one year nearer 
the millennium. Now I am one year nearer the 
eternal world. . ' So teach me,' -Lord; ^ to number 
my, days, that I may apply my heart unto wisdom.' 
Set apart this day for fasting and prayer, -and to 
renew my covenant and resolutions." 

. Mr. Hallook having now pursued preparatory 
study nearly four years; resolved to apply for license 
to preach the gospel. Atdor of piety prompted him 
onward, as it has many other Valuable ministers, 
without the advantages of a public education. While, 
however, his attainments in science and literature 
were limited, his knowledge of his great text-book 



PREPABATIGN FO-RTHE MINISTRY.^ '37 

the BiWe, in its various and high practical bearings 
on a "world lying in sin and -ruin, exceeded that oi 
most candidates for th& ministry. From tiie time of 
his conversion he had made this holy volume, as we 
have seen, his diligent and prayerfal study.' If he 
could not,- with some theological students, bring to 
the investigation of Scripture a knowledge of different 
languages, and the ^outeness of .mere criticism on 
words and phrases, he had the advantage of most in 
■that childlike simplicity with which he took God's 
plain declarations. He loved to sit at Jesus' feet ; 
and his faith could there receive with joy what his 
reason failed to comprehend. The uprightness of his 
heart,~wliich'gave him a high relish for divine truth, 
was m fact a sort of moral test, and a far safer test, 
no doubt, than the widest range of learning and the 
"best rules of biblical criticism,, with a heart at enmity 
with God. Seldom has the world seen so fine an 
illustration of our Sayiour's words, "If aiiy man 
will do his will^he shall know of the doctrine, whether 
it bie of Gad, or whether I speak of , myself." Few 
men could quote, at pleasure, from every part of the 
Bible, with so much ease and aptness. In subsequent 
life, he was indeed mighty in the Scriptures. He 
had, too, an uncommon share of good sense, prudence, 
and practical wisdom., His excellence of judginent, 
his moral dighity, his decision of character, command- 
ed uliiversal respect. The deep feeling also, and the 
. Eoitcenty which were ever manifest ill his Idoks, his 
conversation, his prayers, "his preaching,, his whole 
intercourse with men and with God; went far to give 



38 ■ JEEEMIAH HALLOCK. 

him that weight of influence which he possessed 
among all classes of society, and especially in the 
church of Christ. 

Yet it seems to he a -principle in the government 
which Grod exercises over- this world of sinners, that 
humility should go hefor« honor, severe trial hefore 
marked success. He who prepared Moses for his 
station hy a forty years' "discipline on the mountains 
of Midian, and J)avid for his throne by the persecution 
of Saul, did not allow -Mr. HaUock to enter upon the 
work, in which .he foresaw his future eminence and 
usefulness, until he had first put to a severe test his 
faith, and -patience. 

"January '5, 1784. Not without some life ia 
prayer. Expect, to-mortow, if the Lord will, to be 
examined as to my qualifications for preaching the 
gospel. Lord, I am very unfit; that thou 
wouldst sanctify me for so great a work. 

" Rode to Egrdmont — ^raiay, the road bad-r^no one 
cametothe association but the Rev. Mr.'Avery. I told 
them myerrandibut they could notproceed to examine 
me. They treated me with much -kindness. Trust 
I felt in some degree willing that Crod Should govern. 

" Januart 7. Rode- home and dined with Mr. 
Avery. "We had a few small potatoes boiled,, with a 
piece of salt pork,- but no bread, and not a word of 
complaint.- Neither did tiiey appear mortified, but 
pleasant and agreeable. : I have considered this one 
of the best dinners of my life. When I shaU be ex- 
amiaed now, I know not. OLord, may I enjoy tky 
presence, a,nd it shall be enough. ' 



PREPARATION FOR THE MINISTRY. 39 

" January 8. Set apart this day for prayer and 
meditation; to humlbla myself before the Lord, and 
to notice the dealings of his providBnoe. Though a 
great want of 'spiritual life, yet I trust it has been 
profitable. 

" January 44. Set apart this day for fasting and 
prayer. Lord, be pleased to grant the assistance 
of thy Holy Spirit. 

"Some spiritual life. may I improve, under 
all my advantages. 

'■'January 19. Have been much concerned, even 
to sin, for fear something VFould occur to prevent my 
examination. I have, for some endj an earnest desire 
_ to enter the work "of the ministry. This is to me a 
gloomy day, as there is- a terrible storm of snow fronl 
the north-east, a'nd as Rev. Mr. West has been so kiad 
as to call a special meeting of the association to-mor- 
row, with a view to my examination. I find I can 
see more of my wicked heart in one day of adversity, 
than in a thousand days when things go according to 
my mind. Lord, the maker of heaven and earth, 
may this dispensation of thy providence humble me, 
and may what I have seen of my wicked heart bring 
me low- at thy feet for ever. 

" January 20. The wished-for day is past when 
I hoped to be - examiaed and licensed as a candidate 
for the gospel ministry. But Grod saw otherwise, 
and blessed be his name. ' The storm was so severe 
that not one minister attended. I see now no pros- 
'pect of my examination, if I should five, until April, 
the usual tinje for the association to meet. Lord, 



40. JEREITIAH HALlfOCK. 

thou canst open a door sooner, if thou seestit best ; 
but if not till the end of these eleven long weeks, nor 
then, tixy will be done. I think my studies delight- 
some, but I long to come forward. I. saw others in 
trouble to-day^: was at a house where one of the dear 
children was dead. Discoursed with the afflicted par- 
ents, and prayed with them— had some freedom. J 
have great reasoh to bless God for his mercies, that 
I am well and enjoy uncommon serenity of mind. 
The Tiundred and nineteenth P^alm, last part, has 
been pleasant." , . • 

" February 5. Groshen. I set apart this day for 
fasting "and prayer — ^will the Lord be wilii me. Q 
Lord, if it be thy will, may I return to my studies 
again, and wilt thou lift upon me. the light of thy 
countenance, which is better than life, 

" Some freedom in prajFer. I find so. little life, I_ 
am at times almost discouraged.- I find it more than 
I once supposed, to have good •evidence of personal 
piety. Spent the latter part of tiie afternoon with 
Christian. friends. In the eyening, attended a con- 
ference. Am top ready to complain gf my troubles — 
made this resolution : 

'. " E-esolved, in all my troubles, to be careful how 
I complain or speak of them, and to say and do that 
which may.be most for the glory of Grod, who is as 
worthy of praise in my adversity as in "my prosperity." 

Mr,. Hallock now spent about seven weeks in Gro- 
shen, reading works on theology, making religious 
visits, instructing a few youth, and attending frequent 
ineetings. His practice, at this time, was to spend 



PREPARATION FOR THE MINISTRY. 41 

every Thursday in private fasting and prayer. In tke 
course of this period, he had the happiness to witness 
the conviction and apparent conversion of four heloved 
sisters, besides the improved state of a fifth sister 
whose hope of salvation through Christ was of earlier 
date. Some of his neighbors, also, were at this time 
aroused from the deep sleep of sin, and many hack- 
sliddeJi Christians reclaimed. On the twenty-third 
of March, he left his father's house. to visit his hew 
circle of friends in Connecticut. From this journey 
he returned to Stockhridga in season to attend the 
stated meeting, in April, of the Berkshire Association, 
by which body he was hcensed to preach "the glo- 
rious gospel of the blessed God." 

Up to this date the compiler has had the assist- 
ance of Mr. HaUock in making selections from his 
original journal, and incorporating them in the nar- 
rative of his early life, which- he commeijced in 1815,' 
and closed in 1821, Here that narrative ends, and 
,we lose, the benefit of Mt. Hallock's wisdom in any 
farther extrapts from his private writings, and of his 
memory to correct or illustrate theni by unrecorded 
facts. . i^ 



42 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 



CHAPTER III. 

LABORS UNTIL HIS INSTALLAtlON AS PASTOR. 

Mr. Hallock's sermons were highly evangelical-— 
void of human philosophy-^a happy mixture of doctri- 
nal, practical, experimental truth.^ The leading char- 
acteristic, in their structure, was unaffected simplicity, 
in thought) arrangement, and expression. The style 
was very plain and concise.' His meaning a child 
could scarce misapprehend.' With the Bihle for his 
model, he rose at times to a hold and vivid imagery. 
In originahty and felicity of illustration, he had few 
equals. -Here, like his divine Master, he often avaSed 
himself of surrounding eirpumstances and "passing- 
events. He made much use of the arguments and 
language of the inspired writers. His conclusions, 
no less than his premises, were supported by Scrip- 
ture, in thc' application of which he had "uncommon 
skill. No one suspected him of preaching himself, 
rather than^ "Jesus Christ and him crucified." - ' ■ ' 

His manner was unhorrowed — 'aUke above art and ■ 
description. The man who saw him once ' in the atti- 
tude of Christ's ambassador, could never forget the 
deeply solemn countenance, the tenderness' of tone, 
the slow and distinct articulation. He had little 
action, and made no effort at animation, yet every 
word seemed warm from the heart. In his whole ap- 



CANDIDATE FOE, THE' MINISTRY. 43 

pearance, there~was the Reality without the affectation 
of sanctity. For the tasteful and fastidious hearer 
he had few ?ittractions ; yet, in the ahsence of many 
things which constitute what is usually termed elor 
quenoe, there was often a certain undefinable charm, 
that riveted every eye and ear — a power that reached 
and nioved the soul. Perhaps it was a cdmhinatipn 
of sterling thought, simple language, depth of feeling, 
and tones of nature. One of the- finest writers in our 
country, on hearing- Hi^. Hallook preach' in a time of 
unusual seriousness, declared the perfisrmance the 
hest specimen of sacred^ eloquence he had ever wit- 
nessed". In the. popular sense of the term, however, 
he could not he pronoiinccsd an eloquent preacher. 
Yet he ever seemed to come frorn his closet to the 
pulpit prepared to diffuse light and heat throughout 
the assembly. 

In prayer he was humble, appropriate, compre- 
hensive, fervent, solemn, it seemed hke the address 
of an affectionate child to a kind and beloved, yet 
revered father. No attentive hearer could avoid the 
conviction, that heaven and earth were brought near 
together. "I lave to hear .Mr. Hallock pray;" said 
one who had often enjoyed the privilege, ^ihecause he 
speaks to God- as if he was acquainted with him.''' 
To the spiritual who joined, him in devotional exer* 
cises, it was indeed a luxury. 

From these general remarks on Mr. Hallock's 
appearance in the pulpit, -we turn to his early course, 
after receiving license to preach, the gospeL He 
now- gave himself vliolly to his new and delightful 



44 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

enapldyment. . ' Fpr several weeks he was in Groshen 
and the vioinity, preaching in various "towns every 
Sabtath, often on other days, and visiting &om hpusp 
to house." Almost every week he kept some time as 
a private fast. At one of these seasons he writes, 

" This forenoon I set apart for prayer and fast- 
ing, to renew, my covenant and resolutio;QS, and to 
seek Grod's grace and presence for the morrow, if I 
may he called to speak in his name : may I keep" 
it aright. The devil -has tried what he could to hin- 
der me from- keeping fasts, and I have need of pardon 
for the sins of every moment spent in fasting and 
' prayer ; hut, hy the grace of Grod, I think this has 
been a comfortable forenoon to my soul. ■ I know not 
that I ever had sweeter meditEttion and prayer. The 
life of Cotton Mather was exceedingly Sweet j' blessed 
\e Grod that I have seen that. book. Felt willing, if 
I was not mistaken, to be used for Grod in that way 
which he may appoint for me;" may 1 always be 
submissive to Grod." 

The next'day he writes, " L think I never had 
clearer views of the exoellehcy of. Christ; may I 
ever be ravished with his beauty. Expect soon to go 
again to preach ; may I aim wholly at G-od's glory. 
Though! am but a poor dark-lantern, yet may Christ 
speak through me to his honor, and may his power 
be seen." 

Again, ^' To-day, cleared a place in the woods 
for meditation and prayer ; that I might find. Grod 
there." This retreat for private devotion was near 
the house of his father. He called it his '.' pleasant 



CANDIDATE FOR THE MINJSTRT. . 45 

grove." Similar places lie afterwards selected, ia the 
various towns where he was called to lahor ; and when 
he had closed his term of service,, he was as careful to 
take a formal farewell of these sequestered spots, as 
of the dear friends at his lodgings. But; while he had 
many hours of spiritual comfort, some of high dehght, 
on his entrance upon the good work, the following pas- 
sages from his journal show that his trials did not end 
with his permission to preach the gospel. 

" April 21, 1784. Some freedom in prayer. Why 
it is I know not, I feel myself in a thick cloud. My 
mind does not take hojd of truth. I feel the disposi- 
tion of the poor 'man who huried his talent in the 
earth, and then complained of G-od. I had calculated 
too much on comfortable times, if I might hegin to 
preach. I find I can, do nothing without God. 
may it serve to humble me. 

" May 4. Troubled and perplexed in mind last 
evening, so that I could not" sleep. Am at a loss, whence 
my trouble springs, whether from a disorder of the 
body or mind. Have,TJi some degree, enjoyed the light 
of Grod's countenance to-day; but I-haye dark times 
this evening. Think I know something what that 
means: ^"Wearisprae nights are appointed unto me.' 

'< June 11. Visited a friend, but with coldness. 
lidrd, forgive my sin, and make my heart engaged. 
' my bashfulness; when shall I be rid of it ? that I 
may be delivered from this ' thorn in the- flesh.' 

" June 21. Find I have a corrupt heart, there is 
no hope but in sovereign mercy. Feel grieved for 
poor unregenerate sinners. Alas, what will they d9 in 



46 J.EREMIAH HALLOCK. 

the jend ? Have teen disappointed in respect to some 
piOney— am in necessity for it : may I always con- 
sider the ravens and the lilies." 

In thei eourse of the first month from the date of 
his license, Mr. Hallook received an invitation'to sup- 
ply the' pulpit in West Simsbury, now Ganton, and 
another to remain at Goshen, where he had lived from 
childhood. In compliance with the former request, he 
entered the field of his future lahors the latter part of 
.June. . The feelings with which, he commenced his 
long and useful work. he has left on record. 

. ' " Jtoe 27j 1784. "West Simshury, Sahhath. As 
usual this morning in secret and family prayer. I 
feel 'si''eak;0 Lord, strengthen me, X pray thee, in 
body and mind, to the 4uties of this day. Some free* 
dojp. in meditation, particularly in thinking what #od 
haSjdpne for me both in spiritual and comnion bless- 
ings, and my poor improvement of them. Was assist- 
ed to.,speak with some freedom in the forenoon — ^more . 
dull this afternoon. Attended a conference this even- 
ing with some freedom. 

"June 28. Am sometimes -filiriost discouraged, 
and ready to return to work on a farm ; but suffer, 
me not, God, to- look* ba&k, now that I have put 
my hand to the plough. I can do nothing of myself. 
thou who tsomfortest those that are cast down, pro- 
tect and keep me,. that Satan may not sift me as wheat. 

' ' June" 30. Scarce ever enjoyed a pleasanter morn- 
ing — freedom in discourse, and in secret and family" 
prayer. that the dark clouds may all be, over- 
blown ; that I may ever ' sit under his shadow with 



CANDIDATE FOE. THE MINISTRY. 47 

great delight,' and enjoy his presence, the loss of 
which is more to be dreaded fkan death, . 

"July 1. Attended a full conference' this even- 
ing. Attempted to pray, and ,to discourse upon the 
two thieves. The dear people are indefatigahle in 
attending meetings. It is evident Grbd has been 
among them. that he would carry oii-_his work 
here till the day of Christ I 

" July 2. ' Set, apart this forenoon to renew my 
covenant with God, and my resolves; to fast, pray, 
and ask forgiveness- of sin ; to ask God to direct me 
to a subject and to matter for the Sabbath, and also 
to take away my cold heart and guide me into all 
truth. Some freedom and satisfaction, but have great 
xeason to mourn my deadness. i Yisited a friend just 
at night. Had some pleasant conversation with 
friends this evening. As .usual in secret pra|Eer, 
niorning, noon, and night." 

The last sentence of the preceding extract, or some- 
what of like import, occurs very often in the diary 
which Mr. Hallock kept at this time. It seems to 
denote a calm, pleasant state of devotional feel- 
ing, at an equal remove from that marked eleva- 
tion and depression, of spirit which he sometimes 
mentions. 

" July 3, Saturday. Prayed over my sermons 

before the Lord this afternoon. Yisited Mr. J. B . 

May he get weU, serve God here, and live with hint 
beyond the grave. By what I hear, my preaching 
last Sabbath was to general acceptance. Blessed be 
the Lord. O Lord, be with me to-morrow, Tpray 



48 :;• JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

thee. Find I have a dreadfiilly wicked, heart. May 
I enter upon holy time with a heavenly mind." 

Throughout Mr. Hallook's life, he was distinguish- 
ed for his attention to the sick. It was enough for 
him to hear of the illness of one of his dear people. 
He did not wait for a pattioular request to visit the 
sufferer. And his known jtenderness of feeling, and 
mild, affectionate manner, added to a belief in the 
value of his prayers and counsel, always made hirij 
more than welcome at houses of sorrow. In no situ- 
ation did he more resemhle Him who could he touoh- 
ed with the feeling of human infirmities, in none did 
he appear to tetter advantage, than when, bending 
with a look of mingled love and pity over the couch, 
of pain ; whether to make, in the soft tones of sympa- 
thy, some kind inquiries respectiug the state of the 
body and the soul, to. impart Christian instruction,, 
or devoutly tp intercede with the Hearer of prayer for 
the recovery of the patient, and stiU more earnestly 
for his salvation. 

In the following selections, we find frequent referr 
ences to private devotion with his clerical brethren, at 
their houses and his own ; to the same duty in some 
retired grove, as they passed from one town to. an- 
other ; to his ministerial labors out of the place of his 
residence, and to his preaching at funerals and en- 
couragement of social meetings. •" 

■ " July 9; At West Britain, in the morning, prayed • 
in secret with the Rev. Mr. Miller. Rode to West 
Simsbury with the Rev. Mr. Mills and Deacon Case j 
prayed by the way' in a silent grove. This afternoon 



CANDIDATE FOR THE MINISTllY. 49 

4* 

Mr. Mills preached two sermons. I tried to make two 
prayers, read one Psalm, and spoke a little upon the 
book of, Ruth. Agreed to return to this place again ; 
if it be thy will, Lord, that I should come, do thou 
come with me. We have had a conference this even- 
ing ; trust I had some life. Was delivered, yesterday 
and to-day, from the fear of man ; may I ever be 
humble, and esteem others better than myself; but, 
O Lord, when I am called to speak before my vener- 
able, faiiiers in the ministry, or elsewhere, >0 may the 
thought of flesh and bipod go out of mind. 

" July 10, Saturday. This morning parted with 
the Rev. Mr. Mills ; engaged to preach for him Wed- 
nesday^ next. 0,Lord Jesus, wilt thou honor the meet- 
ing with thy blessed presence, and enable a poor worm 
to speak for thee. To-morrow expect to be at West 
Britain. I view myself to lie at sovereign mercy, 
without any thing at present or in prospect to recom» 
mend me to G-od ; yet I do not cdnsider this an argu- 
ment against prayer, but a most Veighty argument 
in favor of it : hence, by the help of G-od, I would 
devote the jemairidei: of IMs day to fasting, meditation, 
and ptayer, to pray over my sermons before the Lord, 
to ask his assistance fojthe morrow, and tO; jenew 
my covenant and resolves. may it be a good day 
to my soul. 

"July 13. Prepared a short account, of the history 
of Christ from the four evangelists. that Jhe name of 
Christ may ever strike my soul into a heavenly frame. 
Preached a lecture about sunset ; had a short confer- 
ence afterwards, as usual. Had an agreeable inter- 



50 JEREMFAK HALLOCK.' , . 

view with some friends in the evening. Some -free^ 
dom. in prayer. TrouHed with remainiag corruptions. 
happy hour, when I shall 'get a complete victory 
over all sin, 

" JnLYil4. Eode to Torringford. After spending 
some tiihe in prayer and meditation, I tried to preach;, 
had uncopimon freedom. , 'Tis astonishing, that God 
should assist such pdot creatuTe% as we are to preach 
'l;is word. Feel much exhausted: OLoi^d, may I be 
weary in thy work; often, and wear out for thee ; hut 
0, may I never he weary o/ thy work. r 

"July 20. "Retired early for prayef, andlfoiiiid 
uncommon sweetness— r-it is hest to pray early. ' 

"August 1, Sabhath. Blessed be G-od, I am 
brought to see a new month; may 1 live a new life. 
Spent some time, this morning, in prayer and repeat- 
ing my sermons. Expectefl all the week that I should 
hardly be able to preach, but scarce evei* preached 
vsrith greater, freedom. Speiit part of the intefmisi 
sion in disooursej and part- of it in meditation -and 
prayer. Had p, coliference this evening. ' the - 
boundless mercy of God, that should allow and help 
a poor, worm to preach his word. may I have 
grace and strength to go on 'until death. may I 
not live idle.' ' , 

"August 2. Spent most of the day in visiting. 

This morning, Mrs. Rachel Case died. She was dbolit 

eighteen years old, and left a sorrowful consort and 

one sweet bkbe. Towards sunset, they invited rrie 

' to preach a funeral-sermon; - 

"August 3. Rose about sunrise. Retired about 



CANDIDATE FOR THE MINISTRY. . 51 

an hour, for meditation and prayer. "Was strengthened 
to study. About two o'clock began the solemn ser- 
vices, and was enabled to speak with freedom from 
1 Corinthians, 7 : 29, 30. Nearly five hundred people 
were thought to be prese^nt ; -they were solemn ; num- 
bers wept. 0, it was a grievous mourning. I addressed 
the mourners: had a sense, at the grave, how Christ 
has conquered death. Had -a conference, this even- 
ing, of the young people." 

Mr. Hallook was always in th6 practice of preach- 
ing funeral-sermons on the day of the funeral, and 
decidedly in- favor of this course", where, the congrega- 
tion is small and the population not dense. He was 
also much attached to those smaU circles for religious 
worship, the conference and prayer-meeting. For 
these he had very peculiar qualifications. To his 
discernment of this, perhaps,- in connection with his 
unfeigned humility, may be ascribed the fact, that 
in the company of his clerical brethren, he uniformly 
chose rather to take a part in these meetings than to 
preach in the house of God. Seldom, during his whole 
Christian life, did, a w.eek pass in which he did not 
attend one or more of them. Very often, in his journal, 
he makes mention of his high satisfaction in the con- 
ference on Sabbath evening, when his feelings through- 
out the day had suffered no small depression.' He 
was opposed to any departure from the usual order of 
exercises in pubUc worship, yet, in these more private 
meetings, he was withbut form in his mode of con- 
ducting the service -And to the endless variety which 
he introduced, may be ascribed in pai"t the lively in-. 



52 JEREMIAH 'HALLOCK. 

terest felt ty those who enjoyed his presence on these 
oooasions. 

"Aug. 4. Last night, a young woman in the 
neighborhood could not sleep for concern of mind. 
In the other part of the parish, the iiight before, a 
young man was in like eircumstances. may they 
be converted. Feel uncommonly well as to body and 
mind : may I be prepared, for trouble, and always 
mourn and be humble for the- pride of my heart, 
which' is so heaTen-daring, that 'tis,^a wonder I am 
out of hell one moment. Rode to Hartland — ^tried to 
preach for the Rev. Mr. Graylord-^-some freedom- 
uncommon attention — discoursed with some under 
concern for their souls. Believe the Ldrd is at work 
hereto may it go on. 

"Au&; 11. Rode with the Rev. Mr. Gillett to 
"Winsted — ^prayed together by the way — heard him 
preach. 

"Aug. 15.. Sabbath. Spent about an hour this 
morning in meditation and prayer, and in. repeating 
my sermons before the Lord. Some life in the first 
prayer, but not much in the sermon. At noon felt 
as if I could not get up to preach, but was carried 
through with usual freedom — a crowded assembly.- 
In the evening attended a conference — a poor young 
man appeared to be under great concern. what- 
shall I render to the Lord ? may I wear out in his 
service. 

"Aug." 16. Spent the day in visiting, . Found 
some under concern. Though I felt as if I could not 
preach yesterday, yet I believe the word was blessed. 



CANDIDATE FOB, THE MINISTRY. 53 

P bless the Lord. Think that if the Lord does come 
amon^ us, it cannot be on account of my preaching. 

"Aug. 19. I understand that the dear people of 
this place have given me a call to stay with them. 
That Grod who exalted Baasha out of the dust, has 
opened a great door and given me unmerited respect 
and good-will fram my fellow-mort^ils. Lord, 
make me humble and deliver me from the snare of 
pride." 

To show the entire bearing of these last expres- 
sions, it may here be stated, that during Mr. Hallock's 
short engagement at West Siinsbury, he received one 
invitation to return to G-oshen, another to preach at 
Ware, Mass., and a third to labor at IN'ew Cambridge. 
He was also at this time under engagement to the 
people of Lee, Mass., wliere he preached his first ser- 
mon, and where a- word in season resulted in the 
hopeful conversion of a feeble youth at his lodgings. , 
As the rest of the family were leaving for' church, 
Mr. HaHook, with a look and tone of deep sympathy, 
turned to the young man, and pointing, to a basket, 
said inipressively, " Joseph, if you only had an in-" 
terest in Christ, it 'would be* worth more to yoi;i than 
that basket fuH of gold." God rnade the remark an 
arrow to his. heart. The youth soon obtained hope, 
united with the church, and lived to adorn his, pro- 
fession tin his death at the age of eighty-two. 

Mr. Hallock now spent a few weeks partly in 
visiting and .preaching almost daily in places where 
revivals of religion were enjoyed, and partly in ful- 



54 JEREMIAH HALLOCB. 

filment of previous engagements to supply vacant 
pulpits. At "Ware, as at Groshen and West Sims- 
tury, the Lord was pleased to send down the Holy 
Ghost tb make his lahors ejffeetual ; and here he 
received a call to settle in the ministry. On the 
day after his arrival at Wares he writes; 

"Oct. 15, Friday. . Mor^ freedom flian common 
torday, in study and prayer. Had some discourse 
with the young people this evening. 

"Oct. 16. This afternoon I set apart for, prayer, 
that God would direct me to a suitahle portion of his 
ward for to-morrow ;. that there may he an awaken- 
ing among the people ; and that Pmay b^ enabled to 
preach in the demonstration of the Spirit ; likewise " 
to renew my. covenant and resolves. Trust I have 
had some life in prayer. 

"Oct. 17, Sabbath. Spent some time in. medita- 
tion and prayer this morning. The people were very 
attentive. that I may never forget the mercies of 
the Lord. Had a very full and. attentive conference 
this evening. Had freedom. in discourse, and- so had 
others. Some appearance of an awakening. 0, may 
it come on — 0, may it come on. , . .. 

"Nov. 7. A remarkable meetiag this evemng. 
Some suppose there were three hundred persons pres- 
ent. Was enabled to preach with, freedom to the 
. most deeply affected auditory I ever saw. Ldrd, 
appear and save us for thy great name's sake. 

"Nov. 13, Saturday. This forenoon I set apart 
for prayer and examinatiori ; to pray for divine help'to- 
morrow, and for Ware, where the Lord hath come of 



CANDIDATE FOR THE MINISTRY. 55 

late; Some freedom in praying for. this dear people. 
If I am not deceived, think I h.a,vi some evidence of 
personal religion. ■ 

"Dec. 2. Attempted to preach a lecture this 
afternoon; a full and remarkable conference.' It was 
sweet music to hear, the brethren converse freely, 
when a little while ago you could scarce get a word 
from them. 

" Dec 4. Had sevexal people to visit me, to talk 
about their souls. blessed tinies ! It greatly 
revives my heart to see those -whom I trust God' has 
made me the happy instrument in winning to hini- 
self. "^0 may they finally be presented faultless before 
the presence of his glory. 

"Dec. 7. Spent ihe day in visiting. I am weary 
of company, though they are the excellent of the 
earth, because it deprives me of retirement. 

"Feb. 1. Visited my pleasant grove, and took my 
farewell of Ware. 1 havp been there twelve Sabbaths. 
"When I came the young people were light and gay, 
but it has pleased a sovereign God to awaken them ; 
so that their frolics are turned into religious meetings, 
and to God's name be all the glory. There are about 
twelve liopeful converts. Lord, take these lambs 
into thine arms, and may we all meet in thy better 
w^orldt above. God hath given me the friendship of 
this people, and of many in adjacent towns. may 
I be humble,, and give him all the glory. But, 
Lord, what is. aU the friendship of this world with- 
out thine ? I cannot live if thou depart. Take, 
Lord, all the glory to thyself, and 0, may I be used 



66 JEREMIAH HALXOCK. 

as a happy instrument in briaging home souls to 
Jesus Christ." 

Ahout this time Mr. Hallock spent a few Sahhaths 
in his heloved Groshen, and received an invitation 
frorn that ehurch to hecome its pastor , yet, on the 
whole, declined the acceptance of it. On the first of 
March, he parted with his friends at Goshen, and set 
his face again towards "West Simsbury. He found 
tha awakening ia a decline. Many flocked around him 
to express their joy at his return. But he made 
them sad by the intimation that probably he should 
not remain with them. A temporary yet severe trial 
he now experienced, in a difficulty of utterance. 
Again and again he besought the Lord to remove it," 
sometimes in the following terms : '■^0 Lord, show 
me, I pray thee, why thou art contending with me, 
and remove my impediment." '.' 0, may this thorn 
never discourage me, but humble me, and be for the 
glory of God." " O that He^ whomade man's m'oiith, 
would, in his own tim'e^ give me a mouth and wis- 
dom to speak his word." , 

" May 6. Find myself in tiie following difficulties ; 
therefore I set apart this day to fast and pray and 
look to God for help. 

" 1. I have many changes in my naind concern- 
ing settlement in the gospel ministry; therefore I 
would pray God to guide me in the right way. 

"2. I find great remaining corruptions and sins 
ready to carry me away lilte a mighty flood ; there- 
fore I would pray God to subdue them. 

"3. I find many impediments, partioulaj-ly that 



OANDIDAIE FOE. THE MINISTRY. 57 

in my speech ; therefore I wpuld fast and pray that 
they may be removed, and that I may have faith and 
fortitude of mind never to be discouraged. 

"4. \ would examine myself as to my evidences 
of piety and of a call to the work of the ministry. 
' " 5. I would renew my covenant and resolves. 

" It is a principle with me, that we have no 
authority for any rehgious duty unless we have it 
from God's word. ' In vain do they worship me, 
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.' 
Therefore, 

, " 1. For authority to fast, I flee to Matthew 
6 : 16-18 ; Isa. 58 : 6,7 ; Dan. 10 : 2, 3 ; also to sileh 
examples as Anna, Cornelius,, etc. .' 

"2. For authority to pray, I would take sanc- 
tuary under Matt. 6 : 7-14, and 7 : 7 ; Psa. 50 : 15, 
and the like passages. Also", under all the examples 
of prayer^ and of God's hearing it; in the Bible. 

"3;^ The texts to which I resort in respect to the 
difficulty first mentioned, are these : ' I will instruct 
thee, and teach thee in the way which thou shalt go ; 
I vyill guide thee with mine eye.' Psa. 32 : 8. ' Com- 
mit thy way unto the Lord ; trust, also in him, and 
he shall bring it to pass. And ho shall bring forth 
thy righteousness as the Jight, and thy judgment as 
the noonday.' Psa., 37 : 5, 6. v' I would seek unto 
God, and unto God would I commit -my cause.^ Job 
5:8. 'If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of 
God, that giveth to all men liberally and upbraideth' 
not ; and it shall be given him.' James 1 : 5. 

" 4. In respect to the second .particular; I would 



58 ' JEREMIAH IIALLOCK. 

take sanctuary under Mieah 7:8 and 19: 'Rejoice- 
not against me, mine enemy :. when I fall, I shall 
arise ; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light 
unto me. He wiU turn again, he will have compas- 
sion upon us ; he will subdue our iniquities ; and thou 
wilt cast all their siijs into the depths of the sea.' 
' "Whom having not seen, ye love ; in whom, though 
now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy 
^nspeakable and fuH of glory.' 1 Peter, 1:8. 

" 5. In reference to the third trial, I flee to Ex. 
4 : 11, 12 : 'And the Lord said "unto hina. Who hath 
made man's mouth? or who maketh the dumb, or deaf( 
or the seeing, or th^ blind ? Have not I the Lord ? 
Now therefore go, and I will be with thy mouth, 
and teach thee what :thou shalt say.' 'Strengthen 
ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees. 
Say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, 
fear not ; behold^ your God will come with vengeance, 
even Godjwith a recompense; he wUl come and^save 
you. Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, 
and the ea,rs of the deaf shall be unstopped ; then 
shalLthe lame man leap as a hart,' and the tongue 
of the, dumb sing : for in the wilderness shaH waters 
Tbfeak out, and streams in the desert.' Isa. 35 :3-6. 
'And he. said unto me. My grace i^ sufficient for thee ; 
for my strength is made perfect in weakness. Most 
gladly, therefore, will I rather glory in my iniitmities, 
that the power of Christ rnay rest upon me.' 2 Cor. 
12 : 9. 

"6. In respect to trying myself as a Christian, I 
would compare my life with these passages : ' "We 



, CANDIDATE FOR THE MINISTRY. 59 

know that we have passed from death unto life, be- 
cause we love the. brethren: he that loveth not his 
brother, abideth in death.' 1 John, 3 : 14. ' Every 
branch in me that beareth not fruit, he taketh away ; 
and every branch that beareth frjiit, he purgeth it, 
that it^may bring .forth more fruit. Herein is my 
Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit ; so shall 
ye be my disciples.' John 15 : 2, 8. 'He that hath 
my commandments and kefepeth them, he it is that 
loveth me; and he that loveth me shall be loved of 
my Father; arid I will love him, and will manifest 
myself to him;' John 14 : 21. ' Who are kept by 
the power of G-od through faith unto salvation ready 
to be revealed in the last time. Wherein ye greatly 
rejoice, though now for a season, if need be, ye are 
in heaviness through manifold teniptations : that the 
trial of your faith, being much more precious than of 
gold that perisheth, thpugh it be tried with fire, might 
be found, unto praise and honor and glory at the 
appearing of Jesus Christ.' 1 Peter, 1 : 5-7. 

"7. In respect to my call Into the ministry, I 
would try myself by 2 Tim. 4:5:' But watch thou in 
all things, endure afflictions, do the work of an evan- 
gelist, make fiill proof of thy ministry;' ' This is a 
true saying. If a man desire the oflSce of a bishop, he 
desireth a good work. A bishop then must bd blame- 
less,' etc. ITim. 3:1-7. 'And the servant of the 
liord must not strive,' etc. 2 Tim; 2 : 24, 25. ' And 
he said. Certainly I will be with thee: and this shall 
be a token unto thee that I have sent thee: when 
thou hast brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye 



.60 JEREMIAH HALLOCK, 

shall serve God upon this mountain; Ani they shall 
hearken to thy voice.' Ex. 3 : 12, IS,*- 
*; '"If these things accompany irie, then I trust- 1 
have good evidence tha;t I am sent to preach the 



" 8. As to the propriety of renewing my (Covenant 
and resolves, I think I have sufficient authority for 
so doing in the example of the Israelites, in the times 
of Josiah and Nehemiah. Also, we are taught always 
to be mindful of Grod's covenant. 1 Chrcfn. 16 : 15. . 

"Have had some satisfaction this day- in pror 
ceeding according to the method here proposed — ^the 
latter part of the day have spent chiefly^in prayer. 
Now I Would desire again to give myself away to 
G-od ; and 1 resdve by the help of the Lord to spend 
the first "Wednesday in each month, for one yea^, as 
a day of fasting and prayer, if I should live.. If at 
any time circumstances are so that I cannot attend 
to it on Wednesday, then to takeLthe first convenie^ 
day afterwards. Lord, if t may live to see these, 
dayfe, may they he profitable to my poor sbul," ;.* 
. • The next two passages "show tfcat he did not 
restrict his seasons of special devotion and hurailiaiw 
tion to this last arrangement.' , 

"May 19, Thursday. The remainder of the week ' 
I would devote to prayer and preparation for the Sab-, 
bath. 0,- may I always eat my sermons before I 
preach them, 

"May 21. that fasting and prayer may be as 
natural to me as water to the thirsty, and may Gfbd's 
service be sweeter tHan the honeycomb." 



CANDIDATE FOR. I'HK MINISTRY. 61 

After unugaal embarrassment in the house of (3-od, 
he writes, " Spent^most of the intermission in retire- 
ment : felt that life in secret is comfortable and a 
great mercy, and more safe for me than life in plihlio ; 
btit that J life in 'public might be more serviceable to 
the church ; therefore had a desire for it in the after- 
noon, if it was (jod's will. Uncomm'on freedom in 
the afternoon, apd good attention frorh- a large congre- 
gation. , may I give Grod all the praise." 
.;. "May 31, Yesterday received a number of letters 
from my' friends at G-oshen ;- to-day read thefn in pri- 
vate and prayed for each of the writers." , 
; On receiving a request to settle at West Simsbury 
in the Christian ministry, Mr. HaUock proposed to 
give his answer by the 12th of May. - This time had 
now passed, yet his mind on that momentous subject 
remained in a" state of indecision and even distressing 
perplexity. The thought of relinquishing his= favorite 
employment,, itinerant preaching, was painful in the 
extreme. This apart, the line of his duty was not 
perfectly plain. But the state ef his mind will better 
appear from his own pen. 

" June 23. Rose early this morning, and joined 
with Rev. Mr. Gillett in secret piraiyer. Having re- , 
ceived a call from this dear people to settle with, them 
in the great work of the gospel ministry, and hieing at 
a los"^ what .to do, I would set apart this day for festy 
ing and prayer', to give myself up to Grod, to spread 
my case before him, and to ask wisdom of him ac- 
cording to James 1:5." Also, to pray for grace and 
ministerial gifts, 'to mourn over all my sins, and- to 



62 JEllEMIAH HALLOCK^ 

examine what evidences I have of grace. ._In giving 
myself away to God, I would first give him my heart ,• 
secondly, my time and all my natural powers ; thirdly, 
I would sacrifice by the cross all my natural pas- 
sions, that so I may hecome crucified to the world and 
aU sensual pleasures, and they to me. In asking for 
wisdom, I would ask with engagedness, and a desire 
to find the truth, with a single eye to Grod's glory, in 
Christ's name, and for his sake and interest. ~ 

" In the following respects, I think it will be the 
same whether I go or stay. , - 

"1. In respect to doing all for the glory , of God: 
this I must do in either case^I must endeavor to 
be holy as God is. 

"2. In respect to a continual watohfulnesjs against 
all indwelling sin. 

"3. In respect to a pilgrim's life. 

" 4. In respect to fasting and prayer. 

"5. In respect to death and judgment. 

"In the following" respects I think my continu- 
ance with this people will alter my ciicumstances : 

" 1. In respect to the necessary cares of life — ^new 
cares will be born. 

" 2. In respect to living a single Ufe. Though not 
absolutely necessary, yet in many respects it will be 
convenient to have a fp,mily. 

"3. In respect to tijhe for study, and opportuni- 
ties to get acquainted with the world. 

" June 26. Have been refreshed to-day in reading 
Rev. Mr. Brainerd's life. Long to be an itinerant 
preacher. A number came to see me on the subject 



cjCndidate for the ministry. 63 

of settling with iiiem ; I feel as if I must leave 
liiem. 

" JuNR 30. I read them my answer in the nega- 
tive. Some of the people- it irritated, others it filled 
with grief, and the dear Christians seemed to hang 
their harps on the wiUows ; so that the scene I heheld 
was truly affecting. that the mourners in Zion 
may be comforted. 

" JuLY^l. This morning,' spent, some tirne in my 
pleasant grove. Thought it my duty to thank the 
Lord — ^though the dear people mourned— for aU his 
mercies while I have been iu this place ; likewise to 
pray for the people and commit them to God ; also to 
pray for myself. Thought that I could almost call 
.•the trees, and stones in this grove to witness that I 
would be the Lord's, and give myself to him without 
reserve. Towards noon I parted with my dear friends; 
the kind family too in which I have lived, and from 
which I have received many favors ; and, God, may 
every mouthful of food, and every comfort I have re- 
ceived from them, be a witness for them at the great 
day. I called at a few houses as I rode along, and , 
not far from two o'clock P. M. passed the bounds of 
"West Simsbury. And. let me here set up a monu- 
inent of praise to God, while I bid this dear people a 
reluctant adieu. 

" 'Tis now two years and a few days since I first 
entered the bounds of this society, though I have not 
been here all the time. As near as I c£ln recollect, I 
have supplied the pulpit twenty-three Sabbaths. In 
lectures, and on the Sabbath, I thiijk I have been 



64 JEREMIAH HALLOCK.. 

enabled, through the great goodness of Grod, to preach 
fifty-five sermons. The first summer I was witii this 
people the awakening hegan, and last summer there 
was a revival. We have had many very friendly con- 
ferences. Aiid now, praise the Lord, my soul, and 
aU that is within me hless his holy name ; Jearn to 
trust in him, and forget not all his benefits." • 

No sooner had he left this people than the Lord 
began to make impressions on his mind in favor of 
his return. The day after his departure he wrote, 
"By turns felt as if I had done wrong in leaving West 
Simsbury — at least, feared so. Think I would gladly 
■ go back, -whenever it shall appear to be duty." Th? 
next two days he wrote, " Still had those anxious 
feelings for West Simsbury." "Poor West Simsbury 
lay fresh in my mind.". 

His health at this time was not good. " Feel 
weak, and have a pain in my breast, so that I am 
unable to study." " I think the eternal world some- 
times looks pleasant, and if my work is done, I would 
desire, through God's grace, to be willing to go. 
welcome death, if I am prepared I fear thee not." 
" Death seems to be near, yet I am resolved to preach 
and pray and discourse as long as I can, -even while 
the breath shall enter my body. that I may have 
grace thus to do." " Never enjoy myself so well as in 
retirement." 

'' JvLY 14, Torringtpn. This day set apart as my 
monthly fast. 

"1. I desire to examine myself as to my evidences 
of grace. 



CANDl-DATE FQK THE MINlSTilY. 65 

' ""2. I'would apply to Grod for -wisdom to know 
how to ooaduot in all pubHc and private, affairs ; to 
win souls to Christ ;^ to know what texts to preach 
from, and when and where to preach. And I would 
pray for the quickening influences of the Holy Spirit, 
that I may be alive in aU duties; that every morning 
may find me up early in God's work, and every even- 
ing find me tired in the same. 

"3. As I am perpetually exposed to sin, I would 
pray God for sanctifica^ion, and for strength in futjtre 
against sin and temptation. ,^, ' 

"4. I am Jxere among a poor people, who to 
appearance are on the brink of ruin by reason /of 
divisions in respect t& the, preaching of the gospel 
among theih; therefore, 1 would pray, to God for 
them. 

"5. I would examine myself by faith, by repent- 
ance, by the aims I have in acting. 

"Had some freedom early in the morning, but 
the day has been spent with Httle life — my mind in 
confusion, and my body in pain, It certainly must 
be., astonishing to angels, to see such creatures as we 
are enter upon the noble worship of, God with such, 
dull hearts ; that his love should be so great to us, 
and ours so cold to him. 

"July. 17. Spent about an hour and a half 
this morning, in retirement in a grove. Felt As 
usual tUl on the way to meeting ; then was much 
animated to see the j)eople flock tqgether — ^was too 
self-sufficient ;. but had not read the fiirst psalm before 
I was shut up, and. so dragged on heavily through 



66 JEREKIAH HALLOCK.. 

the forenoon. After a dull intermission, was scarcely 
able to perforrn in^he first prayer ; forgot my sermon, 
and all the afternoon it seemed lilse telling a dream. 
The assembly was very large ; I felt hurt for them 
after irieeting, to think they had been so poorly served. 
Thus Grod destroys the hope of man, and my heavenly 
Father frowns upon me ; but I would be dumb before 
his throne, and not' dare dispute his will. I have 
great reason to be thankful that I was not entirely 
confounded before the people ; and to mourn that I 
am no more concerned for (rod's glory. "Well might 
our Saviour cry, when his Father's presence was with- 
drawn; ' Grod lets me see something of my wicked 
heart; it will be a great wonder, if' ever I should 
get tb heaven." 

After a few weeks, the Lord inclined the people 
he had left to renew their invitation. At first his 
course Was not plain, but seeking divine guidance, he 
soon returned to West Simsbury and met a firiendly 
reception. On repassing the bounds of the congrega- 
tion, he writes^, " Many gloomy thoughts passed my 
mind ; I endeavored to pray, as I walked along, that 
Gtod would take the matter into his own hands in 
respect' to my continuance with this people.^' A 
httle onward in his journal, these sentences occur: 
"Peel many struggles in my mind respecting this 
people." "Better as to bodily health, for which I 
would bless the Lord ; feel more as if I should settle 
here, but may my heavenly King govern whoUy in 
this affaii." "Having traveUed about and been in 
awakenings, and found it as I trust my hfcj now to 



CANDIPATE FOHr THE MINISTRY. 67 

think of being deprived of this privilege, and of stay- 
ing in one place,- almost sinks me to the earth. I 
seem as much out of my element, when confined to 
one place, as a fish out of water." 

During this season of distressing perplexityv to 
himself, and of no less painful suspense on the part 
of the people, Mr. HaUook received a respectful yet 
earnest and touching address firoiji the youth of the 
congregation, in which they entreated hiiii not to 
blight their expectations, and leave the defenceless 
Iambs which Christ had given him, to be scattered 
and lost upon "the mountains.. The coimsel of the 
Lord which standeth for ever was also in favor of his 
continuance; and by degrees, not without much fast- 
ing and prayer to learn his duty, the gloota and agi- 
tation of hissoul gave place to a sweet serenity, and 
he wrote, "I believe I have been much to blame for 
perplexing my mind about the future, and partic- 
ularly in respect to. my settlement with this people. 
that I might ever be mindful of our Saviour?s'kind 
caution in the latter part of the sixth chapter of 
Matthew." " Though I have had many discourage- 
ments^ yet I think it is the mind of Christ "that I 
should settle here in the work of the ministry." 

A fear of inadequate support seems to have made 
no part of the good man's trial. Possibly it was on 
the principle which he afterwards applied, very 
happily to another. A youth, having a call to settle 
in the ministry, came to Mr. HaUoofc in a state of 
indecision; on the ground that the salary offered was 
too small. Mr. Hallock said to him with- equal 



68 JEHEMIAH ^HALLOCK. 

solemnity and kindness, "My young brother, it may 
be as much as Christ can afford to give you." In 
the i;winkluxg of an eye, doubt vanished; the youth 
was settled on the salary ; and now, after an expe- 
rience of forty years,; can affirm that he has "lacked 
nothing," and also that he has never felt one moment's 
uneasiness in view of his moderate income. 

" Sept. 4, 1785, Sabbath. Spent about an hour 
and a half this morning in retirement. A Httle 
before meeting felt gloomy, and I think never had 
saoh darkness and depression of (spirit as I experi- 
enced throughout the meeting in the forenoon. My 
trouble was not from, a fear of death, for I longed to 
die. I would be willing to bear whatever my heav- 
enly Father lays upon mie. But 0, wliat shaU I render 
to the' Lord for aU his kindness ! I think I can say 
this afterfioon., 'It is good for me that I have been 
afflicted.' I scarce ever enjoyed sweeter freedom. I 
don't "know that I ever returned to my room with so 
great cause to be thankful, with a more cheerful 
heart, with clearer ■ evidence of my good estate, a^d 
with a deeper sense of this, that I cannot preach 
without Crod's immediate help. Thus are our Sav- 
iour's words in some sense fulfilled : -^ Your sorrow 
shall be turned into joy.' welcome, welcome, 
blessed hour, when my work shall be completely 
done, and I shall enjoy Grod's presence perfectly and 
forever." 

Arrangements for Mr. Halloek^s ordination were 
now made.. The manner in. which he met the solemn 
scene, he thus describes : 



CANDIDATE FO.Il THE MINISIEt. 69 

" Oct. 24. This morning retired for prayer. Had 
some freed()m in reading Paul's epistles to Timothy. 
Desired to keep- this day in fasting and prayer that 
God would go up with us ; to renew my covenant 
with God ; to examine my evidences of grace, and 
qualifications for the great work before me. Spent the 
day in as close application as I could, especially in 
reading and praying over the first and second epistles 
to Timothy. Closed the day with the following re- 
solves in respect to the ordination : 

" 1. Resolved to meditate on answers to the ques- 
tions which I suppose wUl he asked, and to spend what 
time I can get in prayer. 

" 2. Resolved to endeavor to use my friends well, 
and to pray for them. 

" 3. Resolved, ahove all, to trust in God, and ac- 
cept of him as my only hope, and to suhmit all the 
affairs of the approaching day into his hands. 

"Oct. 25. For ever blessed be the Lord, that I 
have had more freedom of late than formerly in pray- 
er. This afternoon the council met to assist in my 
ordination. They forHied about seven o'clock this 
evening, and finished my examination about, ten 
o'clock. I have reason to fear, because my soul cries 
no more to God for his gracious presence. 

" Oct.- 26; 1785. Now the solemn day is cofiie 
when I expect to be set apart to the sacred work of 
the ministry. Spent a little while very early in pri- 
vate prayer. Prayed in the family where I lodged ; 
then joined in prayer, and also prayed with my dear 
brother. Hitchcock in private ; then repaired to the 



70 '/ JEREMIAH HALLOCK. , , 

oouacil, where I met my dear father and kind broths 
er. Betweehthe hours of eleven and one^ the sol- 
emn services were performed. The Rev. Mr. G-illett 
made ttie first prayer. The Bev., Mr. Mills preached 
from Matthew 5:9: ' Blessed are the peacemakers ; 
foi: they shall be called the children of Grod.' The 
Rev. Mr. Marsh made the consecrating prayer'. The 
charge was given by the Rev. Mr. RtfbbinSj and the 
right hand bf fellowshi,p by the Rev. Mr. Hawley. 
The concluding prayer was offered by the ReV. Mr. 
Knapp. The^minist&rs and coi^regation maixifested 
great ^solemnity. No opposition appeared.; love and 
unity seemed to reign. In the time of laying on hands 
I endeavored to think of the ordination mentioned in 
Acts 13 : 2, 3 ; but I have reason to mourn my dead? 
ness. ■-'^". . 

, " Bless the Lord, my soul, for all his merciesi,**. 
temporal and spiritual, and be .not uqgrateful to let 
his mercies die in tmthankfulness. that I may ■ 
ever make progress, and never rest thi^_ side the skies; 
but like a field* of precious Wheat, or like a fruitful 
tree hy the gentle streams th«t never withers^ may 
I' bear fruit more and more, even a hundred-fold. 
And -may I fulfil my part, and move in my proper 
place and- station, and- flourish in the Christian and 
ministerial life, and be always active, and bring out 
of the treasures of God's word things new and old ; 
that my latter end may be like burdened boughs, 
pressed; down with" yellow fruit, for Christ's' sake. 
Crlory be to the Father, Son, and Spirit. Amen and 
Amen." ' ",. - 



CANDIDAli; iOK 'THE MINISTRY. • 71 

The mental conflict now past, Mr. Hallock found 
the new relation at once giving birth to a new affec- 
tion for, the people, who were hefbre -^ery dear to his 
heart. Reluctant as he had' been to form the connec- 
tion,, it is no sooner formed, than pastoral love swells 
his soulj and prompts to a cheerfiil entrance upon his 
r arduous work. This fact the first record of his pen 
puts- in our possession. 

" OcTa 27. Had but little time this day for medi- 
tation arid prayer, yet had' satisfaction in reviewing 
the transactions of yesterday ; felt my heart knit to 
the people ; felt willing to spend and be spent for them, 
and that I had done my duty in staying with them. 
that G-od would go up with us ,' that we' might 
lean on him, and not on our own understandtag." 

In commencing his pastoral labors the Sabbath 
after ordination, he plreached in the morning from 
2 Timothy, 2 : 15 : " Study to show tiiyself approved 
unto Grod, "a workman that needethjiot to be ashamed,, 
rightly dividing the word of truth." In the afternoon, 
his sermon was founded on 1 Thessaloftians, 5 : l2, 13, : 
" An^ we beseech you, brethren, to know them which 
labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and 
admonish you; and to esteem them very highly in 
love for their work's sake. And be at peace among 
yourselves." In the former discourse, his design was 
to point out " a minister's d^ty to Grod, to himself, 
and to his people ;" in the latter, to show " the duty 
of a church and people to God, themselves, and their 
minister." " 



72 JEREMIAH HALLOCK.. 



CHAPTER IV. 

FIRST TWELVE YEARS OF HIS MINISTRY. 

Soon after his ordination, he adopted for his motto, 
"What can I do for G-od?" And-from his suhse- 
quent life, we may suppose him to>have repeated this . 
•question every morning in- his^ closet. Throughotit 
his'tainistry, he had frequent seasons of bodily indis- 
position, yet he rarely omitted, for a single week, tiie 
appointment' of religious conferences and prayer-meet- 
ings, and very seldom failed to attend them. An im- 
pression was early made on the minds of his people) 
which ceased not to deepen till the day of his. death, 
that he was ready to go the full extent of hisstreugth, 
and often beyond the limits which a wakeful solici- 
tude for personal health arid life might have deemed 
safer, to promote in different ways their own highest' 
interest and the', dear cause of his Redeemer. Some 
extracts from his diary,, for several successive days; 
may_here be introduced as a fair specimen of his ordi- 
nary parochiE^l labors. 

"Friday, Dec. 2, 1785. Ro^e early this morn- 
ing — ^had somesatisfection in study and prayer — spent 
the day in making, preparation for, the. Sabbath — had 
a comfortable time in visiting a sick person -in the 
evening. 

" Dec. 3. Spent the day in preparing for the Sab- 



FIRST TWRLVE YEARS PASTOR. > 73 

bath. As usual in ptayer, morning, noon^ and even- 
jng. Find it hatd work ta keep my own tody in 
subjection. 

" Dec. 4. Sabbath. Rose about four o'cloek. Some 
freedom in prayer, in repeating my sermons, and in 
meditation on the love of God. I would now arrange 
the duties of the day in the following ofder : 1. Prayer. 
2. Repeat my forenoon sermon ; then spend what time 
I can get before meeting in ejaculation and reading ; 
then spend as much as possible of the intermission in 
some profitable thoughts and conversation. ''3. "Watch 
over my heart after meeting, mortify my inordinate 
affectibiis, reflect on the duties of the day, and ex- 
apnine myself for a better world. 4. Labor to be 
prepared for the conference both by prayer and medi-- 
tation. And that I may not go to meeting this day 
in my ovm strength. Felt shut up in the forenoon. 
It was stormy, and but few people attended. This 
afternoon, inore freedom. After meeting, was uncom- 
monly free frora dejection — ^had some freedom in con- 
versation — caught a few minutes for meditation and 
prayer before the conference-^some freedom -in con- 
versation at the conference. Tiow sweet were the 
hymns they. sung. But 0, how do I seek myself too 
much, and deny jnyself too little. . 

" Dec. 5. As usjial, in reading Dr. Doddridge's life. 
Spent "the afternoon in visiting four families. Was 
enabled, to discourse some with each of them on spir- 
itual things. Spent this evening in study and con- 
versation ; but 0, my barrenness. 

" Dec. 6, Had little time for prayer to-day. This 

BlJloclf. 4 



74 JER15MTAH HALLOCK. 

afternoon visited a sick person, and discoursed and 
prayed with him and his family. This evening at- 
tended a conference with the young people — very 
dull — ^resolved to keep the morrow, if the Lord will, 
in fasting and prayer. 

" Dec. 7. Rose about dayhreak. Had hut Uttle 
life in pra,yer this morning. Determined to keep this 
day according to my resolve on the sixth of last May. 
Had a friendly conference this evening. 

" Dec. 8. Can hardly hold up my head because of i 
my sins. In the evening we had a friendly confer- 
ence. that I might feel more serious and. engaged 
in religion. . _ 

" Dec. 9. Had uncommon sweetness in reading 
and praying over the thirteenth chapter of John in 
private. Think God lets me see a little of my unprof- 
itableness. Had a conference this evening — ^Walked . 
home, after meeting, in the rain." 

In the spring of 1786 Mr. Hallook was married to 
Miss Mercy Humphrey, a daughter of Oliver Hum- 
phrey, Esq., of "West Simsbury, whose family connec- 
tions in the place were numerous and respectable. 
She was sister to the wife of Rev. Mr. Fowler, with 
whom Mr. HaJlock had read divinity, and the date of 
her Christian hope, as already stated, was from th^ 
revival in 1783. Before his marriage, he writes, ."0 
thou fountain of wisdom, wilt thou give me grace to 
act discreetly and wisely in this difficult matter, and 
provide me a help-meet, one of thy friends that may 
bear the burden with me ; or, if I can do thee more 
service by living a single life, ' thy will be done.' " 



FIRST TWELVE YEARS. PASTOR. ■ 75 

" Never let me marry, I pray thee, unless it fit me for 
thy service, and he for thy glory." " If it wiU not,he 
for the good of Christ's sheep and lamhs in this place, 
liiy heavenly Father, forhid it." 

On entering the famUy state he did nbt make the 
too common plea, that an increase of secular care 
must excuse some remission of devotional exercises — 
. a plea as false in principle as it is often fatal to a life 
of piety. His more correct reasoning, and his resolu- 
tion in consequence, are worthy to he set in diamonds. 
"As I have now entered a scene of new cares, sal 
would resolve to he more watchful and prayerful. 
And whereas I have had three stated times for prayer 
in twenty-four hours, I am resolved to add two more, 
until I shall think it' my duty to alter; so that' my 
stated hours of prayer, if the Lord will, shall he six 
o'clock and ten o'clock a. m. ; one o'clock, six o'clock, 
and nine o'clock p. m. O that I might he sincere in 
these duties." 

His suhsequent journal sheds no light on his actual 
practice in regard to this resolution. The compiler 
inquired of Mrs. Hallock irespecting it,,aftei' the death 
of her hushand. She said in reply, "I never knew 
his stated times for secret devotion, hut this,! can say, 
he seemed to he praying nearly all the while." A 
specimen of the manner in which his private fasts 
were ohserved, will not he void of interest. 

" June 28, 1786. The change in my ou:cumst.ances 
of life, and many cares and concerns have so filled my 
mind, that I have not attended to fasting and prayer 
as usual. Alas^ I have oniitted two of my monthly 



7G JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

fasts. I fear the greatest reason has been the want 
of a better ''heart, and my soul feels the unhappy 
elfeot. Therefore I would, by, the will of God, ^et 
apart this day. to fast and pray, and humble myself 
for all my sins. The method I propose is as follows : 

"1. To pray for divine- direction and assistance. 

?' 2. To read in my journal, especially the history 
of my former fasts.' > • 

" 3. To examine my secular dealings with my - 
'fellow-men. 

'■ "4. To read the Bible and-other good books as I 
think prdper. ' 

".5. To sing at times. . 

"6. Tolook back onmy past life, and search for 
my sins. Here I find I am guilty of liikewarmness-^ 
of carnal aifection and conversation — of inofdinate 
love to this world and the things of it — of unfaithful- 
ness in my calling — of backwardness in religious con- 
versation — of misspending time — of pleasing- myself — 
of being too superficial in reading and. study — ^.of 
making resolves and breaking them ; particularly my 
neglect of the two last fasts. For these,'^and all other, 
sins too numerous to mention, I would confess and 
humble myself before the Xord. 

"7. To pray for the forgiveness of myjiins — ^for 
sanctificatiDn, that, all the sins just mentioned and all 
my other sins may be subdued — for grace to do my 
duty, as the head both of a natural and spiritual 
family — ^for "the continuance of bodily health, and that 
Grod would Torder my secular affairs in respept to a 
house and home of my own — for my relations— for 



FiRST TWELVE YEAES PASTOU. 77 

s 

this little floek-^or the church at large^^-for all the 
ministry — for. all in authority — for all my enemies—-^ 
for all the distressed either in hody or in mind.- These, 
and all other -petitions which it is my duty to make, 
would I bring into my prayers this day. And 0, let 
me never forget to 'pray for the Holy Spirit and the 
continuance of spiritual privileges, ^I wouldalso pray 
that I may rigfttly improve all mercies and judgments, 
and may he prepared for- the Lord^s supper next 
Sabhath. , 

"8. To offer thanksgiving to G-od, for common 
mercies, as food, health, clothes. Mends ; for spiritual 
mercies, as Grod's holy wofd and Spirit, opportunities 
for prayer, meditation, reading, conversation, and all 
seasons for the service of G-od, public or private. 

" 9^ To contemplate the glories of the upper world. 

" 10. To examine whether my evidence is clear, 
as a Christian, or as a minister. As a Christian, 
have I faith ? is my path like that of the righteous ? 
have I clean hands? have I Bavid's repentance? 
As a minister, do I perform the .work of a minister ? 
does God -own me by his' Spirit in giving me success^? 

"11: To renew my covenant arid resolves. 

"I have spent more than twelve hours ih this 
work to-day — have had but little life. I am resolved. 
Providence permitting, to k^ep next Wednesday -in 
like manner. that I inight be better prepareji than . 
I have been to-day. I cannot but wonder that my 
bodUy health has held out so well," 

The solemn dedication of his dwelling-house to 
G-od may here be worthy of notice. 
. r 



78 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

" To-day I have removed into my new house. - 1 
call it Rehoboth, because the Lord hath made room 
for us. my Grod, it is a gloomy mansion without 
thee, and I would love thee more than houses or any 
thing. Lord God, I would give it up to thee," whose 
it is and every thing else, that it might be for Jesus, 
and wear out in the service of his church, a;Qd not be 
converted into food for lust, but may it be sanctified 
by the word and prayer. ' let me not feel as if it 
were my home, but only a tabernacle for a few days 
at most; hence, may I use it only in thy service, and 
in seeking that kingdom which cannot _be shaken. 
Hence, my God, I would devote it to thee, to l)e 
taken from me, or I. be taken from it, at thy pleasure. 
Of thy grace I have received it ; I would thank thee 
for it, and for stirring up my dear people to help 
buUd it. Lord, remember them for good. And 
praised be thy name, that my people do not appear 
to envy me, but to rejoice to see me have a comfort- 
able house. give me the heart of- thy servant 
David, when he came and sat before thee and said, 
' What can David say more ?' and also when he said, 
' Both riches and honor come of thee, and thou reign- 
est over all; and in thy hand is power and might; 
and in thy hand it is to make great, and to giv^ 
strength unto all ; now therefore, our God, we thank 
thee and praise thy glorious name. For. we are 
strangers before thee and sojourners, as were all our 
fathers ; our days on the earth are as a shadow, and 
there is none abiding.' Teach me, my God, to 
study what I shall .render unto thee for the favor of 



FiaST iWKLVJi YEARS PASTOR. 79 

this temporal house, and for all thy innumerable 
bfnefits." 

A family, oommeneed and proceeding on princi- 
ples so entirely Christian, could scarcely fail to be 
happy. In the course of a few years, God gave to 
his servant two sons and one daughter. , His elder 
son, Jeremiah Humphrey, whom he educated at "Will- 
iams college, became presiding judge in the Circuit 
courts of Ohio, and an esteemed officer of the church 
in Steubenville, where he died, Kov. 29, 1847, in the 
57th year of his age. His other son, William Homan, 
ever lived with his parents, or near them ; took the 
charge of business at an early age; and for many 
years, in connection with his mother, allmost entirely 
relieved his' father from secular care. The youngest 
child, a daughter by the name of Sarah, died in her 
fifteenth year, as will hereafter' be noticed. 

These children very early ascertained the first 
wish of their parents in respect to them. They saw 
daily proof of one steady and earnest desire to train 
them up for heaven. Yet Mr. Hallock was accus- 
tomed to say less to his children at set time^, by way 
of formal address, than some godly parents. It was 
the deep, interest which he himself ever seemed tp 
feel in religious things, it was his marked Christian 
deportment, his inimitably solemn and affectionate 
manner, which gave lessons on the importance of early 
piety, that; his children could not misunderstand. 
Often, too, when walking in a retired field with one 
of them, he would press the subject of personal relig- 
ion, and then invite his son to kneel with him under 



so JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

a tree, ap.d there or^ to GoA for the salvation of his 
soul. In his family, he. seldom had recourse to the 
rqd of correction, and whenever it heoame necessary, 
it was his uniform custom to pray with the offender 
hefore he dismissed him. Of his sense of the value 
of daily prayer with his children, the. following fact 
is a pleasant' evidence. A clergyman once lodged at 
his house when Mr. Hallook's sons had occasion to 
leave, home at a very early hour. As they were pre- , 
paring to depart, Mr. Hallock rose and prayed with ' 
them while the rest of the family were in bed, and 
afterwards attended family prayer at the usual time. 
To meet the expenses of his family he had hut a 
small income," yet the needy wcsre not turned away 
empty from hisdoor^ and he was liberal in coirigribu- 
tions to objects of charity. His house was always 
the resort of pious strangers, who were attfacted 
thither pariiy perhaps by his known ho^itality, but 
chiefly by the report of his rare piety. He had also" 
a large circle of- relatives and particular friends, 
whose visits were as &equent as they, were mutually 
pleasant and useful. At one time he writes, " For 
these nine days past I have been rtiostly taken up 
with company. I think we have had the privilege of 
giving more than fifty toeals within about a week. 
Was visited by the dear Rev. Mr. Hopkins of New- 
port," the late E-ev. Dr. Hopkins ; ," he seems almost 
like one of the old apostles." Again, <' I have given 
away considerable for me v^ithin a few r days, and I 
trust cheerfully ; but it is all the Xiord's — I am only 
his steward, and let him have all the praise ; and Oj 



FIRST TWELVE YEAUS PASTOE.. 81 

may I, a wretched smher, find eternal life of his 
boundless mercy in Christ, and may my poor children . 
live before him." ' 

The following statement-, by an eye-witness, is 
equally illustrative of strong faith and a generous 
heart : "In the early part of Mr. Hallook's min- 
istry; I was laboring with him in his field. It was 
a. year of uncommon scarcity. He had , just stated 
to me his . fear that he should not be able to make 
his stock of grain meet the coming harvest,, when 
a colored man, a total stranger, came into the field. 
As he approached Mr. Hallock, he took off his. hat, 
made a low bow, and said, "Massa, I have ppor 
woman and children, and no crumb bread. I try 
get *em some, but nobody pity negur. Good massa, 
can't you give little corn, so they no starve ?' Mr. 
Hallock repHed at once, with cheerfulness, ' Gro with 
me to the house.' He went to his granary and divid- 
ed the scant supply of his children's br^d with this 
stranger." 

For a short period in the autumn of .1786 his 
hjgalth seeniied to ba so affected a,s to give indications 
that his work on earth might be soon closed. At one 
time we find hirri lamenting his inability to retire 
longer to his " pleasant grove," and at another making 
the following- reflection : -^ 

" L think niy disorder threatening, but, through 
the_goodness.6f Grod, I am not terrified. For though 
I never before had such a sense of my ill-desert, yet 
I. have a sweet and all-supporting hope in Him who 



82 JEREMIAH ITALLOCK. 

came into the world to save sinners. I do' not know 
that it ever seemed more desiraUe to go and be with 
the Lord. These are my feelings, if I am not de- " 
oeiyed ; and-0 may I he thankful for such unspeak- 
ahle comforts, and know assuredly that I cannot stand 
a moment hut as -Grod holds me up. And now, 
Lord, I pray, that whether I shall die or recover, thy - 
name may he glorified. — ^that I may praise thee in life 
or in death." 

" I should he glad to live, that I may serve Uod 
and his church, and he a comfort to my dear consort, 
friends, and all mankind. As a general marches 
behind, whUe the enemy presses on the rear, till his 
army are all over the dangerous passage, so I should 
be glad to help my wife, and frierid-s, and all this 
httle flock down to the grave, and safely over Jordan's 
cold stream, and then follow them. But t desire to 
be calm and silent, and not dispute my Maker's will. 
Heaven's high decree shall stand, and through grace 
my goul shall say, Amen. "What if I die? Grod ^.nd 
the church shall live ; therefore all wiU be well. I 
trust I feel in some measure reconciled to death, by 
Good's great, grace. I find idle hours £he most irk- 
some, and am resolved to endeavor to^be in some 
active service for Grod whUe I hve." 

- A day of fasting, which he observed at this time, 
he thus describes : ^ 

" Sept. 5, 1786. To-morrow is my monthly fast, 
but as I view myself in a declining state, and as my 
temporal affairs are such that I can better attend to- 
day than to-morrow,,! would set apart this day, 1 



■ FlUSI TWELVE YEARS PASTOE.. &3 

That I might ' hear the rod,'' and who hath appointed 
it.' 2. That I might serve Grod better for all this, 
and be purged. 3. That I might .be spared a little 
longer to pray and preach. 4. That I might be ready 
for death, according to the latter part of the twenty- 
fourth chapter of Matthew, or for whatever affliction 
a holy Grod hath in store for me. 5. To take a view 
of the great mercy of Grod which is still continued 
towards me. 6. To examine myself: Do I love the 
church ? Have I repentance and- faith ? Aan I patient ? 
7. To confess my sins. 8. To pray for my dear rela- 
tives; that they may give me up to Grod; to pray for 
my people and all people, but especially for dear Zion 
and this church in particular ; for the babes, childreUj 
young people, middle-aged, and aged. . And I would 
consider that sin is the cause of the rod ; that what- 
• ever good I haye at any time, is God's gift at will ; 
th&,t trouble is sent to bring me nearer to Grod, to try 
and htiihble me ; that I have received- much good at 
the hand of. God ; that it is God only who scads 
trouble ; that God never lifts his rod but to execute 
his own most holy, wise, and good purposes. Have 
been enabled to attend, as prescribed above, yet with 
much weakness, and not all the time. I felt as if I 
could pray for any thilig above mentioned, as well as ' 
for my recoveiry ; and now I would conclude by de- 
voting myself "to God, and renewing my covenant 
and resolves."- 

On his return from a journey, October 13, he 
writes, "1 fesolved, and for the most part put it in 
practice, that no company shcjuld divert me from my 



84 _■ JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

wonted private duties, and I think I never enjoyed so 
much continued sweetness on a journey in my life." 

" Oct. 21. I receive many kindnesses from my 
jeople for which I would give thanks. 

"Dec. 14. Received, to-day and this evening, 
some unseeiijly, treatment, hut hope these persons 
had an interest in my prayers'. Therefore, Hebrews 
12:2, and~ similar passages, were pleasant to me. 
't is a pleasant thing to forgive." . 

"Jan. 1, 1787. lamnowhroughttoseeanewyear: 

that . Of late, have hot heen so formal as 

common in prayer, and have had more freedom. For 
this new year I would make the following resolves': 

" 1. To rise |)y dayhreak. 

"2. To read daily qpe day's account from my 
journal for the year past. 

"3. To he more fervent and watchful in my usual' 
times' for prayer. 

"Sweet peace in 'my soul in the evening sacrifice ; . 
and rejoiced to see Capt. — r— willing and urgent 
that his daughter shoul(f make a puhlic confession ; 
it strengthens the evidence I have long had of "the 
piety of this sweet man. 

"Jan. 2. Rose ahout the hreak of,day: Uncom- 
mon sweetness and sorhe ' fervency in sera-et and 
family prayer ; also in readingthe Bible, in singing, 
and reading: in 'my diary, according to my resolves 
yesterday. This evening had some sweetness in con- 
versation. 

"Jan. 26.: it wotild be sweet- Uvihg, if we could 
live only for <xod. Have great reason to be thankful 



FIRST "^WEljVE TEARS I'AS-TOE. 85 

that trials'and putlic commotions have not disturbed 
me of late, as formerly." 

Later in life, Mr. HaUocfc addressed a clerical 
friend who was agitated by difficulties, in this man- 
ner: "Be not alarmed, my young brother. Soon 
after my ordination I thought for a time they 
would kill me. One enemy opened a battery on 
the right, another on the left; I trembled^I looked 
to see myself fall every moment — I wondered that I- 
jemained alive ; biit I found, after a while^ it was all 
roar, roar, and not' a single bullet." 

"Feb. 21, 1787: At. noon, to-day, the dear Str. 
Andrew MiUs set out for New Haven, Vt., which caused 
many £t parting tear. My soul laments the loss of 
such a friend. He is a friend to Zion, and always 
appears attached to God's honor. In prosperity and 
in adversity he discovers gi-eat calmness of inind ; a 
friend to all, much in reading and prayer, constant at 
public worship, "beloved by the good, and revered by 
aUr. He is pleasant in his temper, and easy of access ; 
his voice sweet, his countenance manly, his life-un- 
spotted. Thy fellow, Mills, thou hast scarce left 
behind. Poor sinners, you have lost an unfeigned 
friend. Ye little children and babes, weepi Sigh, 
ye youth; and ye mourning lambs of the church, 
cry to G-od that he would make up this, as to sense, 
irreparable, loss ; for methinks I see our , Zion shake 
at the removal of such a pillar." 

Some years after this painfiil parting, Mr. Hallock 
made this choice friend a visit. He found him a 
deacon in the church and highly useful in the desti- 



86 JISREMIAH HALLOCK. 

tute region where he was located. The wisdom of 
Providence in the remova,! of such a maji from a 
place where his services were less needed, Mr. Hallock 
now clearly saw, and at once hecame iiiankful for an 
event which had drawn from his heart .the ahoye 
touching lamentation^ 

"March 20. Spent part of the day in Study, part 
in conversation, and part in. preaching a lecture fpr 

did Mrs. B . 'tis sweet to work for Christ. 

' "Aug. 6. Some sweetness in reading and medita- 
tion as I rode from "Winchester home ; , in visiting ' 
likewise. I felt as if I wanted to see^ some friends 
who, I had heard, spoke some things that looked hke 
prejudice against me, that I might thank them for 
the good which I hope it hath done me. .Thought I 
could bless Grod that my portion doth not lie here. 

"Aug. 26. It outs me down to see the inconstancy 
of my people. They seem to he. leaviiig me, who 
ought to have been my stay, like Aaron and Hur. • 
Every wind of doctrine tosseth- them about; and 
alas, what will they do in the end? These. things 
sink me "down; but hope thou^in God, O my soul. 
Have lately fixed, this for my motto, which I think is 
sweet, namely, ' God's holy will shall be my stay.' " 

At no period of his ministry did the piety and 
fidelity of Mr. Hallock save him entirely from trials 
of this painful character. He sometimes spoke of 
them with deep emotion. A pastor, whose care for his 
flock was as incessant as his We- for it was strong, 
he could not see.it diminish by the voluntary with- 
drawmeiit of individuals, without .intense grief. And 



FlUST TWELVE YE ARS .PASTOK. 87 

most -of all he was grieved and astonished at the 
slight and ' absurd reasons often assigned for with- 
drawing from a congregation. Speaking of a recent 
instance, which had cut him to the heart, he said, 
"It seems to me like this : Two neighbors, in a pas- 
sion, come to blows. One of them proves too strong 
for the other. The weaker one says, 'Well, if I can't 
have my xevenge on you, I know what I will do ; I 
will go home and whip my wife.' And so the poor 
inoffensive, woman musf suffer. Quite as unreason- 
able is it for persons to withdraw their support of 
the gospel, because some individual- in the society has 
given them offenCe." 

" Jan. 3, 1788. Made one sweet visit, and resolved, 
if the Lord wUl, to make in his strength a religious 
visit to. each family in my society within the. course 
of this year. , Felt guilty because I prayed no more 
this -evening. 

" April 17. Last week was exceedingly tried with 
an envious temper; but 0, praisedj for ever praised 
be the Lord, the snare, is broken, and I have, as I 
tirust, escaped." It seems as if I never loved those.- 
persons better with whom I felt uneasy. 

" Sept. 26. On the tenth of this month Yale Col- 
lege conferred on me the honorary degree of Master 
of Arts. that I might see in this the kind hand 
of Providence, be made more humble thereby, give 
Grod the praise, and have my heart lifted up in his 
tyays. 

"June 1,4, 1789. To-day received a kind letter 
of rebuke from Mr. H , a Baptist minister. I 



88 . JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

think he wrote with the spirit of a Christian, although 
in some things he has mistaken me. may I receive 
his rebukes like a wise man. may the sweet day 
come, dear Lord, when thy children shall see eye ,to 
eye." 

Mr. HaUock could give as well as receive reproof 
like a Christian. To a clerical brother in a select 
circle, who was expressing rather strong impatience 
in view of the remissness of his people, he mildly 
said, "My dear brother, Is this Paul, or is it Bona- 
parte ?" To another, in a state of unhappy variance 
with his people, and whose unconcern seemed to be 
indicated by a more than common attention to his 
person, he remarked with much effect in the same fra- 
ternal circle, " Brother, at such a time as this, when 
we all ought to be humbly on oiir knees, I am soi;ry 
to see you with powdered hair." After an extensive 
revival of religion, there was a difference -of opinion, 
with some warmth of debate among the fevored min- 
isters, as to the best mode of bringing before the 
public an account of what God. had wrought in their 
several parishes. , At length Mr. HaUocE" said, with 
a tone and look of grief and deep concern, " I perceive, 
brethren, that we shall all need to pray more than 
once a day oftener than- usual, or we shall get into 
divisions, and do little honor to Him who hath done 
these marvellous things before our eyes!" 

" Sb'pt. 7. Set out on a journey to Goshen. My 
mind has been more on religion this day than com- 
mon when I set out on journeys. 

"Sept. 8. Arrived. at Nbrtliampton a little after 



FIRST TWELVE YEAES PASTOR. 89 

noon ; was kindly received I3y my friends — ^had some 
uncommon freedom for me, in ifieditatiqn, as I rode. 
About sunset arrived at my father's, where I was 
kindly received by my dear parents and kind brother 
and sisters. Spent the evening agreeably in relig- 
ious conversation with our family and some other 
friends. ' - 

" Sept. 9. Spent part of the day in conversation 
and part in study ; towards night preached at "Will- 
ia,msburgh, from Rev. 22 : 17 ; had some freedom ; 
tlie people were attentive — spoilt the evening in a 
conference. " ' ' ,"~ 

" Sept, lO. This morning visited some that were 
awakened, and some new converts. Many i& this 
Neighborhood who one year ago were dead and secure 
in their sins, now appear to-be spiritually alive, and 
to have the image of Jesus. In tbe afternoon rode 
to Chesterfield ; preached a lecture, then had a con- 
. ference : the young converts seemed to enjoy a little 
heaven below- — one was thought to be converted in 
the meeting. 

"Sept. 11. Yisited agreeably, had freedom in 
conversation, and rneditation, and felt as usual in 
preaching the lecture before the Lord's supper at 
G-osbenJ After the lecture, six were: examined to be 
received' into the churchj who, I; think, appeared 
excellently. 

'' Sept. 12. Visited all day. Was accompanied 
by dear friend" Coleman and brother Moses. 

"Sept. 13, Sabbatii. Rode to Chesterfield and 
preached for Rev. Mr. Allen. The work of Grod is 



'JO JERE-M,1AH SALLOCK. 

visible in this place. After meeting rodeto G-osken, 
and partook of the Lord's supper there with God's 
people ; then went to my father's, sang some hymns, 

attended<!onference at Mr. 's, returned to father's, 

and talked tUl past midnight. 

"Sept. 14. Visited this forenoon, then rode to 
Conway and spent the evening with deav Mr. E. 
B — — , who I think suffers some reproach for Jesus' 
sake. 

" Sept. 15. Visited Rev. Mr. Emerson in the fore- 
noon ; preached for him in the afternoon and this 
evening ; but in the eveniiig sermon was almost en- 
tirely exhausted, and felt ashamed afterwards and 
unfit for conversation. 

" Sept, 16. Rode to "Williamsburgh — visited by 
the way — ^had unexpected freedom in preaching to a 
large audience. that God might have the praise. 

" Sept. 17. Set out for home. 

"Sept. 18. Found my family and people -well, 
having been absent eleven days. It has been the 
most remarkable journey I ever took. I have been 
better in health than common' when from' home, 
and have .seen the great power and mercy of God 
displayed in awakening and converting sinners. This 
great work appears in Conway, Ashfield, Buckland, 
"Williamsburgh, Goshen,. Chesterfield, Northampton, 
Easthampton, and Westhampton. come, Lord Je- 
sus, and. spread the triumphs of the cross through 
our world." , * 

During his ministry it was Mr. Hallock's custom 
to make an annual visit, in the autumn, to his par- 



FIRST TWELVE YEAE.S PASIQE,'. 91 

ents at G'osheii, his brother at Plaiofield, and friends 
in the vicinity. Besides this, iitf seldom took a jour- 
ney, if we except short tours, sometimes for preaching 
and sometimes to meet ecclesiastical bodies. It is 
highly gratifying to find him" the same devout man 
and active minister abroad as at horne. Whatever 
relaxation he might need at any time from the severer 
duties of his station, he seems never to have put off 
his clerical garments as too grave on a journey, or in 
the houses of near relations. Once, in prospect of a 
journey, he made these resolutions : , 

" 1.; To watch over my thoughts and conversation. 

"2. To take some time for, private prayer and 
meditation morning and evening. 

"3. To be ready to preach, if requested, and to 
do and get all the good I can.", 

Again he writes, " To-morrow expect, if I hve, to 
set out with Mrs. Hallock to see our friends in Goshen 
and Plaihfield. Lord, if it be thy will that we 
should go, wUt thou be with us going and coming, 
and while there, and may our journey be for thy glory, 
oiir spiritual comfort, and the edification of thy ped- 
ple, for Christ's sake." 

On his return from *ne of these autumnal visits, 
he says in his journal, " In this Anlsit, have seen and 
heard refreshing things in respect to the work of Grod, 
in particular at Plainfield. Have preached six times, 
besides speaking at conferences. I have had a sweet 
visit. with my brother Moses; and now, O my soul-, 
give Grod all the praise, for to him, only is it due." 
In bidding his. brother's family. farewell, at the close 



92 JEREMIAH HAELOCK. 

of these truly religious visits, it was bis custom, as all 
the children gathered around him, to address them in 
an affeotiohate and solemn manner on the concerns 
of the soul. " " These scenes," remarked one who was 
no stranger to them, "■were among the most t*ider 
and impl^ssive of my life. His visits were as a fore- 
taste of heaveh, and his prayers and counsels gave us 
hope of yet receiving mercy from that God against 
whom we knew we had sinned. On one occasion 
suddenly opening a chamher-door, I saw my father 
and uncle upon their knees, and perceived their tears, 
as I helieved they were wrestling in prayer for the 
salvation of their ohil4ren." 

The first twelve years after Mr. Hallook's ordina-' 
tion were years of deep spiritual declension, in ^ thb 
region round about him. We now find him in the 
midst of this dreary period— altogether, the- darkest 
time of the same length, which he was called to wit- 
ness in the course of his rranistry. To use his own 
la^nguage, in a sermon which he, published some years 
afterwards, '" Spiritual things appeared gradually to 
decline, and the church was reduced to a very low 
and gloomy state." Yet, ia this season of peculiar - 
trial, we" find him at his post, dijtigent^y sowing his 
seed in the morning, and in the evening not with- 
holding his hand. 

" December 20, 1789., Lord's day. To-day began, 
lo preach systematically. that I mi^t go forward 
in my proposed plan, only in the strength of the Lord 
Almighty. 



FIRST TWELVE YBARS PASTOR. 93 

"April 18, 1790. Religious matters in this 
place look darker and darker. Mj soul is perplexed 
to hear that children and youth get together for vanity. 

"August 8. I think that if Grod should ask me 
as he did Solonion, what he should give me, I would 
answer, ' Lord, that I might be faithful.' 

"August 4, 1792. Resolved to fast and. pray: 
1. On account of my sins, the sins of my people, and 
of the land, 2. That I Taa,f he humbled under the 
testimonies of God's displeasure. . 3. For Zion in her 
present" melancholy state, especially in this place. ,4- 
That I -may search my own heart, and inquire "whether 
it' is no;t owing to my slothfulness, that the vineyard 
in this place is thus grown over with thorns, and 
broken down,'' 

Mr. Hallock could receive valuable hints of duty 
&om the passing events of providence. Finding one 
day that one of his sheep was missing, he made some 
search for it, and returned home ;- but the thought of 
the lost dieep stilf gave- him inquietude. At lengtli 
Tie concluded to make a more thorough search, and ' 
found that the poor animal had passed its head be-- 
tween two rails of fence, and Unable to extricate itself, 
had eaten into the earth every thing green within its 
reach. Hb at once inquired -with himself, " Is it not 
pos'sible,that some one afmy spiritual Qock is-atthis 
moment in deep distress of soul? I wiU go through 
the congregation without delay, and ascertain the 
fact." He -went, and actually found a member of 
his church almost in despair, to whom he was happy 
to impart counsel. 



94 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

"March 13, 1793. T-o-day returned from the 
monthly oohvention at brother Hawley's. Saw a 
number of my dear friends in the ministry — ^felt em- 
barra^ed in conversation and in every performance — 
thought every body exceeded me, and felt great want 
of a Christian spirit. 

" To-day I am thirty-five years old ; feel as if I 
never had done any thing, and never should, as a 
minister or Christian. may I be humbled for my 
unprofitableness, and apply my heart unto wisdoin. 
Think it has of late been some comfort to me,-thatall 
'should be done in the name of Christ. Sometimes 
have very trying temptations : thou that didst de- 
liver David's soul out of all distress, wilt thou save 
me in the hoilr of temptation." > 

Throughout his journal Mr. Hallock mourns often,' 
and very bitterly, over his imperfectly sanctified heart. 
The temperament of his mind seems -often to have 
led him to dwell more on the dark, than on the bright^ 
"er shades of his own spiritual state. Yet' we are, no 
doubt, to ascribe these lamentations in great pfirt to 
his deep knowledge of himself and of God, added to 
the high standard of spiritual attainment at which he 
aimed. Hjs sense of entire dependence on God in the 
Christian course^ he illustrates in the following terms : 

' ' The way to heaven is up stream. It is like one ' 
ascending out of Ontario into Erie and the higher 
lakes. But how will the inexperienced youth, in his 
little open boat, meet the tempest and biUows? How 
with naught but his hands and paddle, will he ascend 
the falls of Niagara ?" 



FIRST TWBLVE TEA-RS PASTOR. - 95 

Somewhat similar imagery Mr. Hallock employ- 
ed at times, in reference to the conversion of sinners. 
He was once i^ a neighboring town, where there was 
a powerful work of divine grace. In going thither, he 
ha;d travelled hy the side of a river covered with 
floating .cakes of ice. Surrounded as he was with 
proofs of the mighty power of Grod in the repentance 
of stout-hearted sinners, he said that, the scene hfefore 
him was not less wonderful than would he the sight, 
if the cakes of ice which he had just seen home down 
on /die strong current, should at once stop and float 

up stream. 

At another time, pointing to an adjacent moun- 
tain as he' stood.preaching, he made use .of this simile: 
" A- sheep is lost on that mountain. . The wild beasts 
are howling around it. Left to itself, the poor animal, 
■wrill never findits way off". But the shepherd is now 
on the mountain in search of it. Possihly he may 
find it. Just so in the case of the lost sinner. He is 
wandering in a . most forlorn condition. Our only 
hope is, that the good Shepherd may yet find him, 
and hring him into the fold."' 

These anecdotes are at once an illustration of Mr.- 
Hallock's views in respect to the sinner's entire de- 
pendence on, G-od for saving gr^ce, and an example 
of his common practice in the application of surround- 
ing circumstances to somie useful end. Yet with 
these views of man's dependence, he was careful not 
to excuse any form of sin. No one' could he farther 
from Antinomianism. If -he could not fulb/ explain 
the harmonious connection of divine agency and grace 



96 . - JE.UEMIAH HALLOCK. 

with human freedom and, accotOjtability, he firmly 
bjheve,d in its existence on the testimony of. Jdioyah. 
In a circle of aninisters, where the nature of. the sin- 
ner's inability was the topic of discussion,. he statfed 
the following fact: "A man in my parish, who 
is no sailor,, lately rnade an attempt to cross a mill-^ 
pond in a small boat. The water was high, and to 
his dismay. he found himself gradually carried down 
towards the dam. In this extremity, not knowing 
how, to mS-nage the boat, he called to some persons 
-on. the shore. .They cried out, 'Row on the other 
side.' AH agitajion, he replied, 'I can't.' They 
cried more earnestly, 'Row' on the other side.'' He 
still said, tremblingly, 'I can't.'' They added, ' TFe/^, 
then, go over the damU " - 

" May 30,. 1793. Have had some -refreshment in 
preaching, but never saw my heart more wicked — 
never Was pressed with greater temptations — many 
times, -seemed to be destitute of faith-^oould get no 
comfort from the Bible, or in prayer, and the world, 
seemed altogether va,nity. But gloiry be to, the God 
of all comfort, before I got home. last evening, felt 
revived. JFpund brother Miller at my house; we open- 
ed our minds to each other-^went out and prayed 
together ; and I trust my soul was truly refreshed. 
may we never forsake the Lord. 

"May 30. Last Tuesday had a public meeting 
on account of the drought, though the good Lord ^ent 
rain before the, day came. Key. Mr. MiUejr preached 
two sermons, and appeared to have extraordinary 
assistance. My heart, I trust, was .in' some measiire 



FIRST TWELVE TEAUS J'ASIOE. . 97 

refreshed. Spent. the evening with hrotlxer Miller, 
atid rode home wilji him on Wednesday. It was my 
lot to preach at West Britain, though I felt as if I 
could not ; fbr it has seemed at times, of late, as if I 
could not pray, and as if my poor attempts were shut 
put. Indeed, many times it has seemed- almost as 
if..' the pains of hell had got hold p-pon me ;' .hut in 
prayer and in preaching yesterday„the clouds seemed 
to disperse, and I had unusual .fifeedom and satisfac- 
tion. The audience were very attentive, and after 
meeting I enjoyed a sweet evening. This morning, 
felt as if I could spend the day and ^^e night in 
numherihg over the richest joys. My mind is calm 
and serene, and it almost seems that I should he glad 
to leave this World, and he with JesuS; May God 
haVe all tiie praise of this deliveraaice ; may this ipercy 
teach ine for ever^ in trouble and at all times, to trust, . 
and cry unto him. .And, if these lings should eyer he 
read hy any one, may he or. she he encouraged to 
pray without ceasing to G'od in trouhle, and not faint ; 
knowing that Grod wiU appe'ar for the distressed, if 
they pray to, and trust in him, 

" March 1^ 1795. To-day heard >of the death of 
my sister Abigail- Her natural temper was very 
agreeahle, and sweetened^ I trust,, with true grace. 
-Shf was the desire and crown of her husband, the 
delight of hier parents, the glory of her brothers and 
sisters ; kind to all, beloved by her. neighbors, and 
es^eeined in Zion. But her work is done. God hath 
called her away, we trust, to, himself ; and .l)lessed 
be his name,' May her bereaved consort, parents, 

H«llock-, 5 , 



98 JEREltlAH HALLOCK. . 

and all of us, find this loss made up in God ; and be 
prepared to go when our turn sHall come. 

"May 2, 1795. Last evening had agreeable con- 
versation with brother Griffin.* Spent this forenoon 
■with him in retirement and prayer, I trust profitably. 
Gonversed until about two, and then parted with him. 
may we so live as to meet -in a bett6r world. 

"June 7. Yesterday my dear father came to see 
me froiQ Goshen ; gave me a more particular account 
of my beloved sister's death, . and 'hroiight sonie of 
her private diary, which I thitik, is expressive of true 
religion. may God have all the praise^ 

"-June 5, 1796. Had rath«r more freedom, than 
common in-private duties last evening; -and was 
favored in preaching, this mdtning, heyond my -ex- 
pectation. But in a sermon to the youth this after- 
noon, have been -dreadfully unfruitful, and had 'but 
little attention. "■ Feel ashamed and confounded. 
that I might feel like a child under the parent's rod, 
and that God would have mercy on the youth. ' 

"Sept. 18, 1796. Lord's day. I am troubled 
with a dull, inconstant mind.; and a treacherous mem- 
ory, so that t find it diffioillt to compose, to' speak, 
01 pray. "Whence it ariseth, I cannot .tell; whether 
from disease of body or want of grace. But let it 
be from what it may, I have no way but, to go to the 
Lord and wait for his salvation. The meeting to- 
day has been thin and" dull ; I have had'4)ut very 
little sense of things,, either in preaching or praying. 

* The late Rev. Dr. Edward D. Griffin, then a yolillifill 
pnalor in the adjacent 'town of New Hartford, 



__ "FIRST T^ELV^ YliARS PASTOR, -99- 

Yet I must not forget the unusual comfort the Lord 
Was pleased to grant me this morning, especially in 
family religion. But my Beloved is withdrawn, ag 
to his sensible presence, and I am left to mourn. 
Still, ' though he slay me, yet will.I, trust in him.' 

" July 2, .1797. Rather more frdedom in prayer 
and preaching and at ihe Lord's table.. Through the 
tender mercies of God, I have been more comfortable 
in mind for nine or ten days. The .peace I have in 
Jesus unspeakably exceeds all the joys of this world. 
Lord, make and keep me humble, and- draw, my 
soul more and more to-thee; - ~ ' 

"Aug. 1, 1798. I have this day, by the help of 
G-od-, finished thy little former harvest, and; I would 
now bless the Lord for the harvest, and for success, 
in the ingathering of it. I would confess my sins, 
that I api so carnal, and like those who make provis- 
iCn only for the flesh. that I might have a part 
with that happy number who will one'day reap ever- 
lasting, life.", ' . 

•In this connection it may be pi-oper to introduce 
a few more of Mr. Hallock's harvest thoughts: "0 
Lord, may we begin the harvest In thy- fear, and have 
strength and grace to gatherit as thine and for thee ; 
and may it all be used in thy service— may e-very' 
swath aad every sheaf be sanctified, by the word and 
prayer; and 0, let thy spiritual mercies, fill- the earth 
also in the building of Zion." > ' 

Again, " We have a comfortable supply. L.ord, 
.the harvest is thine ; thou madest it to grow — ^the 
favorable time to gather it, the heailth, the strength, 



lOO JEREMIAH HALLOCK. - 

the skill, the feuccess, axe all of thee, who buildest 
the house and keepest the city. And now,.0' my 
God, may -yre havp grace and wisdom to use it wholly 
jbr thee, and may thy blessing, without which all is 
still in vain, rest perpetually upon us, and wilt thou 
teach us thy statutes .and. grajit us the spiritual 
harvest,, the Holy Spirit and its fruits unto eternal 
life." - ., 

In conversation with a candidate for the ministry, 
who had been attracted taliis roof by the report of 
his piety and worth, Mlr.Hallock once .remarked that 
•one year, when the Lord gave him an uncommon 
supply df fcrage, he was led to inquire' what it rrieant, 
arid iii what way he .should use the whole to the glory 
of the G-iver. He added, "Before spring the matter 
' was quite plain: For there was a grea'fc revival amrag 
my people, that- winter, and I had occasion to keep 'at 
different times more than" fifty horses- for Christ's 
miriisters. I now saw fbr what purpose -God had so . 
kjndly and providentially filled niy barn." ■ . At an- 
other time,walljing out with a Christian friend in 
the fertile fields, Jie said, "How thankful we ought , 
to-be for this ineadow. I sometimes feel- afraid, to 
enjoy the good things of Providence Jest I- should 
abuse thepi."- ' ,' ' -~ '- .- 

"Wiheri he purchased his place, there was a young 
and. thrifty orchard upon it, from v/hich the ~ planter 
himself never received much, if any fruit This or- 
chard, sittiated on the side of a hill, yielded a supply 
for "Mr. Hallock's family in seasons when fruit in tjhe 
valley failed. After sever"al years the thought occurred, 



FIRSr_TWELVE YEARS PASTOE. 101 

tiiat he was under a sort of obligation to set out an- 
other orchard for the benefit of his successor. He 
resolved at once to do it. While,.planting the trees 
with the assistance of his son, a young preacher came 
into the field who had lately received an invitation, to 
become the minister of a neighboring congregation. 
Th€ young man for a short time put his hand to the 
work) when' Mr. Hallook, turning to his son, said, 

" Homan, when I am dead, do you give Mr. M'L 

some of these apples."* 

'^ SEfT. 3, 1793. Feel that' I haye been inadver- 
tently imprudent, and am afi:aid that I have injuted 
the feelings of some. how much do ministers nee4 
to be ' wise as serpe^its and harmless as dqves.' 
Lord, wilt thpu for^ve niy, imprudence, prevent its 
mischief, and humble me, and make 'me more Watch- 
fulj.and make me wise and prudent for the sake of 
Christ and his interest in the world." At another 
time he writes, " Feel as if 1 had teen imprudent in' 
saying perhaps exasperating things^against ihe Deist. 
my Grod, I would wish to be faithful to thee, and 
always ready not only to suffer but to die for thy 



Here it may be proper to mention, that Mr. Hal- 
look, in his habitual intercourse with his people, was 
a striking pattern of genuine ministerial prudence. 
In things indifferent he was ever ready to yield to 
the views of others with much meekness aiid gentle- 

, • More than thirty -yeats after, when this young olergyrn an's 
apple crop failed, this direotioh wa/S -in a pleasing way literally 
fellfilled. ~ . - ■ 



.102 JEREMIAH HALLOOIC. . 

ness, as kuowiug that " a soft answer, turnetk away 
wrath;" hut in cases which involved the ' interest of 
Zion, or the welfare of souls, he was hold and immov- 
able, '-' come life' or cpme death.", He knew, nothing 
of that timidity which deserts its post at the approaeh 
of d'ajiger, and which too often conceals itself under 
the specious jiame of prudence. If he manifested 
more of the hirmlessness of the dove than of the ser- 
pent's wisdom ,{)r the lion's holdness, yetin neither of 
these elements of character was he deficient. It was 
the combined influence of these ' qualities, ever mod- 
ifying each other in a manner peculiarly happy, which 
saved him &lik« from. the meanness of cowardice and 
fi:om' rashileSs. 

On learning thait aiiy membei", of 'his church had. 
been guilty of an offence, his practice was to go at 
once to the delinquent', and with'great plainness and 
tenderness urge the duty, of -repentance. Often he 
was successful. In one instaricd he is said to have 
taken this course. A brother, who had been to talk 
with an offender in the church, informed Mr. HaUook 
of his ill-succesS, and asked if he should not make a 
second eiFort. " Stay," said the afTectionate pastor, 
"and let me first go and see him." He went, and 
addressed the offender, in nearly these words: "My 
dear brother, ■ I have an unusual affection for you. , I 
.can scarce tell you how much I love yoii. I have 
been thinking about you of late night and day. 
My love to you has setemed stronger,, within a short 
time, than ever before." The man burst into tears ; 
he'oould let him proceed no, further; his heart 



FIRST TWELVE YEARS PASTOK. 103 

melted ; he confessed his fault, and engaged to make 
requisite satisfaction to the church. ■ ' 

■ In an interview with a parishioner Unhappily 
poisoned with infidelity, and known to possess Paine's 
Age of Reason, Mr. Hallock became very earnest; 
and in a dfetermined soleinn tone exhorted Hm, at 
parting, to go home and Irarn that pernicious book. 
Failing of success, he called upon him. to remember, 
that his minister had been faithful to warn him not 
to keep in his house a book- -frhioh blasphemed .the 
Saviour of the world. 

On one' pcc3,siQn when he was present at a meet- 
ing of the .school society, an open infidel was appointed 
a school-visitor. MTr; Hallock knew, this infidel to be 
a man of learning and influence. He was aware 
that any interference on his part would certainly give 
great offence- to the jfiaii. and hi» fi-iends. But the 
lambs -of his own -dear flock were in peril. The cause 
of God was concerned. He -dared not be silent. He 
felt constrained to take a bold stand,,, and risk con- 
sequences ; though, as in Paul's case, no man should 
stand with Jiirri. He rose, fearless as Baniel prayed, 
and, pleaded the cause of Christ and of souls against 
infidelity, with an eloquence which delighted the . 
friends of Christ, astonished all, and procured, throi^h 
divine favor,, a reversal of ^ the improper appoints 
ment.. . ■• - ;. ' ■ 

The good man's heart was once grieved, and 
, broken by the opening of a- dancing-ischool in the 
principal village of his parish.. It had long been with 
him a favorite neighborhood for religious conferences. 



IM JEREMIAH HAli-LOCK. 

He still contiiiued his meetings there as usual. One 
evening he perceived several learners of the gay art 
in the conference-room, and remarked that, though 
painful to himself, yet he felt Constrained to give a 
i^olemn adiponitio'n. After a proper introduction he 
said distinctly, that he feared that 8,11 who attended 
the dancing-school were in the hfoad way to hell. 
In stating the matter afterwards to ~one of his aged 
d^eacons, he said,- "I didn't know but they would 
kill me for it ; ,but then I tliought, if they did, they 
could only kill the body." 

' When hisi people had erected, a house for public 
worship, there was a difference of opinion, as to the 
sittings ; -some were in favor of pews, others of slips.. . 
To settle th& question, a meeting of .the society was 
called. On thfe Sabbath preceding this meeting. Me 
Hallook, ever anxious to avert evil, related, at the 
close of service, substantially, the foUo-^ing anec- 
dotes: '" . ' ' 

• "I was last week at C , and saw a popr sin- 
ner in 'great distress for his soul. He inforqied me 
that he received his. first deep impressions under a 
particular sermon;. After conversing with him as to 
his spiritual state, I, told him I had a special reason 
for asking whether, when he heard that sermon, he 
was sitting in a slip or, in a pew'. '-0 sir,^ said he, 
' I cannot tell. My mind was so overwhelmed with 
what the preacher said, I paid no attention to other . 
objects.' • . . 

"I found another person in transports of jby . His 
tongue was loosed in the praises of God. . He spoke- 



FIRST TWELV'E YEARS Pastor. i05 

in rapture of the love of Christ. After other conver- 
sation, J made the same inquiry of him. He rephed, 
with some impatience, ' I neither know nor care 
ahout that matter.- ,It is enough for me, 1;hat 'God 
was pleased in his great mercy to Appear there for, 
ray sinking soul.' " 

The people met in a spirit of conciliation, and 
reaeheda harmonious result. 



106 - JEREMIAH HALLOCK, 



C H A F T E R ,V . . ' 

REVIVALS AT THE BEGINNING . OF THE TRESENr 
- CENTURY. 

Neak tlie cbse of the last century, comnjenced in 
New England what has been a,ppropriately termed 
the era. of- revivals. Not that revivals of religion 
were till then unknown, -for they had distiiiguiahed 
-the ministry of Whitefield and Wesley, Edwards and 
Tennant,' and may he traced hack to the memorahle 
day of Pentecost, an/i to the earlier times of Ezra 
and Josiah ; hut- that they have sirice been more 
"extensive; continuous, and powerful than before. 

At this period, so auspicious to Zion at large, very 
many churches in Connecticut awoke- from the deep 
sleep of years. The influence, of the Holy Grhost was 
now, vo a broad extent, marked witli uncommon power; 
Mr. Hallock's people were hot left, without a large 
share in the glorious work. , After a trial of his 
/aith — he having labored and looked for refreshing 
rain, and received but a few scattermg drops, until 
ready to ^ink in despondency — to his unspeakable 
joy, at the end of twelve dark, long yetfrs, the win- 
dows qf heaven were opened, not to desolate, but to 
make verdant the hills' and valleys under his pastoral 
care, aUd to mature abundant fruit. An eye-witness 
states, that when, on entering a crowded and solenm 
evening meeting, the good, mamperceived the Lord to 



NARRATIVE OF REVIVAL. 107 

have come, in very deed, to -dispel the gloom which 
had been so long thickening over- his people, he could 
not suppress the swellings of his soul, hut wept aloud. 
To this interesting point in his life and ministry 
we have now arrived, and -vire rejoice toTjeahle to 
give a distinot view of this work as it existed in the 
mind of, Mr. Hallock at the time, and was puhlished 
by him in the. Connecticut Evangelical Magazine. 

NARRATIVE , 

OF A W.OEK OF GOP IN CANTON, CONNECTICTJ-T, LN 
1798 AND 1799. 

"Gentlemen — Through the- course of twelve te- 
dious years before this rneraorahle period, the religion 
of Jesus gradually declined among us. The doctrines 
of Christ grew more and more unpopular; family 
prayer, and all the duties of the gospel were less 
regarded ; ungodliness prevailed, - and particularly, 
modern infidelity had made, and was making alarm-, 
ing progress among us. Indeed it seemed to the eye 
of sense, that the Sahhath would he lost, and "every 
appearance of religion vanish; yea, that, our Zion 
must die without a helper, and that infidels would 
laugh at -her dying- groans. But the God of Zion, who 
can do every thir^, was pleased to appear, and lift up 
the standard of the omnip'otent Spirit agaiiigt the 
enemy ; and to him be all ,the glory. 
■ " ihe first appearance of the work was sudden 
and unexpected, some particulars of which are as 
follows.': The second Sabbath in October, ,17.98, I 
exchanged with a brother in the ministry. On my 



108 JEHEMIAH, HALLOCK. 

q-eturn the next evening, I found & young person under 
deep religious impressions.^ She told me she was a 
poor, sinner going down ib hell ;-and that her impres- 
sions b^gan on the Sahbalii in the forenoon, but in- 
creased in the afternoon. In the evening her concern 
was such that she could no longer keep it secret, 
though it had been her intention iliat no one should • 
know it. The next evening, at a conference, there 
was an' unusual solemnity, and many were in tears. 
The morning following, I found two other youth with 
the one first awakened, "whose minds' were likewise 
impressed. On the evening of this jiay, a sermon 
was preached by a neighboring minister. The meet- 
ing was uncoinnjonly full, and the arrows of convic- 
tion reached some hearts. : 

"A young rnan told me he had, tbe day before, 
drawn a number 'of books, at the library meeting, on 
jMofane history, and was determined to spend the fol- 
lowing winter in-> reading them and the like books ; 
but hearing of this meeting, he came thoughtlessly 
to it, and soon found he had a greater work to do than 
to read profane histories. , He saw he was an undone 
sinner, and must beconie reconciled to God, ^r perish. 
His distress arose to, that degree, that he^^eem6d 
almost ip despair; he was at, length brought into 
Grod's niarvellous light.' 

"After this meeting, about fourteen' children and 
youth were found, whos6 minds appeared to be ini- 

* The preacher was the Rev. Timothy M. Cooley of Gran- 
ville, Mass. ' The young woman was a daughter of a man who 
had no confidence in revivals. 



NARRATIVE OF R.EVIVAX. 109 

pressed. . One -of ihem said, ' I have been over a 
precipice all my days, and never, sa-w* it untU now.' 
The next day it was affecting to see, by the rising of 
the sun, awakened youth coming to my house to know 
what they should .do to be saved. In the latter part 
oC the, day, J visited a- number of females in another 
neighborhood, where these things .'had- been hardly 
known, and found a remarkable attention. ^ The tear 
often. flowed on the first mentioning of eternal things. 
In the evening t^iere were found in the neighborhood 
where the work begau, at a house where a meeting 
had been appointed, about thirty children and youth, 
who appeared serious, and some under deep concern. 
It w£ts indeed an affecting scene, and one particular 
fact will not soon be •forgotten. . 

> . " A young woman deeply imprei^ed, said to. an- 
other in the same situation, ' Do not weep so ; w^hat 
good can it- do? Grod does not regard such selfish 
tears as you an,d I shed.' Jlpon this, the one spoken 
to took the other by the hand, and said, ' 0, you are 
trying to quiet rne, but y6u. tremble yourself ;'• which 
was truly tte pase. - . ' i 

'"On the ensuing Sabbath, the work was visible 
in the house of God; and the conference iii. the even- 
ing was fall arid- very serious. One week before, 
matters never appeared darker ; but now the marvel- 
lous goings of the victorious Lamb were seen and felt. 
.0 how little we -know what is in the secret counsels 
of Immanuel! The following Monday, when a ser-" 
mon was preached by a Iieighboriijg minister i^ almost 
the whole parish came to meeting, and the work ap- 



lie JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

p$ar6d to,be going on. And it was a day of tremUing, 
even among professors as well aa others. It often 
brought these Words' to mind, ' But who may abide 
the day of his coming ?' _ 

" Being called one evening to visit a neighbor jjn 
distress of mind, I received from her the following 
inforinatioh: 'I was sober and ,tho"Ughtfui whep a 
child, used to attend secret prayer, thought I loved 
^ood people, and finally concluded that I wias a Ohris-" 
tiaji. But hearing that the work of Grod had begun 
among us, I thought it "became tae to examine on 
what foundation I stopd ; when I found I was build- 
ing on, the sand. On Monday night ray hope perish- 
,ed.' I do not know that I fiver saw any one in bodily 
distress -manifest greater anguish. ■ But before morn- 
ing she found relief) by having, as ■she hoped, her will 
bowed and swallowed up in- the will of Grod. She 
told me the next morning, ' I thiak I can now take 
care of my family, and do all for the glory of Grod.' 

" Before the week was put, another came in an- 
guish" of spirit,' who also had been resting on a hope 
of his good estate, "but how saw himself to be" in the 
gall of bitterness. He expressed himself, after this 
sort : ' I see rpy heart sd opposed to Grod, that I could 
not be happy were I admitted to heaven ; and I should 
choose rather to be in hell than to- dwell wifh Grod.' 
Indeed this was an hour when all seemed to be sha- 
ken. But while_^some found no rest short of entirely 
' new hopes, otheis were confirmed. - 

""The next week on Wednesday, November 1, 
another serinon' was preAehed by a neighboring broth- 



NAIlfi.ATJVE OF REVIVAL. - m 

er, when there were but about half sis many present 
as the week before ; and we were greatly afraid that 
all was about to decline and die. This, was indeed a 
trying hour. No fond parent ever watched the fever 
of his child at the hour of iis crisis, when the period 
of life or death had arrived, vdth more anxious", inter- 
esjted feelings, than rmmbers of God's praying ffieiids 
watched the work of the Spirit at this critical "mo- 
rh§nt. Every symptom of its being fixed and increas- 
ing was as life frftra ihe dead, but the thoughts of 
its going off were more dreadful 1§ian th6 grave. It 
Was not-loag, however, before it appeared. that God 
had ih'very deed come to carry on his work among 
us ; and the hearts oj Zion's, friends were elated with 
fresh, hopes. Those whose minds were arrestedy were, 
for the most part, increasingly impressed ; there were 
also instances of hew awakenings. The solemnity pf 
this season cannot be communicated. It is- known 
■only by experience. 

" A brother iii the ministry," among whose people 
the same work had begun, told me that he had seen 
twenty in, a room, the most of them mortally sick arid" 
attho'point of death; but ih.a,t the scene waisnot so 
impressive, ^s to see a house filled with souls in dis- 
tress, sensible of impendipg and eternal wrath, and 
tiieir,feet sinking in thit horrible pit whence there is 
no redemption. Nature does not afford an adequate 
comparison to set forth these scenes.- They exceed 
the things of time, as the soul exceeds the body, or 
eteniity exceeds time. ' A; wounded spirit who cstix 
bear?' The appearance WES' like an exeoution-day. 



112 JEREMIAH HAL.LOCK. 

, An awfal silenqe reigned, unless when it was broken 
■ by the cry, ' "What shall I do to be saved?" But it 
was not long before, as we hope, one and another 
were brought to repentance and faith, and into the 
enjoymeilt of the pardon and comfort of the gospel. 
And to behold poor sinners who were but yesterday 
on the brink of destruction and wholly unreconciled 
to God, now brought to submit to hiin, and to hear 
them sing the new song, entirely . surpassed all the 
victories of the rriost famous kings and gerieralfe of our- 
world, 

" Here I would also mention, that the things which 
took hold, of the mind were plain gospel truths, ■^ith 
which .the people had long beisn aequamted, and. which 
they had heard with indifference. 1 heard one' say, 
'I usisd.to think I believed there was a G-od, but I 
find I nevfer did till of late' The work was by no 
means noisy, .but rktionsil, deep, and stilL The rational 
faculties, of the soul were touched, and poor sinners 
began to see that eyery thing in the Bible is true ; 
that God is ifl earnest in his precepts and threaten- 
ings ; that they were .wholly sinful, and in the hand 
of a sovereign God. In these things, they seenied to . 
themselves and others like, those awaked out of sleep.' 
The heart, would oppose, but reason and consciepoe 
were convicted, find the mouth was shut. The first 
J that you would knpw of persons under awakenings 
was, ibat they, would be at all the religioite meetings, 
-and manifest a silent and eager -attention. What are 
called the hard thipgs, such as the doctrines of total 
deptavity, divine purposes, and the like, were popular. 



NA'RRAIIVE OF. REVIVAL. 113 

Those who were- once angry whenever these things 
Wefepyeaohed, would cease to object when thoroughly 
convicted:, and rather Smite on their hreasts; 

' " There was a man in the place fifty years of age, 
who had ^neglected public worship, and had always 
been opposed, to the things of the gospel, and who for, 
some time was at all the meetings. On a certain 
wening, the first part of January, I ma,de him a visit 
with a view to converse with him on the; state of his 
mind; when- he gave me, for substance, the following 
account: '. _, , 

'"My fnind began to-be impressed as far back as 
September, ^ut I kept it to myself. • Several things 
seemed to conspire to- increase my attention, . Some- 
time in the faU, I> thought in my sleep that my daugh- 
ter,, who is dead, came into. the room.' I knew that' 
she was dead, and said to her, what have you come 
for ? She replied, ' Father, I am- come to tell you hot 
to be dajmoed.' Though this was but a dream, it 
t-ended tp, increase my. concern. A little after this, 
thes^ particular words, 'Prepare to meet thy Grod, 
Israel,' 'Sounded daily in my ears. Bilt last night 
my inind wias soampressed that I could not sleep. I 
arose about midnight, and ca,lled .up my family. "V^e 
prayedi After wh^ch I returned to my bed again, but 
was equally distressed as before. . . When the day ap- 
proached I arose, and taking ijiy garments to put on, 
it appeared to me that .they were Grod's, and I trem- 
bled, to think how I had used God's property. AH, 
that I turned my eyes on looked like God's things. 
"W^hen I opened the door and beheld the world and 



114 JEREMIAH HALLjOCK. 

the rising morning, tjxe appearance was the' same. 
And the view of -the' terrible majesty of that God,- 
whose were the heavens "and the earth and' all things. - 
so overwhelmed my mind that it took away my bodily 
strength. I turned about and fell on my knees, for I 
had not strength. to stand. I thought of poor infifiels, 
that though they made ligh% of these things, yet, if 
the strongest of them were to see the dreadful majesty 
of G"od which was now discovered to my mind, t£.ey 
would not bei able to stand. After. I. returned into, 
the house, I directly had a view of the preciousnes's 
of Jesus. And I could pour out my soul for Christ's 
dear ministers. Then my mind turned on $he cause 
of Zion, I longed to have it. built up, and the present 
work goon. I tliought of the~poor, heathen, and saidj 

that the angel with the everlasting gospel raight fly 
tiirough the earth. I could love rny enemies, and 
pray, for their .conversion ; and confess to every one 
whom I had injured.' 

"This is for .substance whsCt he told me.at. tpy 
entering the house,- without being aSked a question. 
-After a shojH; pause he added, ' I wish you -would pray 
for me, that I may be converted, if Grod can convert 
me consistently with his pleasure and glory ; if not, 

1 do jiot desire it. I wish also you would pray for 
my poor children, that Grod would convert them ; not 
that they' are any better', or their souls worth any more 
than my neighbors'.' The daylight' was now gone, and 
we went to a;meetirig. The 102d Psalm was sung : 

' Let Zioil and her sons rejoice,' etc. ' 
"After singing, he expressed himself nearly in these 



NA-fiRAIIVE OF REVIVAL.. 116 

■words, ' what sweet singing ! I never heard sueh 
singing before. This is the first happy meeting I 
ever sa%^. I never knew what love,w-as "bfefoie. I 
psedtp think I had love, but I find I never had.' This 
was Friday evening. The iollo^ving Sabbath the 
Lord's supper was admiaistered. "He tarried as a 
spectator, and appeajred to be filled with comfort and 
joy. In the intermission he observed, ' This is the first 
sermon I ever heard.* And he remarked, how glori- 
ously it looked to seie Zion sitting at the table of Je- 
sus, and praying unto and praising her King. M he 
spoke much of his pre'ciojis Jesus, I inquired, ' Why 
do you thus adinire him ?' He answered, 'Because 
he loved his Father's law.' The question was then 
put, '.Do you think that Jesus is a friend to the divine 
law and government?': .His answer w^as, 'Yes, I be- 
lieve that Jesus has such regatd for the la,w, that rather 
than see it made void, he would send teii worlds to 
hell.'-- The question. then was, 'Do you loye him for 
this ?' - He rephed, ' I doJ' But. all this while, he did 
not speak 'of himself as though, he tJiought he was 
converted.' . ^■ 

'.'The work was now evidently on the inereasel. 
"We had lectures' eVe?y week, mostly preached by 
neighboring ministers. 'And here I would mention,' 
that the awakenings in other places, the proclamation 
fi?om the state Greneid,! Assembly respecting the Sab- 
bath and the regulations in schools, all seemed to be 
attended with good efiects. C/pnferences were setup' 
in every part of the parish. AH religious meetings 
became fiill and solemn;. aiid every week, and some- 



U6 jtlREMIAH HALLOCK. 

times every day, would bring the animating news of 
some one hopefully converted. Indeed, it seemed as 
if it would be impossible for any thing to stand before 
the power of God, and that every one must bow. 
However, dreadful experience proves that natural men 
are indeed, morally dead. They are harder than 
rocks, deafer than adders, and more stubborn than 
the sturdiest oaks. That which will break down th$ 
rooksj and tear up the obstinate oats, will have no 
effect on the carnal mind. As means -did not begin, 
this work of theniselyes, so neither did they support, 
or carry it on. But as this was the work of the om- 
nipotent Spiritj so the effects produced proclaimed its 
sovereign, divine Author. One was taken here, and 
.another there ; and often those^ vFhom we should the 
least expect. I have seen some whowere at this time 
under the most awakening judgments, as thought- 
less as ever; and others in fall health and prosperity, 
pfjujked in the heart. ) 

" A neighbor, in the course of the winter, had a dan- 
gerous epidemical disease — ^which was now, in some 
instances, very mortal among us— come suddenly into 
his family ia a threatening manner. Yet neither tiiis 
terrible sidiness, nor the awakening of others, could 
arouse his attention. But after the family were all 
recovered, this neighbor,- a,s he told me, arose one 
morning as secure as ever ; but on going to his barn 
as usual, the thought struck, his mind that he could 
not do the least thing' without G-od. He had lived a, 
careless, vain Hfe, and made light ,of the awakening. 
He told me he thought it' was too' sUlya thing for 



NA:RRitTIVE OF REVIVAL. 117 

rational creatures to attend to. , He used to say, if a 
man latored hard, he ought to live well. Hence he 
felt no ohligation, nor saw any cause even for asking 
a hlessiog, or returning thanks. But now, when the 
thought struck his niiind that he had no independent 
- power to do the least thing without &od, it pricked 
him to the heart. This infinite G-od appeared the" 
great and first cause of every thing, and all centered 
iii Hini.> He was at first determined to suppress and 
cqnoeal his coriVictions, hut soon found it impossihie. 
And aftM: ahout two weeks, he was hopefiilly brought 
savingly to' svibmit to G-odo . ' ,-• • ' 

"Another person told me thus : _' I was returning, 
op such an evening, from a conference, where I had 
seen numbers under concern, ajid heard others speak 
of the love of God, atid of their hope in Christ. But 
nothing took, hold of my mind until, as I was- on- my 
way home, these ' Words sounded in my ears : ' Is it 
noting to you, all ye that pass" by ?* ' These words 
were fixed in hismirid, and he appheid fhem thus: 'Is 
it -nothing to"ine, ihat my nei^hbors^'and those of my 
age, are troubled about their sins, and some hopefully 
converted to G-od ? Have I not sins to- be troubled 
about, as well asthey ? And-do not I also need con- 
vei'sioh?' I saw this person about a fortnight after 
"his mind was thus taken hold, of, and his convictions 
were much increased ; when he obser-v^d thus : 'I find 
that all I do is selfish. If T pray or read, itis all 
selfish. And I feel myself like one hung upon tenterr 
hooks : his situation is very distressing-, but the more 
he struggles, the deeper the painful hooks penetrate.' 



118 JEREMIAH HALLOXIK.. 

This was on Saturday, and it was indeed a serious, 
iarylng hour. But the next' day this man hof)es that 
herec^ved'a new heart from the ascended Saviour. 
I have heard him say, that a new heart, or deliver- 
ance from sin, appeared, he thought, more, precious 
than deliverance from hell. /. ; ,- 

■- "I, have ohserved that this spiritual shower was 
sovereign in- its operation. There was a man, between 
forty and fifty, living in a remote part of the parish, 
who was a Gallib as to religion, and entirely abgorhed 
in- the things of- the world. He h^d attended no con- 
ferences, and was seldom at meetings on the SahhaHi. 
But one evening having gone io hed as thoughtless as 
ever, he awoke aBout midnight, when these wprds- 
came forcibly to his. mind: '0 that they were wise, 
that they understood this, that they would consider 
their latter end.' Here was the beginning ^of his 
conviction,- which lasted three or four, weeks. Ihave 
heard him say, that he found himself naked, a sinner, 
and without excuse. - And before he found Jesus, he 
was brought .to see that -God was just, if he sent hini 
toheU. ' 

" I said in the beginning of this letter, 4;hat before 
the awakening, rnpdern Infidelity had made, and was 
making alarming progress among us. Some whohad 
been infidels for years, are among the hopeful converts, 
and are laboring to build up the faith they once sought 
to desb-oy. But I leave further particulars for an- 
other opportunity. . -^ : 

' "From your sincere friend, 

" JEREMlABt HALLOCK. 

"West SiiHSBUBT, July 16, 1800.'' ' ;- ' 



NARRATI'VE OF RETI'^AL.. 119 

• ■ THE NARRATIVE CONTINUED. 

" Gentlemen — I meniSphed at the close of itiy first , 
letter, that some ^ho were Infidel^ are now g,mong 
the hopeful converts. I heard one of them say, with 
tremhling lips, •' I am the wretch who have murdered 
Christ : I have talked^ a great deal against "the gospel; 
but there was always something in my breg,st which 
said it Vras true, even while I was talking against it.' 
This poor man was almost in despair. But after a 
long season of distress,' he found comfort: 

"From another who had hfeen opposing the divia- 
ity. of the Scriptures,' I received th& following letter : 

" ' Rev. Sir — I frequently hear you mention from 
your jpulpit,, that there, are numbers in this place who - 
are opposers to Christianity. Doubtless you allude to 
me for one. If this be, the case,- you have good reason 
to m&ke the allusion ; for I frankly confess, not with- 
out some sorrow, I have given great reason- for such 
suspicion. It is nearly ten years since 'I have enter- 
tained doubts respecting the truth, of revelation, not. 
without a mixture of necessary belief in it, as the only 
scheme to bring glory to God and happiness to man. 
Could- 1 convince you of my sincerity, I doubt not you 
would be glad when I tell you I renounce my doubts'; 
, and I pray God I m^y never more give the world rea- 
son to call me an oppefsef to religion. I" have often 
«ome to a partial resoljltion to make you such a con- 
fession of my eSrrors. The first time I seriously en- 
gaged with rriyself to do it, was on hearing you read 
some letters which you brought from Goshen, and 
your remarks upon ^em. I then reflected whether ; 



120 JEREMIAH HALLOOK. 

it teloHged to me to "animadvert on the ways of God's 
providence, and the . authenticity of that which in 
itself looked like truth. But afterwards doptts, and 
tusine'ss, and reluotaiuse to part with my favprite 
schemes, intervened, or you -would ha,ve'had this letter 
"before" this -time. 

" ^ The cause of my writing this letter now is not 
the fact that religion is heooming fashionable in- this 
place, or any extraordin£^ry conviction. <5h my mind 
rnore than I have had for- some time at short ipter- 
vals betwixt my doubts ; which conviction,, I think, is 
nothing more than that it. is my duty to serve God in 
his q,ppQinted ways. I ptay God he would- guard me 
against d«ubts hereafter. I beg you to be- assured of 
my esteem.', 

"Here was Hie beginning of conAdction on this 
person's, mind. It- on the whole appeared gradually 
to increase about eight: months, until it- became pow- 
erful, and he saw himself wholly depj-ayed, and in the 
hands of a sovereign God ; when, as he hopes, he was 
made to partake of the joys of the penitent prodigal. I 
have said the .work was not tioisy, but j'ation^.l ; and 
one end I have in transcribiE^ this letter is to give, a 
specimen of it. ' 

" There is another' instance among us, of one who 
says he had had no trouble for seven years past abobt 
, -ifuturity, concluding that death was the total end of 
man, as much as of the beasts. At first he made an 
open scoff and ridicule of the awakening'. But at 
length 'the arrows of truth -reached his cpnsoience. 
Sis Conviction continued and increased for some 



NARRATIVE OF KEYlrTAL.. .J21 

weeks until, a§ we trust, he became reconciled to Grod 
V through Christ. He now appears to, love the doctrines 
of the cross. Formerly he had e taste for hooks, and 
read much in novels, profane history, and the like.; 
hut now he calls them trash, and makes the Bihle his 
study, and seems to want words to set forth hpw much 
it exceeds all other hooks. 

" But to proceed to an instance or two more. I 
was at a conference in which the conversation turned, 
on "the doctrines of the divine purposes ; which sublime 
doctrines were not attended to now for disputation, 
but with fear and solemnity. . They did not appear to 
be dry; uniriteresting, dispn|able points, hut divine 
realities, calculated to convict the sinner and refresh 
the saint. - . , 

" At the close of the meeting, a Certain man asked 
a question to this import : 'Does a person who is truly 
seeking after God, feel, afraid that any, of the^^divine 
purposes will cut himoff from salvation V This ques- 
tion was answered ■ in the negative ; that tlie divine 
purposes were jic» more against prayer than an atten- 
tion to common mattei;s, and that the only reason 
-why men brought tiiem against prayer, was their havr 
ing no heart to pray. The persOn who, put the qu,es- 
tidh answered, ' I am satisfied.' But knowing hiin 
to have long been an opposer .of these things, many 
marvelled at his answer. 

" On the jiext Sabbath, this man made a public 
declaration in; writing to the .congregation, which ac- 
counts for his appearing to. be satisfied with those very 
doctrines -which used to give him so much offejioe, 

Ilallock. -6 



122 "JEREMIAH HALLOCK, 

In this .public confession he acknowledges Jus past 
infidelity, his opposition to G-od and his religion, to 
the work of the Spirit, to the ministers of the gospel, 
and all who 'profess to belong to Christ ; and that G-od 
had showed him his sinful, wretched, helpless state, 
and given him to hunger for the brfead of life, and to 
beheve, as he trusted, in Jesus.* The writing which 
he publicly exhibited is in these words : 

" ' It haying pleased the kiud Sovereign of the 
universe to open riiy eyes, in some measure, to see 
the depravity and poison of my own heart— to see my 
desperate situation whUe opposed to God, and to the - 
way of salvation by a kind Saviour — ^to see my total 
inability to rectify my own heart, .or recover myself 
from the fatal disease of sin and death — ^to s.ee, that if 
I am ever relieved from the plague of a proud and 
vitiated heart, and made to rejoice in the salvation of 
Christ, it must be wholly owing to the forfeited mer- 
cy and unmerited grape of a compassionate Redeem- 

* This •w^s an accomplished gentleman, of fine talentSrfo]> 
raerly an officer in the army, whose known hostility to religion 
and commanding presence, says an eye-'witness, almost awart-" 
ened alarm Jest he had come to interrupt the meeting. Return- 
ing from the meeting; he reached home after his ftlraily had 
retired, and immediately took his pen to write. His. wtfe fear- 
ing something injurious, said to him that he" seemed excited, 
and suggested that he should defer writing till morning. He 
' i;eplied, that perhaps he should never write better than at that 
moment, and, proceeded to draft the suhfoined letter, which he 
handed to Mr. Hallock the next morning to he read to the con- 
gregation on the ensuing day, should he think it suitable. He 
became a devoted servant of Christ, and is the Deacon Taylor 
to whom Mr. Hallook's letters of May, 1802, and May and No- 
vember, 1826, were addicsscd. 



NARRATIVE OF REVIVAL. _ ia;i 

er :— ^With these, things fastened on my mind, and to 
abide, I hopej as loi^.as I live, I would wish to mak« 
some communications to this religious assembly, 
which I hope may be kindly ieceived by them. - 

" ' For several years past niy mind and affections 
have been much alienated from the new and livihg 
way of salvation by Jesus Christ. I have fallen into 
the most uncomfortable doubts of hig divinity, have- 
doubted the authenticity of his blessed word, have 
embraced irreligious and hateful errors, have turned 
my back, on the blegsed Redeemer, while his frifendly 
hand has reached out a pardon to me, and urged me 
to take it, even while his head was filled with the 
dew, and his looks with the drops of the night. I 
have run away fronr the'blessed Grod, while his ten- 
der mercies weje all around me, and with a sweet 
voice saying Unto me^^Turn ye, turn ye, for why will 
ye die ?' I have lived iir dreadful security, and stop- 
ped my ears to the most melting invitations of the 
Saviour of the world. I have spent much time in 
reading books which were- calculated to shake my 
faith in that holy word, which, had I sincerely believ- 
ed it, would have given me great comfort in God, and 
' served in a great measure to -smooth the rugged path 
of life. I have been guilty of many errors in senti- 
ment and in .practice. I have slighteli the blessed 
religion of Jesii^ Christ, the ministers of the gospel, 
and professors of religion. /I have spoken lightly of 
the religious attention in this place, and have neg- 
lected to attend religious conferences, which by Girl's 
Holy Spirit are undoubtedly instrumental of true con- 



12-1 JER12MlAH-HAIiL0CK. 

viotipn. I have teen given to many open immorali- 
ties, and have ho£ been circumspect in my behavior, 
to set a good example before those who took . know- 
ledge of me. 

" ' And now in every instance wherein I have 
offended my heavenly Father, and mankind, I would 
freely. acknowledge my great sin and numerous trans- 
gressions, imploring the forgiveness of that almighty 
Being, against' whom I have unreasonably, and with- 
out the least provocation, so often transgressed, and 
who only can bes.tow pardon and eternal life on the 
chief of dinners. It appears one of the most distin- 
guished mercies, that when people have run into error, 
and marred themselves by sin, there is, a Being to 
whom they rnay apply Vfith broken hearts, and who 
will blot out their sin with his own .blood, and give 
them to eat- of the bread of^ life. 'He that covereth 
his sins shall not prosper, but he. that oonfesseth and 
forsaketh, them shall find mercy.' Certainly there 
can be no exchange so happy as this, to part with, a 
proud and w'icked heart for a humble- and sanctified 
one — tP resign our enmity for^love; and selfishness for 
benevolence, our filthy self-righteousness for the spot- 
less A-obes of a glorious Mediator, and our love of sin 
and death "for holiness and .eternal life. 

' " ' "With the foregoing considerations on my mind, 
I will implore a prayer-'hearing G-od to lend a listen- 
ing ear to my requests, whicKI pray G-od to help me 
make with sincerity. My first desirfe is for a rectified 
heart, to have sin slain,, and a principle of true holi- 
ness and Iqve to God implanted in its stead, and a 



NARRATIVE" OP REVIVAL. 125 

heart of constant repentance and unfeigned sorrow for 
sin. I pray Qod to grant me, all my life, a deep sense 
of my own unworthiness arid 01 desert; I pray to 
realize it as long as I live, -to lie in the very dust, at 
the feet of the great Sovereign of the^ universe; to 
extol, magnify, and glorify the ricl^es of his moral rec- 
titude, liis glorious attrihutes, his infinite perfections ; 
to entreat of him for Christ's sake to give me his bless- 
ed Spiiit, to lead and guide me into all truth, to make 
me steadfast in a life of religion, to save me from a 
life of unhelief, from backsliding, and apostasy, and' 
finally to engage me to resolve, in the strength of the 
great Redeemer, to take his yoke on me which is 
easy, and his burden which, is light, and learn of hirn 
who is meek and lowly, that I may find rest to my 
soulT 

" ' I hope that G-od, by his great mercy and rich 
grace, has given me to hunger for the bread of life, 
and -thirst for liviiig water — ^that he has given me tp 
see that Christ is the way, the truth, and the life, aiid 
that there is salvation in no other way. And now, be- 
fofe God and this solemn assembly, and I Jiope with 
a broken and sincere heart, I renounce the heart-tor- 
menting and heaven-provoking principles of Infidelity, 
. so dishonoriagto G-od, and pernicious to mankind. 

"-' But before I clbse this writing, I must drop a 
few hints to those with whorrj I have associated in 
Infidelit)^' for some -years pa,st. 

' " ' You will not view me as reflecting on you, for 
I sincerely pity you. I tremble for the fatal mistake 
you are making. Is deism a good scheme to embrace 



126 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

in^death? Is there comfort in it, in view of a happy 
immortality ? Will it make a dying hour serene and 
joyful ? Can you expect to find a smiling God out 
of Christ ? Can you he satisfied that infidel principles 
are calculated to hurnhle the proud and rehellious 
hearts of mankind, and to exalt the Most High ? WUl 
you not he persuaded to abandon a scheme which 
excludes prayer, and shuts out a,ll heavenly contem- 
plation ? Can you hring up your dear children and 
never pray to God for them, nor mention a vFor-d con- 
cerning religion and the greats God, for fear their 
minds may he prepossessed in favor of a scheme, of 
whiBhj^if they had come to riper years, they would 
discover, the fraud, and dishelieve it for themselves? 
When your offspring come before you with wishful 
countenances, asking for bread, do you never think 
about the bread of life ? that th^ir souls are famish- 
ing while their bodies are nourished' ? 
■ ,. ?' 'I will mention but one more consideration! ^.iid. 
that a dreadful and awful one. You must meet your 
beloved children before God's bar, and there answer 
for your conduct towards tiiem. Should they, in con- 
sequence of your total neglect to instruct them in 
religion, be doomed to a dreadful hell, wiU they not 
shriek out these heart-rending words with horrid em- 
phasis, ' Father, you never told me of this dreadful 
place ; you never told me of a glorious escape, a, glo- 
rious relief by Jesus Christ; and must I lie in this 
dismal, burning lake? 0, unhappy, that you was 
ever made the instrument of my existence !'" , Now, 
will you come to the loving Saviour, and bring youj 



NARRATIVE OF. RliVlVAL. 127 

whole families- with you ? There is bread enough in 
our Father's house. I pray God that he wUl, in great 
mercy, be pleased tp open your eyes, to discern won- 
drous things in that law which you havb rejected, and 
to see ineffable beauty in that Saviour whom you have 
disowned,' 

" The above communication was read, Lord's day, 
April 14, 1799, to a numerous audience. Many of 
them were much aifected^ and most of the infidels 
alluded to were present. 

" The author of the above communication says, 
that being at meeting on the Lord's day, a number 
o^f months after the revival had begun, on hearing the 
names of ten persons called, who were propounded to 
join the church, his mind was struck with the c'utti^ 
thought, that an eternal separation was about to take 
place between people of the same congregation, neigh- 
borhood, and family. And as there was room enough, 
he could see nothing to hinder him from coming to 
Christ too but his own unwillingness.^ These were 
about the first of his impressions. In the evening, he 
thought he would go to the conference ; but as he had 
never been to any of the conferences, and had even 
spoken against them, he felt many objections. Yet 
he concluded to go at all events. I have heard him 
say, the first thing that struck his raind as he entered 
the house, was the decorum and order of the meeting. 
His convictions continued and increased for a number 
of weeks, until he was brought, as he confesses, to 
see his desperate situation, while opposed to God and 



128 -JEREMIAH KALiOCK. 

the way of salvation ty a kind Saviour ; and to me 
that Christ is the way, the truth, and the life, and 
cordially, as he hopes, to accept of hinr. 

" Thus I have given some account of the work of 
Ofld among us, and mentioned some particular in- 
stances in. which the nature of the work appears. As 
to the extent of it, there were but few in the -parish 
who were not, in a measure, solemn. Almost the 
whole conversation, when people were together in in- 
termissions on the Sahhath, and on week-days, was 
on religion. Even companies on training-days were 
solemn. Balls were suppressed, and religion was the 
theme at weddings and at all times. The number 
hopefully horn into Uie kingdom of&od is between 
sixty and seventy. The number who have made a 
public profession is fifty-nine, and it is expected that 
others wiU come forward and subscribe with their 
hands unto the Lord. - 

"I would here notice,, that though many have 
been taken who were to human view the farthest 
from the kingdom of God, yet 1 think that God in the 
midst of his sovereign, holy ways, must appear, even 
in this work, to every attentive soul, to be a prayer- 
hearing God. In the middle of the place there was, 
during all the past days of inattention, a praying con- 
ference kppt up once a wbek by -a few Serious people. 
And it was here in this conference that the work be- 
gun, and here it has been the greatest. Surely he is 
a God who hears the prayers of the destitute. 

"I shall close by giving a brief account of one 
who left the world in the height of the attention 



SAREATIYE OF' REVIVAL. 129 

among us. She died May 15, 1799, in the sixteenth 
year of her age. She was a promising youth, of Uright 
natural abilities, and of a respectable religious family. 
Her mind began to be impressed the latter part of the 
year before she died. As she had been taught the 
ways of &e Lord in the family, from her childhood, 
she appeared early in the awakening to have a good 
doctrinal knowledge of the way of salvation. But 
she complained of a hard heart, and a stubborn will. 
She was at all meetings and conferences which she 
could, conveniently attend, but found no relief. In 
the latter part of February she began to he unwell, 
and was soon confined. Her disease quickly became 
very threatening ; and within a few months she was 
given over by her physician. But though her bodily 
disease was distressing, "yet it was in a great measure 
overbalanced by her spiritual troubles. Her complaint 
was chiefly of her selfish heart, which she felt to be at 
enmity with Gpd ; and the prospect of going out of 
the world with arms in her hands against the Most 
High, , was horrible beyond conception. She Would 
ofteri. in. great anguish oiry out, ' I must die, and I 
cannot die so.' ' , 

" Such a scene, especially in a day of awakening, . 
was- very affecting, and it excited the pity and pray- 
ers of many. A number of young people who had 
been under concern, and had obtained relief, went one 
evening to see her, about a fortnight before she died, 
and conversed and prayed with her. As they were 
going away at a late hour, she begged their, prayers'. 
And her request and situation were so affecting to 

(■)• 



130 JEREMIAH HALLOCK.- 

them, lihat they, as I am told, after leaving her,, re- 
tiredi and "Spent an hour of the silent midnight in 
carrying the case of their distressed friend to God. 
And we have reason to hope, that on this very night 
she received from the ascended Saviour the gift of a 
new heart. There appeared to be a great alteration 
in her mind from this time ; though she had many 
douhts and fears untU the morning hefore her death, 
when every cloud seemed to he dispelled. And I can 
say, I never saw so much triumph and victory in the 
arms of death hefore. She expired not far from twelve 
on Saturday. Her joys had not the appearance of a 
vain confidence, hut of a real submission to God, in 
view of his glory in the face of Jesus Christ, She pos- 
sessed her reason perfectly. There was a holy fpar 
mixed with her joy ; and though she said many things 
■while ^e lay dying, yet it was with as much appa- 
rent care as a considerate witness would speak in a 
case of life and d^eath. 

" I shall here mention a few of her dying words, 
which were written at the time of her death. I 
heard most of them myself, and wrote as she spoke 
them. Not -far from sunrise she. expressed herself 
thus : ' I have lived through a tedious night, and am 
brought to see the light of a glorious morning.' Not 
long after, she expressed herself in these words : ' Now 
I am going to Jesus to be disposed of just as he pleases. 
I am not afraid to be dead — I am not afraid to diej' 
The house was soon filled with the neighbors, and her 
young friends. But though death had evidently seiz- 
ed on her mortal 'body, immortal glory seemed 'to 



NAKRATIV:^ OF REVIVAL. 131 

(tloom in her soul ; and sheknew and kindly received 
all who came to see her, and spoke discreetly and suit- 
ably to them. She looked on one of! her mates and said, 
'N'owyousee my heartstrings break.' On one's asking 
her if she might not be deceived, it engaged her serious 
attention, when she replied, ' Why, I know Jesus will 
taKe me : if he does not, he wiU do me no injustice.' As 
shedrew nigh her exit, she rattled ia her throat. Being 
asked if she wished for driok, her reply was, ■ No, it is 
nothing but the pangs of death.' On seeing her strug- 
gles, one of the spectators said, it is hard to die. She 
answered, ' It is hard, you may depend.' She calmly 
looked on her dying fingers, spoke of her grave and fu- 
neral, and bade me in her name tell her young friends 
and others at her funeral, to learn to die, and that she 
bade them farewell. In speaking of these things, she 
was as rational, calm, and deliberate as a kind parent 
on going a journey would be ia giving directions to his 
family. About three minutesbefore she died, with a 
distinct and audible voice, she cUUed two young people, 
who then came in, by name, saying, ' Fare you well ; 
I'have almost got through this troublesome world.' 
She' seemed to die with a lustre in her eyes, and a glow 
in her countenance. It was a wonderful scene of 
deaih and triumph. I sat before her, and looking her 
in the face, my heart naturally cried, 
' Hosanna to the Prince of life, 

Who clothed himself in clay, 
Entered the iron gates x>f death, 

And tore the bars away.' 
I blessed that work which issued in such a. Victory 
over the king of terrors, and in such a lively hope of 



132 JEREMIAH HALLOCE. 

immortality, and could not but bless those converted 
to Christ, and congratulate ijiem in their happy pros- 
pects in death. ' 

"These things were confounding even to infidels, 
and numbers who had thought lightly of the work, 
were now ready to smite their breasts and say, truly 
it is of God. I rnight enlarge, but the time would 
fail. I have endeavored to state simple facts accord- 
ing to the best judgment of a fallible creature, with a 
mixture of joy and fear. 

" When I find Peter, an apostle, deceived in Simon 
Magus, and hear him when speaking of the faith of Sil- 
vanus. using the cautious language, ' A faithful broth- 
er as I spppose,^ it makes me tremble for fear how we 
shall hold out. "We carmot tell what will be on the 
morrow, and man is ignorant of the heart. Hence my 
desire is, that all whom I have alluded to in the above 
narration, will remember that this is not an hour of 
boasting, but of putting on the harness, and that it stiE 
remains to be proved by their fruits, whether they have 
true religion or not. On the other hand, there is-joy and 
hope in God, and I desire to be thankful to Jiim, that he 
hath allowed me to stand and behold his glorious work ; 
though I must confess that I never felt so useless since 
I entered the ministry. God hath v^rought, and to his 
name be all the glory. And may he strengthen hi^ own 
work, and more abundantly increaseit, until all that is 
shall, as it were, be absorbed in greater glory. 
" From your real friend, 

"JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

" WfiST SlMSBURY, Aug. 18. 1800," 



NAUriATIVE OF REVIVALS. 133 

The expectation of Mr.-HaHook that more would 
unite Mth God's visible people, thaii had come for- 
ward at the date of this narrative, was not disap- 
pointed. In a printed sermon which he preached at 
the dedication of Ms' new meeting-house, he says, 
" Between seventy and eighty made a puhlio profession, 
who were considered as the fruits of this awakening." 

Of the extent of his lahors in this memorable 
season, as well in' neighboring congregations as his 
own, the following extracts from his journal are fair 
specimens : 

"■•Feb. 19, 1799, Lord's day^ The assembly seri- 
ous arid attentive— the conference this evening unu- 
sually full, and a number under deep impressions. 
Had several meetings the past week : Monday, at 

the widow R 's; Tuesday evening, at Mr. A. 

C 's ; Wednesday, at the ineeting-house ,■- in the 

evening, at the schobl^house ; Thursday, at Mr. Z. 

B 's ; Friday evening, at Mr. E. B 's ; and I 

tilost the attention, is on the increase here and in. 
other places. Blessed be the Lord for ever and ever. 
■ " March 25, Mondaiy. Preached for brother Haw- 
ley, Northington, and attended a conference with him 
in the evening. The Lord is evidently here. 

" Tuesday. Preached for brother Griffin, New 
Hartford. God is doing wonders here. 

" "Wednesday. A very rainy day.' Rev. Mr. GU- 
lett and Rev. Mr. Griffin came home with me. Brother 
Gillett preached in the afternoon, brother Griffin in 
the evening. The meetings were solemn, and I trust 
profitable. 



131 XEREMIA'H HALLOCK. 

" July 1, Monday. To-day returned home from 
my tour witli bftJther Gillett. Last week on Monday, 
rode to North Canaan and preached at two o'clock, 
when we rode to South Canaan and preaohed two 
sermons at four. .Tuesday we rode to Salisbury. Here 

Mr. W , a candidate, preaohed. - Then-, brother 

Grillett preaiched concerning the taking of Jericho? 
thjsn I preached from" Acts 14 5 27, ' And when they 
were come, and had gathered the church together 
they rehearsed 'all that Grod had done with them.' 
Wednesday, rode again to South Canaan, and I 
preached at ten frbm the history .of the four Ifepers. 
The people were waiting for. us and we had a solemn 
meeting — many wept— H)ne was thought to be con- 
verted last Monday evening,, and the work appears 
to be flourishing here. B-ode in the afternoon and 
preuched at Cornwall at four o'clock. Here the peo- 
ple were also waiting for us, and we had a fuU and 
serious meeting. Rev. Mr. H^ — — was preaching 
when we arrived. Then' I preached, and Mr. G-illett 
followed with a pathetic exhortation, Talked with 
freedoiji tyi about elfeven o'clock. Surely (Jod is at 
work in this place. On Thursday we rode to Kent ; 
I preached the first sermon from Jer. 40 : 16, last . 
dause. A cloud came over me, and I had but little 
freedom in prayer or preaching ; but brother Grillett , 
preached the second sermon with freedom. Had a 
conference in the evening— was enabled to speak wiibh 
freedom., Friday, visited several families ; had help 
in conversation and prayer, and the conferences, I 
trust, were edifying. About noon set out for War- 



NARUAIJVE OF REVIVALS. 136 

len- — we stopped on tHe mountain and prayed. I 
preached the first sermon at Warren frcMn Acts 2- : 37, 
38. Had unusual assistance. Mr. G-illet preached 
from' Why stand ye here all the day idle V He spoke 
■with'fireedoiH, and numbers were in tears. Saturday 
w6 rode to Milton, Rev. Mr. Starr and Rev. Mr; Knkpp 
being with \ls. Here I preached at ten o'clock. Lord's 
day, June 30, 1 was at Warren. Feeble and trem- 
bling in the morning-^preached in the forenpon from 
Luke 12 : 56, ' Buthow is it that ye do not discern this 

' time ?' in the afternoon flrom Ezek. 33 : 11, ' Turn 
ye, turn ye, from your evil ways ; for why will ye 
die,. house of Israel V Had conversation in the 
intermission, and till ten in the evening. I qannot 
but think there- is some real thoughtfujness here. 
Monday we rode early to Goshen — ^had two nielting 
visits — ^then oa:me on. — ^parted with brother (xillett at 
Torrington— *«topped at Rev. Mr. Mills' and had a 
sweet interview — then rode home and went and 
preached at Mr. 's." 

Tours of this kind Mr. Hallock oft«n performed, 
sometimes" by the appointment of the ministerial asso- 
ciation, »more frequently by mutual agreement. Al- 
ways ready for the service of God and his generation, 
in seasons of revival the ^aaxtenl; of his labors was 
truly surprising. . At the close of one of these favored, 
times he writes, " Though attended with the catarrh 
and many infirmities, and many times ready to faint, 
yet by the mercifal Help' of the Lord I have been 

^enabled to attend the meetings — ^ot less than five or 
six in a week — and J trust my bodily health, is better 



136 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

than it was eight months ago. I helieve it is in an- 
swer to the prayers of the Lord's dear people for me, 
of which I am so unworthy. Q Lord, still hold me 
up, and he my strength ; let me not wander from thy 
path, in~ doctrine or practice." 

" 'August 14, 1799:. Yesterday met with the con- 
vention at Mr. G-illett's. Heard Rev. -Mr. Porter of 
"Washington and Rev^Mr. G-riffin* preach." 

" Dl5c. 11. Went to Camhridge with my dear 
brother GrrifEn. He preached to a solenm and atten- 
tive audience. I preached in the evening. 

"DEC.-27. Tuesday last, brethren Mills, GiUett, 
and GritSn met for the private concert at my house." 

The foUowiiig, in their order, were the texts from 
which he preached to his own people on several suc- 
cessive- sabbaths, immediately after the commence- 
ment of the revival in 1798. 

" ' Now, when they heard this, they were pricked 
in their heart, and said unto Peter and the 'rest of the 
apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Then 
Peter said unto them. Repent, and be baptized every 
one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remis- 
sion of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy 
Ghost.' Acts 2 : 37, 38. , ' If any man love not the 
Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema, Maran- 
atha.' 1 Cor. 16:22. 'And I gave her space to 
repent of her fornication; and she repented not. Be- 
hold, I will cast her into a bed, and them that com- 
mit adultery with her into great tribulation, except 
they repent of their deeds.' Rev. 2 : 21,- 22. 'Re- 
* The Rev. Drs. Ebenezer Povter and Edward D. Griffin. 



NARRATIVE- OF REVIVALS. 137 

jcioe, ye nations, with his people'; for he will 
avenge the hlood of- his servants, and will render ven- 
geance to his adversariesj and will be merciful unto 
his land, atnd to his people.' Deut. 32 : 43. ^ The 
heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately 
wicked.'- Jer. 17 : 9. ' Thon hast ascended on high, 
thou hast led captivity captive : thou hast received 
gifts for men; _yea, for the rebellious also, that the 
Lord God might dwell among them.' Esa. 68 : 18. 
' But the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory 
shall be seen upon thee.' Isaiah 40 : 2. ' And I saw 
another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the 
everlasting gospel to preach unto^ them, that dwell on 
the earth, and to every nation and kindred, and tongue 
and people, saying with a loud voice. Fear G-od, and 
give glory to him ; ihr the hour of his judgment is 
come : and worship him that made heaven and ekrth, 
and the sea, and the fountains of waters.' Rev. 
14 : 6, 7. '^If thy presence go not with me, carry us 
not up hence.' Exodus 33 : 15. ' Sir, we would see 
Jesus.' John 12:21. 'He that believeth on~ the 
Son of God, hath the witness in himself: he that be- 
lieveth not God hath made him a liar; because he 
believeth not the record that God gave of his Son-.' 
Jer. 2 : 27 ; 1 John, 5 : 10. ' Holiness becometh thy 
house^ -Lord, for ever.' Psalm 93 : 5. 'Then he, 
said, I pray thee therefore, father, that. thou wouldr 
est send him to my fatheris Jfciouse : for I have five 
brethren ; that he may testify unto them, lest they 
also come into this place of torment.' " Luke 
16:27,28. 



138 JKREllIAH HALLOCIC. 

The various states of Mr. Hallock's mind in con- 
nection with, the rise and .the progress of this work 
of grace, are indicated in the following passages. 

One week hefore its commencement, he writes, 
"0 will the Lord think of the dry earth, and not re- 
member the spiritual drought of Zion. thou, who 
art good and doest good, wilt thou rain down right- 
eousness lapon'us." 

Again, "Could not attend a lecture at — • — jior 
a conference this evening as I purposed, by reason of 
the great rain. may I learn submission like a 
weaned child., Alas, how poorly and miserably do I 
spend my time. my God, wilt thou quicken me." 
, " This has been asad day to me, as well as yes- 
terday and the day before. my cold murmuring 
heart — ^no life in prayer, in study, or in prealching — 
unthankful for the awakening, and fear €hat it is 
abating : am astonished that any mortal .should feel 
so dull as I am, under such circumstances. It seems 
as if I was in the way ; came home this eveni^ mor- 
tified and ashamed : Grod, my life, my hope^ my 
rook." 

" This day has been the most refreshing to me 
that I have seen, for a great while. Surely, I must 
here Set up an Eben-ezer, for ' hitherto. the Lord hath 
helped me.' Jesus^ thou Lord Grod of Jiosts, take 
ally all the glory to thyself, and make me happy in 
beholding thee glorified." 

" Tried to preach all day from Grenesis 45 : 4; but 
it has. been all day like a cold, frozen, dreadful win- 
ter. thou infinite God, I would with all. confidence 



NAE.RATIVE OF REVIVALS. 139 

justify thee, and, be humtled under thy wise> good, 
and mighty hand._ And. 0,- for Jesus' sake, may thy 
grace be sufficient for me, and thy power be made 
perfect in my weakness. Felt in some measure 
relieved' at the confer'ence." 

"Had a sweet conference at the school-house." 

"Had an hour of sweet conversation after the 
conference." 

" My mind is cold, weak, and wandering — ^have 
had scarce oncsweet moment to-day, either in prayer 
or preaching. Felt a little revived in the intermis- 
sion. Q Lord, why dost thou tkus hold me off ? I 
know it cannot be from any defect in thy power or 
grace, nor in the foundation which thou hast . laid in 
Zion, but it must be because of my sins. But,-© 
Lord,. canst thou not have mercy on sinners ? I know 
thou canst ; and 0, show favor and pity to a poor sin- 
ner, almost ready to give up his evidencess of grace, 
and of a call into the ministry." 

" There are evident tokens of the departure of the 
Bridegroom. Lord, how painful is thy absence." 

" A very gloomy day, in a moral sense— cold and 
faithless myself — straitened in every view ; and Zion 
dull and sleepy, and sinners-dead. Lord, may we 
be humbled under thy holy, mighty hand." 

The following is one of his addresses to persons 
on receiving them into the church. 

"I now declare each of you a member of this 
church. You are members of Christ's visible body, 
and are. raised up to sit together in heavenly places 
in Christ Jesus. But you will remember that you 



140 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. < 

have not come to the rest of Grod ahove. The great. 
■wilderness of lahor and patience, of enemies and com- 
bats, of hunger and of thirst, yea, and the river Jor- 
dan, -which is death, lie between you and the world 
of glory. Many who passed through the sea, who ate 
.of- the m'anna and drank of the rockr died by unbe- 
lief, and never saw the^ rest of the Lord. And it be- 
oometh you to fear the least appearance of coming 
short. I may say to you,- as Joshma; said to Israel, 
' Ye are witnesses against yourselves, that ye have 
chosen you the Lord to serve him.' If you should ; 
turn away, and in works deily him, all this will come 
up against you. 'Now we live, if ye stand fast in 
the Lord.' If you endure against heU, earth, and sin, 
Grod wiH be glorified, 'ZionwUl, and great' will be 
your peace. But in order for this yoji must make a 
business of leligioii, of reading, of meditation, of the 
religion of the closet, the family, and the house m{ 
Grod. The covenant you have made is perpetual and 
never to be forgotten, no, not for an hour. As David 
put off Saul's sword and coat of mail, so-put off-all your 
own wisdom and strength, and with that lovely youth, 
meet your spiritual- foes only by faith in the name of 
the Lord Jesus. Barnabas exhorted the young profes- 
sors at Antioch with purpose of heart to cleave unto 
the Lord. If you do this, your enemies will be de- 
feated, and be constrained to confess, that Jesus is of 
God, -and his Teligion divine. And now, dearly be- 
loved, ' I commend you to Grod, and to the. word of his 
grace, which is stble to build you up and to give you an 
inheritance among all them which are sanctified.' " 



NARRATIVE OF REVIVALS 141 

The record o£ the work of G-od jn this chapter 
may be appropriately closed by the outline op oiVe op 
Mr. Hallock's sermons, preached in a school-house 

at S , a neighboring congregation, where ^ the 

Spirit was evidently descending. "We are indebted 
for it to the retentive m'erfiory^strengthened perhaps 

by loss of sight — of the Rev. Mr. McL the pastor, 

who heard' it with deep anxiety that it might be bless- 
ed to precious souls of his spiritual charge. " It was 
pleached," he says, " at a time of special attention to 
religion arnong my people. It was evening. Many 
were assembled. The old. and the young were anxious 
about the 'soul. The mind of Mr. Hallook was by 
prayer prepared for the occasion, and he announced 
the text and proceeded .to apply it with- almost an 
unearrthly solemnity." 

" ' "WhoscSever he be of you that forsaketh not 
. 0,11 that he hath, he cannot be' my disciple.' Luke 
14:33. 

" It will bp my intention, this-evening, to bring, 
you to the test. There is an important sense in which 
it is VERY COSTLY to become a disciple of Christ. Yoii 
must couM thin' cost, if you- would be sure of Tieaven. 
K any of you were thinking of building, some expen- 
sive edifice, you would first sit down and count th« 
cost. • If a king were to go to war with another king, 
he would first of all count the cost. This is the safest 
way to escape ultimate shame and -disappointment. 
Thus poor sinners who would become disciples of 
Christ, must first sit down and count the c6st,\ and 
Christ says, it will cost them all that they have. 



142 . JEREMlAHjIsSlrLOOK. * 

' Whossever he be of you, that forsaketh not all that 
he hath, he cannot he my disciple.' 

<' I shall first-consider what God owns. I do this 
in' order to ascertain what is left, for all that is. left 
belongs to the sinner, and constitutes what he must 
give up in oiider to he a disciple of Christ. God owns 
'the silver and the gold,' 'the cattle upon a thousand 
hills' ' The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness tiiere- 
of.' The sun, moon, and stars are his. The kingdoms 
of this world, and the church of Christ are his. : The 
great and wide universe belongs to him. He made 
all things' for himself. And now, what is there left? 
AU that is left is the sinner's.; 

" 1: Here is jouTself-rigkfeousnesSfthis is a gar- 
ment which the sinner has made himself. "With this 
he has endeavofed to cover over his deceitful wicked 
heart, to hide it from (rod, But G-od sees through 
it. He looks 4own into the very depths of the sin- - 
ner's depravity, and says to him, ' I will reprove thee, 
and set thy sins in order before thine eyes.' Consider 
the poor scribes and Pharisees. • They trusted in their 
self-righteousness, and perished in, their sins. Your 
self-righteousness is absolutely worthless. It is no 
better than filthy rags. Cast it from you as oflfensive 
to God, and be willing to be clothed in the white 
rdbe of Christ's righteousness. With this, you will 
be made welcome at the supper of the Lamb. 

" 2. False doctrine. This belongs to the sinner. 
To xjbtain eternal salvation, you must believe the 
gospel, you must be 'Tooted arid grounded' in the 
truth. In the work of saving immortal souls," God 



NARRATIVE OT REVIVALS. US 

makes use of truth, of inspired truth. Beware of 
blind. -guides, of false docti-ine, and the command- 
ments of men. If you depart from 'the faith once 
delivered to the saints,' you grieve the Holy Spirit, 
and he "will depart from you. If you give heed to 
seducing fahlesj and doctriaes of devils, I feajr you 
will seal your damnation. 

" 3. Vain amusements and carnal pleasures belong 
to the sinner. Such sources of happiness are as transi- 
tory "as 'the crackling of thorns under. a pot.' They 
always leave an aching void. Your jovial music and 
dancing, your house of mirth and feasting, your wine 
and your card-taMej must aU he forsaken ; ' your 
laughter must be turned to mourrdngj and your joy 
to heaviness.' Kehgion is a serious business with 
thosewho are on their 5vay tp'heaven. 

" 4. 'Sinful associates belong to the sinner. . Such 
associates are not the companions of those who are 
' strangers and pilgrims on the earth.' They belong 
to sinners. If you -would be Christ's disciples, you 
must come out from flie world and be. separate. 'The 
oompanioh of ^ools shall be destroyed.' 

" S. The hypocrite's hope belongs to the sinner. 
We fear there are rilany who lay hold on such a hope. 
It is no better than the spider's web. Dismiss it in 
this time of solemiiity with you. , If you hold it fast, 
'what will you do when God riseth up; and when 
he .visiteth you, what will you answer him ?' Oh, the 
fajse hope will be like the giAdng up of the ghost when 
God shall take away the soul. 
■ "6. Promises of future repentance are left, and 



14-1 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. ^ .If 

belong to the pinner. To quiet the mind for the pres- 
ent, many such promises are made, .hut they are 
fearfully dangerous to the soul. Delaying sinners, 
the voice of God is crying in your ears, ' Behold,, now 
is the accepted time ; behold, now is the day of salva- 
tion ;' but you reply, ' To-morrow shall be as this 
day, and much more abundant.' ' When I shall have 
a convenient seaspn,' then I will repent and come to 
Chrifet. I am afraid that season will never come. 
Death may this moment, be at the door. Your safety 
consists in your immediate acceptance of Christ. 

*' Thus we have considered what belongs to the 
sinner. Self-righteousness, false doctrines, vain amuse- 
ments and carnal pleasures, sinful associates, the hypo- 
crite's hope, and promises of future repentance belong 
to sinners, and must, be forsaken in order to become 
the followers of Christ. • 

" Ahd.now, if you Vill forsake all these, let me. tell 
you AVHAT Christ will give you.- 

"1. Here is pardon. Sinners in. their natural 
state are under condemnation. The sentenpe of death 
is passed upon them. < The soul that sinneth it shall 
die.' .Tlie language of the gospel isj 'He that-behev- 
eth not is condemned already.' For the present the 
sentence is- not executed, because G-od. waits upon 
sinners to be gracious, and to give them space for re- 
pentance. "While God thus waits, the gospel is preach- 
ed to> sinners. The Spirit strives with them, and par- 
doning mercy is. offered them, if they will forsake all 
and come to Christ. Come then, poor sinners, leave 
all that you have, and enjoy eternally the blessedness 



^ NARRATIVE OF REVIVALS. 145 

of forgiveness-. Gome, and all your sins shall be 
removed from you as far as the east is from the west. 
They shall never o-eturn to condemn you and torment 
you. 'He that believeth en the Son of God, shall 
hot come into condemnation.' 

"2. Here is peace — peace with Grod, peace of 
conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Siimers while 
out of Christ and in a state of impenitence are un- 
happy. They are 'wretched and miserable and poor 
and blind and naked.' ' The wicked are like the 
troubled sea when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up 
mire and dirt.' ' There is no peace, saith my God, to 
the wicked.' The past is, to them, all lost in sin. At 
this very moment their hearts are contending with a 
holy God : they would flee out of his hands. In the 
future there is 'a fearful looking for of judgment and 
fiery indignation.' Unhappy sinners, 

" ' Your way is dark and leads to hell; 
Why will you persevere ?' 

Now peace is offered to you; it is urged" upon you : a 
peace that ''passeth^ all understanding,' peace with 
God and heaven, peace in your own souls, joy which 
is ' unspeakable and full of glbry.' If you reinain in 
3nour sins you will, never know what it is to be happy. 
Would you know the blessedness of that reUgion 
which is from heaven, forsake all, and come to Christ, 
the R)untain of living wate^rs. 

" 3, Here is hope. The gospel speaks of a 'good 
hope through grace,' a hope which is like ' an anchor, 
sure and steadfast.' It is supported in the soul by 
evidence that the heart is changed by the Spirit -of 



146- JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

God, that the affections are purified and placed upon 
heavenly ohjeots, and that the soul delights in the 
doctrines of- grace, and in the advancement of that 
Kingdom -which is not of this world. Poor guilty 
condemned sumers have no such hope. They are 
' without hope .and without Grodin the world.' They 
are like the unhappy helpless mariner who is out on 
' a sea of storms and- tempests without an anchor to 
hold and steady his vesset The winds are ho\vling, 
and the billows are dashing, aiid all expectation of 
entering the desired haven is cut off, Y6u may have 
a ' good hope ;' you must have it, or he.lost in reme- 
diless despair. Forsake all that you hjive, and this 
great anchor is yours. -Then let the storms beat, and 
the winds blow ; let the heavens lower and gather 
blackness^ you are safe, and you may sing the rich 
grace tha;t conducts you to the haven of everlasting 
peace. 

"4! Here is "triumph in death. All must die. 
There is a time to die. A dying time will be a ndost 
distressing time to poor sinners who have made no 
preparation for death. Wh^t will their self-righteous- 
ness, their vain pleasures and gratifications, and thejr 
false hopes, avail them then ? The widied are driven 
away in their wiokedpess. How keen their mental 
anguish, how gainful their'sufferingsj Vhen flesh and 
Jieart shall fail ! How they wUl tremble and wail as 
they see their probation closing, and Jknow that .the 
Spirit of Grod has departed froni them ; and that in a 
moment they must rush into a ^orld of iost souls. 
I have seensuoh poor sinners 'm. their last moments. 



. NA.RRATIVE OF REVIVALS, 147 

How my heart did ache, when I was driven to the 
painful conclusion that their case ■yras hopeless. But, 
sinners, it is not necessary that you should die thus 
wretched. The solemnities of this evening are evi- 
dence that God is yet waiting upon you. His Spirit 
is present. Make him welbome to your heart. Grieve 
him not. 5'orsake.all that you haVe,,and come to 
Christ, and that holy, -memorahle song of triumph 
shall he yours: '0 death, where is thy sting? 
graved ■#here is thy victory ? Thanks he to God, who 
giveth us the viptory through our Lord Jesus Christ.' 
"Finally, here is eternal glory.' The impenitent 
unhelieving sinner must he lost. There is no place, 
no portion for him in heaven. For him there is no 
- society, no ernployment, no enjoyment inheav©n. The 
wicked must he turned into hell. Hear the last sol- 
emn sentence front the mouth of the offended Judge, 
the sentence that will decide for ^ver the allotment 
of the finally impenitent: ' Pepart from moj ye cursed; 
into everlasting fire, prepared for the devU and his, 
angels.' You have an opportunity, this evening, to 
escape this- dreadful doom. , In tjie name of my Lord 
%nd Master, I come and offer heaven to you. Let tis 
rise above this little earth, and take a view of that 
hearvenly kingdom". And-.what is it? , It is deliver- 
aUce from;aU sin. ' There shall in no -wise eiiter into 
it any thing that defileth.' It is deliverance from 
all sorrow ; all tears shall he wiped from their eyfis ; 
' there shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor cry- 
ing,' It is ' an exceeding and an eternal weight of 
glory.' AH will be of one heart and of one mind, and 



148 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

all the redeemed will sweetly sing the new song, the 
song of grace; Now, sinners, are you willing to lose 
this heaven ? Can you endure th$ loss ? "Will you 
throw away your immortal souls for mere trifles? 
Leave all that you have, and heaven is yours. Do 
you hesitate ? "Will you die ? Do you want a longer 
time to decide ? It does seem to me that I have made 
up my mind. Let me now plead with you iat one 
moment". I must bring you to the test. Count the 
cost. Look at. what you have to forsake. . It is aU as 
worthless as dung and dross. The longer you, retain 
it, the- more unhappy you are. If yo:u keep it in your 
possession till death, ^ou will perish with everlasting 
destruction. It is all lighter than vanity. By for- 
saking it, you lose nothing ; on the contrary, your gain 
will be infinite. Here you will have pardon,' and peace, 
and hope, and triumph in death, and eternal. glory be- 
yond the grave. Can you hesitate for a single 
moment ? If you will not yield, and leave all.and come 
to Christ, then we must weep over you, and bid you 
adieu for ever." 

. "I am pained," adds Eev.,Mr. McL — — , "with 
. tlie conviction that I have come far short of the origi- 
nal. It is difficult, for me to give, an adequate de- 
scription of the preaching of that man of God. We 
must see him and hearhira, and personally witness 
his solemnity and importunity, in order to have a full 
understanding of the nature and power of his public 
performances.**' 



MISSION IN VERMONT. 149 



CHAPTER VI. 

• FIRST MISSION TO VERM^ONT— l/ABORS IN 
REVIVALS, 

The early and strong desire of Mr. Hallock to te 
a missionary is akeady before tte reader. In the 
summer of 1801 the Lord called him for a time to 
this service. The Missionary Society of Connecticut, 
at that time in its infancy, applied to him to spend a 
few months in the- state of "Vermont. On receiving 
the application, he writes, 

" June., 3, 1801. Am requested to make a tour in 
the north-east part of' Vermont. The suhject looks 
very weighty indeed. Many are the motives,' for 
going,, and many are the ohjeotions. Lord, divest 
me of self, and order this matter in mercy, and guide 
me hyihy counsel in the way I should go. I give 
myself tp thee. 

" July 12, "Week before last I engaged to go, God 
wilUng, en a mission of four months into the new 
state. Lord, strengthen me and guide me in this 
thy wo;-k. Things as yet have appeared to work favor- 
aljly to my mission. Jesus, I thank thee. Suffer 
no trials to come, upon me, I pray, thee, in this or any 
thing, ahove the strength which thou shalt give. 

"July 26, Lord's day. Text in the forenoon, 
' Seek- first the kingdom of G-od ;' i,n the afternoon., 
' Put on the whole armor of God.' But little freedom, 



150 JEREMIAH «ALLOCK. 

yet the scene appeared, solemn, as this was the part- 
ing Sahbath. Expect to set out to-morrow on my 
tour to Vermont. 

" July 27, 1801. Having an appointment from 
the Trustees, of the Missionary Society of Connecti- 
cut,' the- consent of the church, and, I trust, the call 
of Jesus, and aU things, heing prepared, I this day, 
ahoiit eleven o'clock, bade my lovely consort and dear 
children and friends farewell, taking for my motto, 
' Jesus OF Nazareth, Captain of the Lord's host, 

MY best friend.' " , 

Some of his feelings on the way to the field of 
labor, he thus records : 

First day. "Some of the time was exceedingly 
depressed, and so discouraged I was almost ready to 
turn about ; at other times feK enooUragied. In the 
evening, a sweet visit with my dear brother — — ." 

Second day. " Some part of the way exceedingly 
confused and^ depressed. Tried to pray, but my mind 
was weak and unfixed. It seemed as if I had but 
little evidence of faith or love ; distressing doubts pre- 
vailed, and the consolations of the word seemed to 
be gone, and I was constrained to ery, with sinking 
Petet, 'Lord, save me.' Dined at Rev. Mr. Judd's. 
Was refreshed in conversation. About three o'clock 
rode to my dear father's in Goshen. Found ^ray 
, parents well, and prospering both in body and soul, 
but felt more depressed and discouraged than ever; 
no appetite for food ; my heart was hard and wander- 
ing ; I feared I was never renewed, I had so little 
sense of ^;he hatefiilness of sin, and of the beauty of 



MI-SSION IN .yERMOHT. 351 

holiness. The weight of the journey overwhehned 
me. It seemed as if I could neither go back nor for- 
ward ; I was ready to wish J had never thought of 
the mission ; had something of a fever, but tried to 
compose my tumultuous mind in Ood, and by his 
, mercy, after a while went to sleep." 

Fourth day. " Arose and retired with some Chris- 
tian friends into the w'oods, for prayer. Felt weak in 
body and- mind, but not so discouraged as at, some 
times; for ever blessed be the Lord, was in a great 
measure reUeved this afternoon.'.' . 

Fifth day. " -A. pleasant morning; some freedom, 
I trust, in secret prayer.". 

Seventh day. " Sabbath ; Sunderland, Vermont. 
A distressing gloom has been on me almost ever since 
1 came from home ; was confused in famUy-and secret 
prayer last night and this morning. But 0, what 
shall I render unto the Lord, for his free mercies? I 
began to feel released in the forenoon, especially in 
preaching; and. this afternoon^ . both in prayer and 
preaching, -the attention was unusual — some tears ; 
thus far tlie Lord hath helped me. Preached a third 
sermon an hour and a half befere sunset ; talked in the 
evening with some professors ; advised them to organ- 
ize anew. The Sabbath and the church are almost 
lost in this town." 

, " Aug. 5. Joined with the Rev. Mr. H in se'-* 

cret prayer this morning, and rode to Chittenden. 

" Aug. 6. Preached at four o'clock ; had but little 
jBreedom : the people stopped, and I talked with them 
after sermon ; some appeared attentive. 



152 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

" Aug-. 7. Visited all day from house to house, my 

dear friend H-- heihg with me. Numbers weie 

tender and wept, and I cannot but think the Spirit of 
G-od is secretly at work in Ijiis place. At (evening 
the neighbors met for prayer, snd I made some re- 
marks on G-pd's reviving his vrork. , 

" AjUB. 8. Visited as yesterday, in -anothe;r neigh- 
borhood, but did not fihd so much feeling. 

" Aug. 9, Lord's day. Rested poorly. The morn- 
ing was rainy,;" had but little opportunity for retire-- 
ment, or freedom in any duty ; preached from- 1 Cor. 
16 : 22 and John 3 : 14, 15 ; had much more freedom 
and attention th&n I expected. The house was crowd- 
ed-; it was very hot ; I felt as if I should faint both ia. 
prayer and preaching, but was carried ^rough : had 
a full and serious conference in the evening; Chris- 
tians seemed to be revived, and tatake courage that 
Grbd was about to come among them. A fevy youth 
appear to be under some impressions. They have no 
church formed in this town, but there seem- to be a 
few understanding, lively Christiaps, They have 
meetings on the Sabbath, and I c^mnoj btit think that- 
God has mercy in store for this place. . - 

"Aug. 10. Had an affectionate parting with 
Christian friends in Chittenden ; left some pobr sin- 
ners in tears ; the Lord have mercy on them. 

" Aug. 12. Sudbury. Mpre freedom in family 
prayer and in retirement ;' talked with the children; 
they gave good attention, especially one little boy 
about twelve ; he steadily watohec^ me while I was 
talkingj with watery eyes." ,*• 



MISSION IN VERMONT. 153 

Oji his way to this plabe, Mr. Hallook writes, " As 
a strg,nger I knew not ths way ; hence ,three things 
were necessary. First, that some one should inform 
rhe ; secondly, that he should inforiji' me right ; thii^dly, 
that I should follow the direction : so it is in spiritual 
things." 

" Aug. 13. Rode to Cornwall ; preached the fu- 
neral-sermon of a youth, from Luke 13:24, to an 
afflicted family, and a crowded attentive audience. 
This town is all settled and large. The church con- 
tains about-one hundred memhers. They have lately, 
had some revival,, and' ahout thirty added ; feel much 
more at home than in the forepart of my journey. 
After agreeable' conversation and prayer with brother 
"W— — and' visiting some sick families, rode to New 
Haven, and stopped with my good old friend deacon 
Andrew Mills ;^ had a precious evening, with freedom 
in J)rayer and conversation. . 

" Aug. 16. Lord'& day, Confrrsed in mind, this 
morning, but had -unusual freedom in preaching in 
the forenoon to a little, attentive audience ; also in 
conversation in the intermission. 

" Aug. 17. Rode with deacoti Mills to Waltham, 
about ten miles; had sweet conversation with some 
friends from New Hartford ; in the evening had a 
meeting ; but little freedom, yet thie_ people were at- 
tentive. There is no meeting-house nor church formed 
in this toWn, neither have they of late had any meet- 
ing on the Sabbath, except a few who met together 
last Lord's day. Yet in this place there are a few 
niourning souls, 

7* 



154 JEREU'lAH HALLOCK. 

"Aug. 18. Rfetumed to New Haven— visited a 
sick person on the way — attended a diurch-meeting 

at two o'clock. Miss S was examined. Never 

could a copy more agree with its original, than her 
experience agreed with that of hopeful converts in 
Connecticut. This appeared to he the most heavenly 
meeting I have seen on my journey. At four o'clock 
preached on Christians being -the light of the world, 
vrith more freedom than I expected. Had refresh- 
ing conversation with a number of dear Christians 
after meeting, then rode about four miles. 

' ' Aug. 19. Preached at four o'clock from Isa. 40 : 1. 
The meeting was fuU and attentive. Some scofiing 
Universalists were present, supposed- to come for a- dis- 
pute, but they seemed rather to smite their breasts and 
go home in silence. Thanks be to God, who hath given 
us a peaceful, serious mseting. Spent the evening 
with Christian friends in conversation and prayer." 

A clerical brother of like sentiments with Mr. Hal- 
Icick, who had just lost a dear son. without the conso- 
lation of a good hope in his case, once put this ques- 
tion with rather peculiar emphasis: " I)o you not 
sometimes doubt, Mr. HaUook, whether a holy and 
benevolent God will inflict eternal punishment" upon 
any jJart of mankind ?" He promptly replied, "No, 
sir. If a man should-tell me that he had just seen 
Canton meeting-llouse in flames, and I should hasten 
to the spot and find it not so, would he be able 
afterwards to look me in the^face? So,, if there is 
to be no everlasting punishment for any. of our race, 
how could Christ, after his many positive deolara- 



MISSION IN VEB.MONT. l56 

tions to the contrary, hold up his head hefore his 
people in the futuire world ?" 

" 4-UG. 26. Eode to Essex, twelve miles. Tired 
and faint, called at a house hy the way, where they 
never -so much as asked us to drink a Mttle water. 

" Aug. 31. Rode to the' lake— saw the Grand isle ; 
in the afternoon visited a school-^the' instructor and 
the children were affected. 

" Sept. 12. My cough trouhlesome — ^ome freedom 
of spirit in retirement — rode with my friend I)— r^ to 
the lake, four miles, to see Mr. S , hopefully con- 
verted of late. In the time of the war, he- was a 
British soldier. He is about sixty, and unahle to 
read ; a man of good natural sense, but before his late 
awakening he was very. profane andpassionate. His 
daughter-in-law is also an apparent convert. This 
house J a little while past^ place of profane oaths, is 
now, I trust, a Bethel." , . 

Letter to ^is -wife, 

" Kingston,, Vt, Oct. 3, 1801. 

" Dearest earthly Friend — Though I am by the- 
help of Grod as well as common,- and find kind-&iends 
everywhere, yet the trial of so long a separation from 
you is indeed great. I have not heard a word from 
you, since I left home. These questions interest" my . 
heart : Are you well, or sick ? living, or dead ? suj)t 
ported, or overborne with trials 1 I also long to know 
if it is well with the church and parish. But when 
these and the like weighty cares overload my soul,. 
I try to cast them all upon the Lord. About three 
weeks ago, I had a tedious cqld and a most trouble- 



356 • TEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

some cough, but was enabled to preach. Sahhath 
before last, I preached at "Westford, administered the 
Lord's suppler, and attended a meeting in tha. even- 
ing. It seemed just like '98 and the forepart of '99. 
A more blessed attention than what appears now in 
the south part of Westford, I never saw. I have beeii 
to Essex, to Swanton, to Georgia and Waterbury, 
where the goings of the victorious Lamb are also visi- ■ 
ble, some under concern and numbers apparently born 
of'Grod. The little clqud is seen in Fairfield and ill 
, almost every place. About noon, September 1, 1 met 
brother Bushnell in Milton, and I can hardly think 
Aaron was more glad to see Moses. 

" A missionary wants health, a strong constitution, 
abilities, great gracej and much prudence. How much 
then must a poor invalid and one of little faith need 
your- prayers, and constant support from the Lord 
Jesus. I hope dear Christians will not let their easy 
circumstances at home make them forget fainting 
missionaries and the cause in the wilderness. ' 

'-' Tell Deacon Bidwell, Deacon Mills, Deacon 
Humphrey, and Dr. Everest, they twine about my- 
heart, and I should be glad to give each of them a 
letter ; but I am so taken up, I can hardly get time 
to read my usual chapters in the Bible. ,If the Lord 
will, I hope, to see you the latter part of next. month. 
I shall make an effort to get home on the Friday pre- 
ceding the fourth Sabbath in November ; and wish 
the concert,* if convenient, to meet on that evening, 

,.* This .concert was held weekly, for more than twenty 
years, in Mr. Hallock's study ; commonly on Thursday even- 



MigSION IN VEfeMONT. 157 

that wei may pray together once more. G-ive my 
love to Jeremiah, Homan, and Sarah; I helieve I think 
of you all twice, where you do of me once. Think of 
Grod. Choose Mary's good part. Farewell. Mr. 
BushneU sends his love to you and to the ,c|iurch. 
" From your affectionate- friend, - 

"JEREMIAH HALLOCK."- 

"Oct. 21. Rode to G ; preached on Moses' 

lifting up the serpent. Was v6ry coldly received here. 
The Lord for^ve them.' 

" Oct. 23. In a little more than eight days, have 
rode a hundred miles, much of tlie w^y extremely had ; 
have preached eight sermons, and- attended one con- 
ference ; our lives, hones, and health have been spar- 
ed, and to G-od be all the glory. Lord, wilt thoji 
come aiid revive thy work in these regions of moral 
death. Lord, wilt thou have mercy on the kind 
youth who' hath rode with me, and grant him the 
riches of Jesus. 

"Oct. 24. Spent this evening in prayer with a 
few Christians. Three tcild their experience. It 
seemed as if God was there. It seemed like the stiU 
small Voice when BUja^ worshipped. 

" Nbv. 2. In Montpelief found Mr. T. R ■.. It 

seemed to refresh me in body and mind." Brother 

R exhorted in the family — ^we sang — had' two 

prayers, and a fefjreshing' evening." .^v. ■ ' ' 

lag. In compliance with the reijuest in this letter, the breth- 
ren Convened at the time proposed, and in the course of .thet 
mfeeting, tg the great joy of all, Mr. Hallock arrived from his 
loiig journey. 



158 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

The account of this tour Mr. Hallock closes as 
follows: 

"-Nov. 81. Arrived at home atout seven in the 
evening, after -an absence of sixteen weeks, and found 
my consort and femily well. Health' has generally 
prevailed in the paijish, and the church appears still 
united, no schism haviag taken place. .Had an agree- 
ahle meeting with a goodly number convened at our 
house on my return. , 

"In my Jate journey have travelled abojit one 
thousand mUes ; visited, many of the towns in the 
new settlements from Middlebury to Canada line, and 
preached ninety-six sermons — on an average six in a 
week. I have assisted in the fornpiatiqn of two 
ehuiches, one ia Richmond and' the other in .Cabotj • 
and have admitted thiirty-two persons into the church. 

"As my motto, when I set out was, 'Jesus of 
Nazareth, Captain of the Lord's host, my . best 
FRIEND,' I would close with this :. ' Be all the glory - 
TiUNi;, whose it is, and to whom it belongs.' " 

He adds the following as to the call for- mission- 
aries in the new settlements of Vermont : 

" The inhabitants in the new settleme^its in Ver- 
mont Are numerous far beyond what I had supposed : 
in many of the towns one hundred, and in some ris- 
ing of' two hundred families. The land in general is 
rich and fertile. But as the first settlers gave their 
attention to farms ind aqueducts rather than tp meet- 
ing-houses and the gospel, in a large tract, of coimtry 
not a meeting-house is to be found, in njany places 
no visible church exists, and in some no sort of relig* 



MTISSION IN TEEllONT. 159 

ious meeting, and the Lord's day is spent by iiie mass 
of the people in exploring land, visiting,' fishing, etc. 
But in every place Christ has his spiritual salt, and 
grieving souls are to he found ; yet as they have no 
ecclesiastical centre, \rhat spiritual steength there is, is 
far firpm being concentrated, and Christians are like 
jsca'ttered sheep. E nthusiasm and many errors are prop- 
agated. Still, matters in general appear on the reform, 
the truth seems to be taking root, Christians to be 
refreshed, and divers' places to erijoy special revivals. 

"If we take the south part of Canada, adjacent 
to Vermont, vvrhich is .settled by our people, the mis* 
sionary ground in that quarter is equal in extent to 
the territory of Connecticut, The call for missionary 
labor is extensive a,nd loud. The prospect is, in many 
places, that if the Christians can be gathered and 
have a little help, they will soon be able to settle and 
support ministers, and willing to become, generous 
contributors for sending the. gospel to others. The 
custom of giving up the Sabbath and its ordinances 
for ten or fourteen years is to be met and counter- 
acted. Where matters begin to put on a more favor- 
able appearance, Christians, almost hopeless^. revive,- 
take courage, and Uke' the Macedonians say. Come and 
help us. Having been often deceived by strangers, the 
serious people grow cautious; they wish for'preachers 
with good credentials, and receive a missionary from 
the Coijnecticut Soci6ty with confidence and respect. 

"But when we contemplate the experience, the 
abiKties, the faith, labors, and self-denial requisite for 
a profitable mi^:ionary, the heart cries, 'Who is 



16.0 JEREMIAH HALLOeK. 

suifioient ?' As all increase is of G-od, let none for- 
get to mitiglet their contributions with persevering 
prayers to the Lord of the harvest. Amen." 

LABORS IJT HIS 0"WN VIGIETITY. 

Letter to Deacon Taylor. ' ,. 

"WEstSiMSBUKY, May 27, 1802. 

"Very dear Brother'^ — I send you a few lines hy 
your daughter, whom I am glad to see.. Sabbath 
before last I was at Middle Grranyille., . There was a 
tremendous storm— but few at meeting: — yet . the 
special influences , of the divine Spirit were evident; 
•The conference was full and very solemn; brother 

A , who is awake, and myself, concluded we 

never saw it more so. The special attention is con- 
vfined to one neigiiborhood ; pray that it may leaVeii 
the whole parish. I tarried until Monday noon, 
fivery house was serious, and Some under deep' 
impressions: 0, how real is'eternity, when the tnmd 
is a little enlightened. • ■ 

" C. P appears well. He gave me the follow^ 

ing account of himself. About two months past l^e 
was at a conference ; somfe observations were rnade- 
on consideration. They took a little liold of his inind, 
but he went home and retired to rest; as usual, with- 
out prayer. He then put the question, 'Do I love 
the Lord Jesus ?' The answer was. No, I have nbt 
the least love to Mm,' though I have been- in the 
visirble church. He saw his heart, perfectly, black, 
and remained in' this terrible situation about three 
weeks.., These lines of "Watts occurred : < , 



MISSION IN VERlCOIfT. ' 161 

" ' As pilgrims on the scorching sand, 
Beneath a iurning sky, 
JLohg for a cooling stream at hand, 
And they must drink, or die.' 

"He felt that he taust drink^or die — retired — and 
before he arose from his knees, the, glory of (rod 
appef.red^ — yet no hope respecting himself; his dis- 
tress was gone, and he feared that stupidity, which 
he had so much dreaded, had come upon him. Ahout 
a week after, he had new light; attended with a hope. 
He appears humble like a little, child — is afraid of 
his deceitfiil heart — but says, 'If I am not deceived, 
I do love God, I do love Jesus, t do love Zion.'' He 
stands amazed at the wonderful love of God, that 
instead of sending him to hell,, he should show him 
these things. His only child, a daughter, and a Chris- 
tian, married in B .. He has been to see her, and 

says, 'You cannot tell, Mr. Hallock, how my poor 
child rejoiced ; she Was in Christ before her father.' 

" Nothing special among us ; our conference full 

last Sabbath evening. Deacon H' is confined; 

so many absent, it seems lonesome ; but Christ lives. 
Farewell, my brother, the Lord bless you and your 
house. Write whein you can. 
"I am, etc. 

'OEREMIAH HALLOCZ." 

" Aug. 2, 1802. My soul travails in birth, either on 
holy or selfish grounds, for the conversion of my poor 
children. Lord, I would commit all to thy infinite 
mercy in Christ." Again: "I find amazing stupidity 
in my family. God of mercy, my only hope for 



162 JEREMIAH HALLOOK. 

my rained self and poor undone family, wilt thou 
cotne^of thy mere mercy and power, and show us our 
sins in a true light, and softeja and quioke'n our hearts 
for Jesus' sake. 

"Aug: 22. lam so barren in study, so lifeless and 
embarrassed in preaching, and see, so much opposition 
and wickedness of heart, I am almost ready to sink. 
L6rd, wilt thou save and help 'me, for thy name's 
sake. > 

"Aug. 23. Sensible of my- unfaithfulness, as" I 
trdst in some measure, of the solemn charge com- 
mitted to me as a minister, and of the value of immor- 
tal souls ; considering the worth of Christ's kingdom, 
and how much Jeaus has done ; I would iidw resolve 
to revisit each family in this parish, to inquire after 
their eternal concern^ — ^to speiid one day at least 
every week in this work, unles^ sickness or special 
providences forbid, untU 1 shall have accomplished it. 
I, Would keep a particular account of my visits. And 
having had long experience of^my weakness, and 
knowing that this undertaking will be attended with 
many trials, I would rely only on the Lord, for .wis- 
dom and strength and for success, pleading his great 
name and holy kingdom. 

"Fribay, Aug. 27. Devoted to visiting, according 
to the above resolve. I think spiritual visits useful,, 
and trust I " feel; in some measure, quickened. - 
Lord, wilt thou give me strength to proceed, and give 
success. ' 

"Moi^DAY, August 30, 1802. Devoted this day to 
visiting. I have, for the ipost part, felt barren and 



LABOR IN REVIVALS. .163 

gloomy myself, and find tut little religion among tjie 
people. Yet •while I lanient before the- Lord, I would 
not he discouraged, hut seek to sow, morning and 
evening, in season, out of season, hoping that if I 
should not live to see the harvest others may. 
Lord, make me faithful and give ine'rease, and thine 
be the glory.- 

" Sept. 12. Trust I had-, some refreshing and 
strength in reading the word, and in prayer at noon. 
This afternoon spent in the field.. may I do aU 
for the gospel's sake, -and nothing out of love to the 
world.- 

" Oct.. 3, 1803. I have been from home seven-. 
days — ^been enabled to journey not far from eighty 
miles to attend the association and council, to preach 
, six times, and converse and pray repeatedly with 
Christian friends, I trust with some freedom and to 
some acceptance. Yet what reason I have to lament 
my hard, unthankful, and barren heart, 

"Oct. 17, Lord's day. Norfolk. Last Monday 
evening preached at Cambridge on the superior glory 
of the gospel. Tuesday, went with brother Cowles 
to Plyinouth — ^we both preached — I preached agkin 
in the evening, on Zion as the mother of converts. 
'Wednesday we both preached at Litchfield, and both 
spoke again in the evening. Thursday we preached 
at Groshen and spoke in the evening. Friday we 
preached at Harwinton, and spoke in the evening. 
Yesterday rode to this place. To-day preached, first 
on Christians so walking, in Christ as they have 
received him ; then on Zion as the mother of cout 



164 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

verts : in the evening,", from ' The shout of a king is 
among them.' Have had unusual health, ajid some 
freedom in prg/jer and preaching. 

" Oct. 18. To-day returned home ; found all well 
except Jeremiah, who is still complaining. Lord 
Jesu|, I would tell thee. O Lord, wilt thou make 
the seed of the word we have heen instrumental in 
sowing prosperous, and may I he humble and thank- 
ful, glorying only in thee. 

" Jan, 1, 1804. We are now brought to see the 
beginning of a new year. We of this family are yet 
alive, and all except Jeremiah have been favored with 
usual health, and his case is not desperate. I heve 
not been once prevented by sickness from attending 
meeting. Have been allowed the past year to go and 
see the work of God in Chester and Middle Granville ; 
and have heard of it in^many placed. I am not pressed' 
with debt, but have wherewith to pay my creditors^ 
and we are clothed and fed to the full. The mercies 
of God, both to soul and body, are innumerable.. But 
my unfaithfulness and spiritual barrenness, in 
prayer, in study, in every religious duty, private and 
public. My heart is most vicious, whence proceeds 
oj^osition to the cross of Jesus, and all corruption. 
Lord my God, how do I need thy grace, thy 
strength, ■ thy righteousness, and all the riches of 
Christ Jesus. There have been about twelve deaths- 
among us the past year : what times will pass over 
us this year ; who will be bereaved, or who will die ; 
what public or private changes, axiverse or prosper- 
ous, is with Him who worketh all things according to 



LABOR. IN REVIVALS. 165 

the counsel of his own will. But this we know, it 
will he well with them that fear God, and that the 
' ready ' are hlesged. - Lord, revive thy work, make 
us wholly thine^ and he our portion. 

-"Last Friday evening the dear youth Mr. W ■ 
came to see us from his mission; last evening, the 
precious Mr. C , late missionary to New Connect- 
icut," Northern Ohio; "Brother C ^ preached in 

the forenoon and adrninistered the Lord's supper. 
Brother W-^^ — preached in the afternoon. Their 
preaching and prayers were excellent, and in the spirit 
and -truths of the gospel. Both of them preached- 
again, at different places, in the evening, to unusual 
acceptance. In the tinie of drought there is some- 
thing hopeful in seeing the clouds rise and come over 
us. that these spiritual clouds might he attended 
with much rain. 

" Jan. 2. Aftef-praying and Singing together, part- 
ed with dearW . How sweet are hrethrepheloved 

for JesUs' sake. 

"June 16, 1804. My dear father and sister Mercy 
are with, us on a visit. Have spent. two days this 
week in visiting schools. - 1 get hut little time for 
study. My mind is weak, wandering, and barren, I 
feel as if I was -one- of the most unfruitful, useless 
ministers. Lord, to thee I fly, and thee alone, for 
help. Last week attended the ordination of Rev. 
Mr. Perry over the church in Sharon. Attempted to 
make the concluding prayer, hut was emh'arrassed 
and fruitless — greatly tried with the fear of man. I 
remain- fearfully cold and comfortless under, mercies 



166 • JE-REMIAH HALLOCK. 

and trials. . Lord^ what ^hall I do ? I. fly only to 



" Ju;vE 23. Rev. Mr. T. W , a missionary, tar- 

rie'd with us last night. We prayed together repeat- 
edly. may, I he thankful for such company, and 
may the Lord go with him." • < 

This missionary ohserves, in a letter to .the com- 
piler, "As I was leaving the house of Dr. Strong of 
Hartford, to go on a mission to the state of New 
York, that great and gdod man said, ' Cro and stay a 
day with hrother Hallook. He can give you more of 
the. instruction and assistance you will need on your 
mission than any other man.' Among other things that , 
.flowed from Mr. HaUock's heart, like rivers of living 
water, he said, ' I have lately been thiiiking on- these 
words of the first Christian ministers^ ^Bui we will 
■ give ourselves continually toprayer and to the min- 
. istry of the word^ and I have almost wondered that 
every ordination sermon has not been preached from 
that text.' So well did his spirit agree with this 
passage, that th^e was no appearanog. of affectation 
in his proposal to unite in prayer both morning and. 
evening , in his study. Nor was it surprisyig that 
such a man, when he went ihto the barn in the course 
of the forenoon, must there kneel and pray to G-od in 
the name of Him who was born in a stable. In view 
of my mission, the sum of what he said may be 'given 
in these words : ' In every place and in every house 
kno^ as far as you can what interests the people, 
and take their concerns, and cares into your own heart .. 
with a spirit of Christian sympathy. This spirit will 



LABOR .IN REVIVALS, 167 

be as ar Iqadsjione to draw their hearts to Christ. The 
Saviour cared for the hodies as, well as the souls of 
men.' " ' ' 

" August. 30. .Returned home last evMiiug affer 
an ahseneg of four days. On the Sabbath was. at 
Middle GrranvUle. In this place more than fifty have 
been added to the church. Monday rode to Tyr-ing- 
ham ; found Rev. Mr. Avery and his family spiritual 
On Tuesday rode toLoudon," now Otis, " visited friends 
there, and preached in the evening. - God hath a 
number of precious people in this place. I am often 
tried with the rnost foolish', wicked thoughts, but by 
the help of God I continue to this time. 

" Sept. 24. Yisited brother Griffin, at Colonel- 
Austin's. Spent the evening at Dr. B 's, with 

Rev. Messrs. ICills, Griffin, and Jerome, in prayer for 
Mrs. Jerome, Who lay at %he point of death. 

" Oct. 28. Lord's day. Litchfield.- Preached in 
the forenoon, on the necessity of holiness ; in the 
afternoon, on coming to the great supper. Was favor- 
ed with some ^eedom- and attention. I trust the feax 
of God is in this place. 

" Oct. -29. Rode witib Rev. Mr. Mills to "Wash- 
ington.^ Heard him preach; I exhorted the church 
to awake and pray to God, it being a time of attention 
in this place. • 

" Oct. 30. Went with Rev. Mr. Porter to Rqxbury. 
I preached on the depravity of m^n, Mr. Mills exhort- 
ed ; there were evident signs of unusual atteiitioni 
.^Eeturned in the evening to Washington. 
' "Oct, 31. The dear Rev. Mr. Swift of Roxbury. 



168 JEREHIAH HALLOCK, 

came to see us. At one o'clock, eleven wereexamio-:. 
ed as candidates for the churcli. It was a spiritual, 
solemn interview. At three, I preached on preparing 
the way of the Lord^ In the. evening Mr. Mills and 
myself exhorted. The meetings were serious, the 
Lord is doing great things for this people. 

" I)bc. 2, 1804. Spent Monday and Tuesday, the 
past week, in visiting with Mrs. Hallook from -house, 
to house. 

"March IO, 1805. This morning was almq^tready 
to give up aU hope of any grace- in my heart.. The 
extremity of .this almost despair did not last long. 
CoTild not hut think I di,d love divine things. Must 
say, it has been as usual with me torday, all things 
consideyed^ yet, have had but little sensible comfort' 
and' much exhausted, in the outward man. Tell me, 
ye ministers of Jesus-, is it ever so with you ? 

"March 13, 1805. This day, I am forty-seven 
yeate old. On meditating upon Grod's past .helps and 
mercies, the trials of my life, my sins and barrenness, 
and the reason of a hope, it appears that I have much 
reason for confession, and humility before Grod, much 
matter of praise', much cause to hope in Grod, and to 
abound in -his work. And I cahriot . but have a t^em- . 
Ming hope, ijha,t my heart has by divine grace' been 
turned to the Lord. I would give myself and family 
entirely to the Lord ; and may I begin and spend this, 
year in his service, and be prepared for aU its. events 
prosperous or adverse, for Jesus' sake." r-' 



REVIVALS IN 1805. 169 



CHAPTER VII. 

REVIVALS OF 1805 AND 1806— CORRESPONDENCE. 

" July 14, 1805. There have been of late five or 
six among us under convictionj and one has lately 
obtained hope. At a meeting last "Wednesday, the 
audience was unusually solemn. It is marvellous to 
see among us these evident tokens of the Lord's re- 
turn once taore by his grace. Lord, we are most 
unworthy siimers, and^ wilt thou for Jesus' sake 
carry on thy work of salvation among us, to the honor 
of thy great name. To-day had some freedom and 
affection in prayers and conversation in the morning. 

" July 23. I trust the attention among us does 
not decrease ; three awakened youth have been to see 
me this afternoon. Lord, make them thy willing 
servants. To-day finished getting in my hay , and 
grain. It is ail the Lord's, and I would surrender it 
up, every spear and every kernel, to bim to be used 
wholly in his service. Read the hundred and third 
Psalm, my soul, I caU on thee for ever to praise, 
to bless, to extol the Lord. 

" Aug. 11. Five have obtaifled hope, and numbers 
are under concern, I think twenty or thirty. It is 
marvellous, and may God have the entire glory, for 
to him alone the whole is due. God of salvation, . 
wilt thou carry on thine, own work, and cause that it 
may end in the sanctification amJ eternal life of many 



170 .lEREMlAH HALLOCK. 

lost sinners, to the glory of thy great name, through 
Jesus Christ. On -the thirty-first of last month, this 
and a number of neighboring chi:^rches met for prayer 
on account of the drought, and ere the meeting clos- 
ed the rain began — thou prayer-hearing Grod. 

" Aug. 15.' Visited from house to house with 
brother Grillett, and in the evening brother Mills came 
and preached. The meetmg this evening was full 
and impressive, and I cannot but think; the good 
Lord is carrying on his gracious work among us, 
though some things have taken place the present 
week among certain vain youth, which look discour- 
agix^. may the servants of the Lamb be as bold 
and faithful as the servants of the devil. 

" Aug. 18. Lord's day. Preached in the forenoon 
on resisting the Holy Ghost, and trembled myself for 
fear I had done it. Preached in the evening at Mr. 
's. Four youth are, of late, somewhat awaken- 
ed in this neighborhood " — three or four mUes from Mr. 
Hallock's house. " Shall talrry here to-night — ;talked 
with the awakened youth. 

" Monday. Prayed and conversed tiiis morning 
with three of the youth. Trust the awakening is not 
decreasing. For ever praised, and for ever blessed be 
the Lord God of Zion. Amen and Amen." 

He once addressed a person under deep serious im- 
pressions, much in this manner. " Suppose a debtor 
in a large amount desirous to make payment. Not 
doubting his ability, he waits on the creditor, and 
asks him if he will accept g-o/e?. , ' yes,' he replied, 
* if genuine,' He at once empties his bags on the 



REVIVAL ]N 1805. 171 

table. The creditor, glancing his eye up6n it, says, 
' This is not gold — -you must be under a mistake — 
exanxine it yourself.' On a closer inspection, the 
owner acknowledges it is not gold, and says, ' I believe 
it to be silver; will you, sir, accept silver?' at the 
same time beginning to fear he shall not have enough 
to meet the. demand. The creditor expresses a will- 
ingness to take silver in payment, and the debtor be- 
gins to count it out. ' Stop,' says the receiver, ' are 
you not mistaken again ? "Look closely, and I thinlt 
you will see it is not silver.' The latter finds it even 
so,- and adds tremblingly, 'It must then be copper; 
will you take this f ' Most readily,' is the reply, 
*if it is real copper, I wUl receive it at its proper 
value.' The poor debtor now become suspicious, 
looks at it again mote narrowly, and exclaims in 
agony, ' it is not even copper ; it is mere dross, of 
no value at all. Alas, I am undone ! here is my all ; 
I can never, never pay the debt ! I he wholly at your 
mercy.' " The poor trembUng sinner perceived the 
bearing of this simile, and at once seemed to see the 
entire worthlessness of his own best works, and to 
despair of ever paying his immense debt to divine 
justice. In a short time he found relief, if not deceiv- 
ed, by a cordial reliance on the mere mercy of God in 
Jesus Christ. 

*'OcT. 3. Have been favored with the help of 
many dear brethren. We have had stated lectures 
on Wednesday, and repeated conferences and other 
meetings, so that I have had no time to write : about 
twenty have obtained hope. It is affecting to see 



178 JEREMIAH HALLOCK 

how the Holy Spirit teacheth blind, ignorant sinners 
acoording to the Bible, as to their depravity and help- 
lessness, and the sovereign grace of God. 

"Nov. 3, Lord's day. Lord's supper. This day 
eighteen, v?ere added to the church ; fifteen of them 
date their hopes in this revival. Fiist sermon from Isa. . 
44 : 5 :' ' One shall say, I am the Lord's,' etc. I trust 
it was an unusual day for the sweet , breathings and 
comforting influences of Grod's Holy Spirit ; a day never 
to be forgotten to the. praise of his glorious grace." 

Of this revival of religion among his people, Mr. 
Hallook in a printed sermon says, "This spiritual 
refreshing began to appear in June, and increased 
gradually for five months, until ihiere were droppings 
more or less in ahnost every part of the society; 
towards thirty joined the church wJio were considered 
as the fruits of this little harvest." But we are 
favored with a more full description of the work from 
his own pen, as inserted in the- Connecticut Evangeli- 
cal Magazine. 

NARRATIVE 

OF A REVIVAL OF RELIGION, IN CANTON, CONNEOT- 
I CUT, IN" 1805. 

■ "It pleased the Lord gloriously to visit this place 
by the special influences of' his Holy Spirit, in the 
latter part of 1798; and in the fore part of 1799. In 
this time the drooping church was not~a little quick- 
ened and comforted, and between seventy and eighty 
were added to it, an account of which was published 
in the first volume' of the Magazine. 



REVIVAL IN 1805. 173 

"That day can never be forgotten by the church 
in this place ; and to the praise of. God be it spoken, 
the lapse of seven years has riot weakened the faith 
of the candid beholder in the work of that day. 

" But by reason of deaths and removals, the church 
became considerably reduced, and inattention to di- 
vine things .prevailed, and was increasLag, especially 
among the youth, so that the things of religion began 
to wear a very gloomy appearance. 

"But in the early part of last June, one of the 
youth was visibly under serious impressions. This 
was soon attended with a solemn effect on the young- 
people. It was not long before several others were- 
awakened in the same neighborhood where the above- 
mentioned youth lived. And from this time the 
attention increased. 

"It seenied to operate like leaven hid in three 
measures of meal. New instances of awakening often 
occurred. 

" The neighboring ministers, as welb as some 
more remote, -^ere very kind to visit us and to preach 
to us. Indeed it seemed as if the Lord sent them; 
and almost every meeting was attended with some 
visible eflfect, ulntU there were some instances of 
attention in almost every part of the parish. Lec- 
tures and conferences were frequent, and public relig- 
ious meetings were full and serious. And this spir- 
itual work appeared gradually to rise, for more than 
three months. The attention has been mostly among 
young people. It seemed as if God had Axed his 
eyes on the youth, though numbers of children have 



174 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. , 

been seriously impressed ; and there have also heen 
some instances from the ages of thirty to sixty. 

"Of the subjects of this work, the largest propor- 
tion are females. Towards thirty have obtained hope. 
Fifteen have joined the church, and others are ex- 
pected to come forward and subscribe with their hands 
unto the Lord. As when the cry was made, 'Behold, 
the bridegroom com,eth,' the virgins arose and trimmed 
their lamps, this has been a day of alarm to the 
church. They appeared to be aroused in some meas- 
ure from their formal state, into -which even the wise 
are so apt to fall while the Bridegroom tarries. Some 
were ready to cry, ' Our lamps are gone out.' 

"Having noticed these things concerning the 
beginning and progress of this revival, I shall add, as 
a specimen of the work, the relation of two youth as 
written by themselves to a friend. The first writes 
thus: 

" ' Dear Sir — The following lliies are ashort sketch 
of what I hope the great Sovereign of the universe 
has been pleased to do for me, a poor unworthy sin- 
ner. Time has wafted me through the days of child- 
hood, perhaps as thoughtless of God and iifeensible of 
eternity as any one can be. Whenever I was aroused 
to. think on death and judgment, I would silence the 
voice of conscience, and say I could not cherish such 
gloomy thoughts when I was in health and prosperity ; 
little thinking that my soul was out of health. There- 
fore I abandoned these thoughts, which ought to have 
been most dear to me. But, blessed be Grod, he has 



REVIVAL IN 18U5. 175 

spared my life until now, and, as I hope, made me a 
living monument to adore his glorious name. 

" 'My mind began to be seriously impressed last 
July, at the funeral of Mrs. D. C. I. followed the 
breathless body to the silerit mansions of the dead, 
little thinking it was a lesson for me to read. I con- 
sidered myself an uninterested beholder. But when 
I saw the corpse laid in the grave, the thought struck 
my mind, Will this suffice ? Will the grave now shut 
its mouth, and say, Enough ? The answer was ready : 
No, it will not, but it will soon claim me in spite of 
all my efforts. But whepi looked beyond the grave, 
eternity appeared still more awful. These words 
seemed to be directed to me : 'What meanest thou, 
sleeper ? Arise, and call upon thy G-od.' 

'"This led me to look into my polluted heart, 
where I found nothing but sin and guilt, which were 
pressing me down into the pit of woe and misery ; 
and my days that were past wore irrecoverably 
gone for ever. But a thousand hurrying thoughts 
of the world seemed to bear me away from these 
feelings; and many times did I put on the veil of 
cheerfulness when I had: an aching heart within, for 
fear of the ridicule of the thoughtless part of man- 
kind, who must stand at the ti'ibunal of Gf-od, as well 
as myself. 

"'Thus my days were spent until about the 
middle of September, when 1;he horrors of hell ap- 
peared before me uiia voidable. I felt myself to be a 
sinner, and exposed to the wrath of G-od, who was 
continually saying, ' Vengeance is mine, I will repay.' 



176 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

In vain I sought relief from the Bible. Every line 
seemed to condemn me. I thought I was doing all I 
could to purchase happiness, and my reading, pray- 
ing, sighs, and moans were in such earnest, I thought 
I should move heaven io pity- me. But all was in 
vain, it was in such a selfish manner. And I thought 
I was unjustly hound with, the cords of disquietude, 
and doomed to eat the hread of sorrow, while many 
of my young companions could triumph over death 
and the grave, and sing, 'Thy love, Jesus, is the 
theme ;' hut I was unheard and unanswered, and 
left to wear out my hpurs in grief alone. This, T 
thought, was unjust, and my heart rose in dreadful 
opposition against God. Oh, how hard is the human 
heart. If it had the power, it wovild dethrone the 
Almighty. But blessed be God, the power is in his 
own hands. 

'"I remained in this sorrowful situation several 
days, seeking relief, but refusing the precious balin 
of Gilead. One Monday in this moMh was a most 
trying day to me. It seemed as if the whole universe 
gazed with an eye of contempt on its sinful, wretched 
inhabitant?. But 0, the following "Wednesday ! May 
that precious day never be erased from my memory — ' 
the day, as I hope, in which God met my poor 
perishing soul. Having taken up the Hartford selec 
tion of hymnSf I began to read the 274th : 

'Cheer up, my soul, there is a meroy-seat^ 
Sprinkled with blood, where Jpsus an.swers prayer • 
There humbly cast thyself beneath his feet, 
For never needy sinner perished there.' 



. ICEVIVAL IN 1805. 177 

And truly, I then said to myself, who can wish for a 
higher -seat, than at the feet of sovereign mercy ? 
And my heart was now ready to thank Gfod that I 
was in his hands. And 0, how astonishing it was 
that his mercy was extended even to me, who had 
heen contending with him all my days ; refusing all 
his blessed calls and invitations, trampling under foot 
his dear Son, who had spUt his precious hlood upon 
the cross for me, and yet not one moment had I spent 
in his service.. Now my heart could join with the 
psalmist in saying, ' come, let us worship and bow 
down, let us kneel before the Lord our Maker.' Also, 
' Who can utter the mighty acts of the 'Lord, who can 
show forth all his praise ?' His perfections were 
visible in the whole creation. A-sermon was preached 
that afternoon from Solomon's Song, chap. 4 : 5,. 8, 
' Come with me from Lebanon, my spouse,' etc. These 
appeared to be in reality Christ's words, and the ser- 
mon was sweet to my soul through the whole exercise. 
I felt as if my soul feasted on the food of eternal life, 
which Grod had prepared for all who serve him in 
spirit and in truth. And if I do not labor under a 
great mistake; it, is my desire to serve God, and I can 
trust my all with him and rely upon his word. I 
hope I have enjoyed the presence of Grod most of the 
time ; but someJtimes, through my own negligence, 
and falling so far short of t^e duty which I owe him, 
I am left to lament the withdrawing of; his smiles, 
and to trying doubts.- But I must conclude by ask- 
ing your prayers, sir, and the prayers of all God's 
children, that I may be kept from the snares with 

S* 



178 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

which I am surrounded in this evil world, and that 
I may be preserved through the faith of Jesus unto 
death. Then, when 

r • - - 

■ . I ■ ' 

" ' Filled with delight, my rapturedsoul 
Can here no longer stay, 
Though Jordan's waves around me roll, 
Fearless I 'd launch away,' " 

■ " The second writes in the following words : 

"'Dear Sir — I shall now, as enabled, state to 
you some of the recent, dealings of Grod with my soul. 
My mind began to be impressed with a sense of my 
sins, and consequent danger, in the beginning of last 
April. But the great and- general stupidity with 
which I was then surrounded, together with the fear 
of becoming an object of derision, caused me to con- 
ceal > my distress until the beginning of June, when 
it rose to such a height that I found concealment 
impossible. For a certain period, during two or three 
weeks, the black catalogue of the sins of my whole 
life a^eared to be set in order before my eyes, 
accompanied with a deep sense of my being in the 
hands of a holy, sin-hating God, and entirely at his 
disposal. 

" ' It seemed as though nature would sometimes 
sink under the pressure; but He who thus laid his 
hand on me, was still my support. In July, when 
the attention to religion had become considerable, I 
began to find that I had not dnly a wicked heart, but 
that it was entirely selfish, and filled with the most 
dreadful and daring opposition to Grod ; and that self- 



REVIVAL IN 1805. 179 

ishnesg had teen, and still was, the great moving 
principle of aU my aotions. This put me to a great 
stand. My inquiry now was with more anxiety than 
everj ' What ftiust I do. to be saved ?'. I now saw that 
the prayers of the wicked are an ahom^nation unto 
the Lord. Yet I was told that prayer -was a duty 
incumbent upon rne, notwithstanding my own .sinful- 
ness, and that I ought to pray with a penitent heart. 
This was what I could not bea,r,. and I found myself 
actually at war with G-od Almighty. It appeared to 
me that annihilation would be far preferable to the 
situation in which I then was. I would gladly have 
changed condition with the very stones in the street, 
and frequently looked with envy on the meanest rep- 
tiles of the earth. •. • 

" 'Whenever I opened my Bible, I found it filled 
with threatenings against me. I found also that it 
demanded true and unfeigned submission to Grod, 
as the only condition oa which salvation would be 
granted. I attended many meetings, but they only, 
served to augment my distress, and if possible to 
increase rny opposition. ' For several weeks I almost 
entirely relinquished business, and spent my time 
principally w^l^ing in my chamber. Whenever I 
heard" of any person's obtaining a hope, it was like 
adding fuel to the fire. My heart rose against it and 
accused Grod of exercising partiality with his creatures, 
not consideSring that he has a right to do what he 
will with his Qwn. . ^ , 

"' These exercises continued .until August, when 
the terrors of hell seemed to compass rrie about. From 



180 .JEREMIAH HALL0CK. 

Tuesday, the 6thj to Wednesday the 14th, it appeared 
to Me that I stood on the very confines of destruc- 
tion, and was permitted to look into, the eternal 
world; Death and jud^ent were now most solemn 
realities, and they so overwhelmed me that I was 
many times ready to sink into despair,, and give 
np all hope of ever ohtainirig mercy. 

" ' Then O, how vain appeared 
All things beneath tfae sky, 
Like visions past, like flowers that blow > 
When wintry storms are nigh.' 

But it pleased the great and merciful Grod not to keep 
me long in tjiis painful situation. On "Wednesday, 
the 14th of August, I attended a lecture, when a 
sermon was preached from John 4 : 49, ' The nohle^ 
man saith unto him, sir, conae down, ere my child 
die.' Upon hearing these words and their explana- 
tion, I found my heart glowing with the most ardent 
love towards the Saviour. He appeared ta he 'the 
chiefest among ten thousand, and altogether lovely.;' 
every way suited to my necessities. Tears flowed 
without control. The language of my heart was, 0, 
my dear Saviour, come, and take an everlasting pos- 
session of my soul. I hid thee a hearty welcome to 
my heart, and would lie low at thy feet for eVer. My 
emotions were so great that I found it difficult to 
keep from immediately kneeling upon the floor, and 
extending my arras where I then was, in the meet- 
ing-house. 1 1 had no idea that- this was conversion. 
I returned home, and without mentioning any thino 
to the family, retired to rest as usual. And here 



REVIVAL IN 1805, 18t 

again I found my soul drawn forth in the most affec- 
tionate desires after the Saviour. I found those beau- 
tiful lines in Dr. Watts' versification applicable to 
what I then felt : 

'■ ' My fleah lay resting on nyy bed — 
My soul arose on high.' 

With my mind composed to the most perfect peace, I 
now went to sleep. On awaking in the morning, I 
concluded that I had become entirely stupid, and 
accordingly made several attempts to bring on my 
former distress ; but this I found was impossible. I 
then resolved to walk out and reflect on the exercises 
of the day and evening preceding. But .instead of 
this, the character of God himself now came into 
view, and filled my soul with joy, love, and gratitude, 
wonder and admiration, to that degree that bodily 
strength failed ; and for sorrie minutes I became almost 
insensible to surrounding objects. Upon recovering 
myself, I found that every thing around me wore a 
new aspect. The glory of G-od appeared to be visible 
in every part of creation. I saw the hills, mountains, 
and fields, all lying beneath the orrlnisoient eye of 
God, and answering the great end for which they 
were created, the glory of God. And now the thought 
occurred, Shall man, who, is the noblest part of crea- 
tion, be silent ? This was an amazing thought. I 
stood like one astonished at myself. Why had I never 
thought of this before ? I now saw that I had indeed 
been wilfully blind, and thad; it -would have been 
just in God, had he left me to my own chosen way. 
I now began to imagine that this might be conver- 



182 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

sion. But I had many doubts about it, because that 
during all these exercises I had strangely forgotten 
myself. These doubts were, however, soon removed, 
when I found that I was entirely willing that God 
should dispose of me, for time and eternity, as he 
saw best and most for his glgry. And 0, what heart- 
felt joy did it give me to reflect that I was in the 
hands of God. It was like an anchor to my soul. 

'"The Bible, religious meetings, and the duties 
of the closet became the food of my soul. The latter 
becomes every da,y more and more precious to me. 
How does rny heart frequently expand with rapture 
while I. am praying for th« advancement of the 
Redeemer's iiagdom. When gloom'and darkness fill 
my-mindi as is sometimes the case, in consequence 
of the remaining sinfulness of my heart, I find that 
the thought that God's kingdom is ejbernal, and stands 
secure, generally removes ihe cloud. This, sir, is, 
according to my best recollection, a short sketch of 
what I have, through the goodness of God, been 
made to experience. I would now conclude by ask- 
ing your prayeirs for me, that I may not be left to 
dishonor God in the profession which I have made.' 

"Having given the foregoing account of the 
sovereign and most merciful dealings of the Lord 
towards us his sinful and unworthy creatures, I 
shall close by only observing, that days of attention 
are not trifling days, but most solemn and serious to 
all. It beopmeth those that are left,' to tremble ; and 
such as hope, not to be high-minded, but to fear lest 



REV.IVAIi IN 1805. 183 

after all, they should come out withered branches, 
only fit for the fire, to the dishonor of Christ, the grief 
of Zion, and their own shame. 

"JEREMIAH HALLOCK." 

" Feb. 3, 1806. Last week was at Colebrook and 
"Winsted. The Lord is carrying on his work "in each 
of these places, dear Christians are comforted, and 
sinners born. again. Praised be the God of salvation. 
My mind was unusually calm and refreshed, Thurs- 
day evening, at Winsted." 

As Mr. italldbk was laboring abroad. in a time of 
revival, he found a man who to much ignorance of 
spiritual subjects joined an equal degree of confidence 
and joy in his own state. The man was very flupnt 
in the relation of his new views and feeUngs ; at 
length he. paused as if to hear a confirmation of his 
hope from the mouth of so experienced a Christian as 
Mr. Hallock. Understanding the case fuU well, Mr. 
Hallbck merely said to him, " Sir, if I should come 
this way six years hence, and then find that you pray 
regularly in your family, morning and evening-, I 
shall think favorably, of your case." Mr. Hallock 
sometimes said with a suppressed smile, " I love to 
see young converts have ears :" a remark not less an 
evidence of his discernment than of his want of con- 
fidence in religious loquacity. Yet it would be wrong 
to suppose him not to make much allowance, or not 
to expect much diversity in the case of young Chris- 
tians. Severely as he scrutinized his own spiritual 
state,' Ms charitable feelings inclined him to form a 
favorable opinion in the case of others. 



184 JEREMIAH HALIOCK, 

T6 the Kev. Mosei Hallock, Plainfield, JStaBS, 

"'West SiMSBURY.Feb. 1806;, 

"Dearly beloved Brothee — I think that the 
moral foundation of all real union and solid happiness 
is holy love. Where this love reigns in. the heart; if 
we are poor — a cottage for our house,, and herhs for 
our dinner — if we are low, if we are sick, yea, if 
dying, still we are happy, and united in the sweetest, 
most perfect hond. , But if this godlike love he ahsent, 
all is like, a rope of sand, and there is no real happi- 
ness, although we are ever so rich, the house adomedj 
and -the dinner a stalled ox, or though flourishing in 
health, or raised to a throne. Let us then seek this 
love, not the world ; and let us esteem those who have 
it — not the rich,, the carnal, the honorahle of this 
earth. 

" "We had a short but agreeahle visit from brother 
Hosford and sister. Our honored mother lias been 
with us^ she is now at brother Case's ; I expect she 
will return in a few days to our house. She is com- 
fortable for her, but, at best, is very feeble in body, 
though calm and agreeable in mind. Our dear father 
has been with us a numbeT of days, and his company 
is truly better than gold, 

"We are poor, sinful, dependent creatures^ — Grod 
is aU in all ; let us look to him, and cast all our cares 
upon him. Grive my love to sister, to William, to 
Martha, to all the children. Tell them, that in order 
to be happy, they must fear the Lord. 

" From your affectionate brother, 

« JEREMIAH HALLOCK." 



HIS CORHESPONDENCE. 185 

At atout this time the consociation to which the 
church of Canton belonged, recommended that each 
minister in their connection should, in company with 
a lay-hrother^ visit every family of his congregation, 
fcjT the purpose of prayer and tehgio\is eonversation. 
A few specimens of these visits follow. 

" March 27, 1806. It is proposed that the minis- 
ter, and one or more of the church with him, visit all 
the families in the society, to converse with them on 
th© concerns. of the soul— to tegin this day, and 'to 
visit one or two days in a week, until the whole parish 
is gone over. Lord, all will he in vain without 
thy guidance, help, and blessing. be our stfength, 
our guide, and give the increase. My dear brother. 
Deacon Theophilus Humphrey, ^went with me to-day. 
We prayed and conversed, with eleven families. In 
this number, we found three famihes where prayer 
is attended, five professors of religion, three others 
who acknowledged a hope. I think it is a profitable, 
instructive way of spending time. Lord, wilt thou 
give us strength and grace to go on. 

"April 2. Visited all day with Deacon MiUs, 
Called on thirteen families. Prayed and discoursed 
on spiritual things in each house. . Found.tliree feimi- 
lies in which prayer is al^ended, nine professors, and 
four others who trust they are born again. I trust 
the Lord was with us, and. that the day was not spent 
in vain. Lord, I would thank thee for thy dear 
-^servant, Deacon Mills, and his instructive, impressive 
prayers and observations. 

" April 9. Went this day in visiting with Deacon 



186 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

Everest. We visited twelve families. Found fsinily 
prayer a.ttended in seven of them, eighteen profes- 
sors, and two whose minds are tender and with a 
iremhling hope. Find such visiting days very lato- 
rious. I have great reason to lament my want of life 
this day, hoth in prayer and conversation, and the 
dreadful moral death which appears among us. 
Lord, wilt thou have mercy on thy mourning, wither- 
ing ZioH, for Christ's sake. 

• " April 16. I ara ready to think, many times, was 
there ever a Christian who had so muoli unbelief, so 
much hardness, bondage, and opposition of heart as I 
have?" 

Letter to Deacon Tayior. 

" West Simsbcrt, May 23, 'l806. 
" I thank you,' my dear brother, for your instruc- 
tive, impressive letter. "When B arnabas saw the awak- 
ening, the,;grace.of God in Antiooh, his heart rejoiced, 
and he exhorted them all to. continue in the faith, 
and with their hearts to cleave unto the Lord. It is 
called the grace of God; what divine, unspeakable 
grace. Wonderful is the love of G-od in sending his 
dear Son — ^in .making the great supper. , But both 
Scripture and facts testify that all make light jjf it. 
Alt are by nature under the dominion of this abomi- 
nable, God-provoking unbelief ; and hehoe will inev- 
itably and most justly perish, unless renewed by the 
grace of God unto repentance arid faith. And how 
wonderful it' is, that God, instead of saying, none ctf 
these gospel-despising sinners shaU taste of my sup- 
per, should say, I will compel them to come to my 



HIS CORRESPONDENCE. 187 

Seta ; I will effectually call and draw them Tjy my 
Holy Spirit, and they shall he mine, and I will he 
their God.. what mercy, what gra,ce divine. 

"And has the great Eternal thus come in very 

deed to B ? If any douBt it, let them answer 

this old question, ' What meaneth this ?' And if Grod 
has come, what" a pity it is that ail should not know 
it, attend with their whole soul, and prepare the Lord 
his W9,y. It appears that the old Jews, perished he- 
cause they did not discern the signs of the Jlmes, nor 
know that the Saviour was among them. If the hlind 
man, when he asked what the noise of the passing 
multitude meant, had heen told that it was Caesar's 
legions, or had received some other false answer, or 
if, when told it was Jesus, he had. not helieved nor 
applied,- the poor man would never have received his. 
sight ; yea, twenty minutes ' delay in his case would 
have heen for ever fatal, for the passing Saviour 
would have gone hy. So it is with poor sinners in 
days of awakening ; delays and inattention are inost 
dangerous. Let the love of the vjrorld, an inordinate 
concern for a piece of ground, for a few yoke of oxen, 
the things of marriage, and carnal mirth, he laid-^side. 
How terrihle to lose the soul for the huhhles.of time! 

" This is a searching day to professors. Surely His 
hride should dress in gold of Ophir. The church must 
he ready, clothed with the humhle, prayerful spirit of 
Christ. Let Zion travail now, and join in the song 
of, grace, and not he found with the wrangling elder 
hrother. It becomes prayerless sinners to awake. 
Dear immortals, how can they sleep. And let not 



188 JEUEMIAH HALLOCK. 

the 'awakened emlfface a false hope, instead of Chrilst. 
There is great danger of resting on the faith of the 
stony ground, as the religion of the good ground. 'Tis 
of great importance that the great truths" of the gos- 
pel, concerning God, Ourselves, and Jesus Christ, fill 
every meeting and heart. I was in the old parish 
at meeting yesterday. Things look encouraging 
there. The work of the Lord goes on marvellously 
at Northampton; the seed of the prayers of the 
saints is coming up there. Let G-od have all, all, all 
the glory, and us sinners lie in the dust hefore him. 
The Lord Jesus he with you, my brother. 
" I am, etc. 

"JEREMIAH HAL'LOCE. 
" P. S. My appointments are stich, it appears im- 
possible to make you a visit next week ; hut I shall 
come, if the Lord will, a week from next Wednesday. 
Give my love to brothers Eells and Cooley. Let us 
not trust in men nor means, but only in the liying^ 
God." . . 

I To the SEinie. 

"November 1, 1806. 

"Very deae Brother — How thankful ought we 
to be for solemn Sabbaths, and for the divine in- 
crease of the graces, and nrunbers of Zion'. The Lord 
JesUs has displayed his distinguishing grace towards 

his people in B . Eternity will not be too long 

to praise him for it. The Lord said to Pharoah,- 'Let 
my people go, that they may serpe me.' God rede&m- 
eth his people out of spiritual Egypt, that they may 
serve himself, not idols, nor themselves. God said. 



HIS CORRESPONDENCE. 189 

' Let my people go, that they may serve me in the 
wilderness.^ And he finally brought them to Canaan, 
to serve him in his ,temple there. So he will finally 
bring all his converts to. heaven, to- serve him in the 
perfect service of that perfect, eternal world, in all 
the agility of the winged ssraphim.^ 0, of what im- 
portance is it that the ^five,'' that the 'twelve,^ yea, 
that air the church, and all who may yet join, -should 
continue to walk with Grod, and faithfully serve him 
through all the wilderness unto death. Some^ after 
all, when they had got into the wilderness, turned to 
idolatry ; but to forsake the Lord after he hath re- 
deemed us, must be the sin of sins, the guilt of guilt, 
the folly of folly, and the way to the woe of woes. 
But how pleasant and profitable are the fruits of obe- 
dience. ' Let my -Beloved come into his garden, and 
eat his pleasant fruits.' The depravity of the human 
heart is beyond utterance ; and the holy God is not 
seen by it, -anywhere, in any^thing, nor in any way, 
but to be opposed by it. How necessary is the new 
birth! : 

"Rev. R. A is here, and expects to preach for 

us to-morrow. ' He says the awajtening has continued 
more or less for five years in Pleasant Valley. He spent 
a -Sabbath there not long since ; thinks he never saw 
Christians more awake in prayer. May we not hope 
that awakenings will continue, so long as the church 
are awake and fervent in prayer ? 

"As to your first question, my brother, it is a 
matter of ddubt w:hether a church ought to insist on 
a confession for open sins, committed before conver- 



190 - JEREMIAH HALLOOK. 

sion. I would not forbid,, nor insist upon it. The 
whole hfe of the impehitenf man is nothing but sin. 
And his confession of Christ implies- his sorrow for all 
his past hfe of sin. But as to the second question, it 
appears to me that all confessions made by bapksUd- 
iiig professors 'for open..sins, s|ionld by all means be 
made in public before the world. In -the year 1803, 
I wrote my own mind fully on this subject ; and to me 
the arguments have lost no weight by time or reflec- 
tion. I send you the sermon which contains the argu- 
ments. May you, may we, and all the churches be 
guided xight, for Jesus' sake. 

"I am, dear sir, your true friend, 

"JEREMIAH HALLOCK:" 

" March 13, 1807. I am this day entering iny 
fiftieth year : solemn thought. The past mercies of 
another year are many; but 0-how little thoughtful, 
have I been, and how fruitless "to G-od. . I think t 
never saw so much "unbelief, and such depths of de- 
pravity in my heart, and such need of constant sup- 
port from Christ, as I have the past year. thou 
prayer-hearing God, to thee would I look; and on thee 
would I cast all my cares, through Jesus Christ. 
And do not let me live to di&iionor thee and thy dear 
cause. If thou shalt continue me in this world an- 
other year, wilt thou 1(6 my strength, and make -me 
fruitful to' thee in the gospel ministry in Zion ; may" 
my shoe be iron and brass, and ' as my days, may 
my strength be.' If I am to die this year, may it 
be in honor of Jesus and his cause. To this end "wilt 
thou grant m« the hght of thy countenance. cast 



HIS JOtJUNAL. ,191 

me not off, now my stre,ij.gth is failing ; but be the 
strength of my heart and my eternal portion. And 
as my salvation ig nearer, if I am thineVthan when I 
believed,. may I live more like a pilgrim^ jamd be 
more spiritually-minded ; that wh^n thou comest I 
may love thy appearing, open to thee immediately, 
and hasten to meet thee with joy, to the praise of 
God the Father, God the §on, and God the Holy 
Ghost. Amen." 

" January 7, 1807. This day, Homan, my second 
son, is twelve years 0I4. Lord, I would thank thee, 
arid give him up to thee. wilt thou have mercy 
on him, and make him thine, that he may grow up 
before and for thee. 

' " Jan. 18. My soul hath been in much deadness 
and darkness to-day— how tedious and distressing. 
If I am not deceived, it is not this world that I Wan^, 
nor any '-thing in it. -But I long for a gospel view of 
Jesus, and of the glory of God in him ; for humUity 
and spiritual freedom in prayer, in meditation, and in 
aU the things of the word. Lord, wilt thou, who 
sufferest the swallow and the sparrow to build their 
nest in thine altars, let my poor soul rest under the 
light of thy glorious gospel. 

" Feb. 1. Received a precious letter from my 
gr'edtly favored and dear brother WiUiams. Lord, 
I am not worthy that thou shouldst allow one of thy 
ministers or people to write to me." 

It was the uniform meinifestation of such humility 
as .breathes in the last sentence, which led the late 
Dr. Azel Backus to remark, " Brother Hallock is one 



192 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

of those men to whom the Lord Jesus Christ will say, 
' Friend, go up higher.' " 

"Feb. 8. Last Friday, my dear son Jeremiah 
set out for college. Lord, I would give him up to 
thee — may he have a prosperous term, and wilt thou 
take and put him into thy service." 

This son entered Williams college in the autumn 
of 1806. Mr. Hallock's days of fasting and prayer 
were at this time very frequent. In closing the 
account of one of them, he writes, " I seemed to have 
the most liberty in /?rajse. I sometimes think whether 
we are not apt to dwell too much on the dark side." 



SECOND MISSION TO VEHMONTy 198 



CHAPTER VIII. 

SECOND MISSION TO V'EEMONIN-COEIIESPONDENCE. 

"July 29, 1807. "Wednesday. About ten this 
morning I left hdnie, after prayel;, in which -We en- 
.deayored to commit each- other to thoiLord. It was 
hard to part with -nay family and people. Lord, 
wilfthoii he mystaength, guide, comfort, and defence' 
from my,sins and all my enemifes. 0- take care of ray 
dear wife and children and aged mother ; and he the 
shepherd of my dear flqck. Make my journey plros- 
peTousV.and useful to- thy dear children. ' Do all for 
lis, and be all in all untb lis, for Jesus' sake. Amen. 
" Aug. 7. Rode to Rochester. Found some ChrisT 
tian friends here,, with whom I became acquainted 
six years ago. I now begin to enter on missionary 
ground.-' Ji'o^d of the harvest, to thee alone Would. 
I look for direction. Strength, and success. 

"Aug. 12^. Tried to Compose my mirid in Grod, and 
to pray, as I rod^, for my family and people, and all 
the' ministers and churches of the Lamb. Lodged at 
"Waitsfield J witb Rev. , Mr. Salistary. Brother " Salis- 

_buiry and his wife counted tbirfy-two ministers, mostly 
dafididates, who have been settled, in this state with- 
in six. years, and -mostly in places .which never had a 

.minister before. G Lord, wilt thou hold them up, 
make them faithful unto .the end; and give the in- 
crease. 

H«ll4ck. ■ 9 



1.94 . JEREMIAH JTAiLOCK. 

" Aug. 25. This morning left Bhrke and rode to 
St. Johrisbury, seventeemniles. I have been at Brprke 

* six days, have attended six public meetings, visited 
one school and divers faniilies, and adininistered the 
Lord's supper. St. Johnsbury has been settled per- 
haps twelve years, and contains^ Inhabitants enough 
to fill a large nieeting-hoUse ; but they have no visible 
church of Christ in the, town, nor stated public wor- 
ship. IJniyersalism and many errors prevail. But 
One man came to the meeting^ althou^ notice was 
publicly given on the Sabbath. There was a consider- 
£^ble number of females. I was enabled to speak with 
sonw freedom and plainness. The most of them gave 

■ attention. How true it is, that unless the. Lord leave 
a seed, we become as Sodom. This people Have how- 
ever, for some reason, almost finished a,n elegant meet- 
ing-house. that it might prove a token for gobd, 
and that here the Lord would appear in his glory, and 
establish -and build up Zion. <- : 

" S^PT. 6. Derby, Lord's day. But little freedom 
in tetir^ent; as usual in the family. Preached 
with some freedom,, from John 8:39. The. people 
were attentive, and some 'affected. -^ After the close of 
the fprenpqn meeting. Doctor Newoome, a late convert 
from open infidelity and univerSalism, was examined 
and taken into the church. Then we attended to the 
Lord's, supper.. When Dr. Newcome gave in his rela- 

'tion, it had an uni^suai eflfect on the audience'. , The 
church and spectators were solemn 'in the time of the 
supper, and many, I trust, were truly refreshed. But 

. I have to lanient the dreadful leanness of my own 



SECOND MISSION TIO VERMONT. IDs"' 

souU O Lord Jesus, when wilt thou shine upon me, 
and- fili my poor j^mishing soul with thy love,' and- 
pr'aisel The confession of. faith which I had to. read 
to' the doctor, heing long, it was toi^ards two o'clock 
when the. supper was endM; and having- an evening 
rneBting to attend before five o'clock. at the distaince 
of four miles, the iaternHssion.was hut half an hour. 
In this'tinje, I neither ate npr drank. • By the time I 
had finished the first head- of the sermon in the 9>fter- 
noon,'I found riij^ eyes dim, my hpdily strength, power 
of recollection, and utterance gone, or so. gone that I 
was obliged to .^top, and after a little pause to close 
with ai. very few words, and desire one of the brethren 
. to mak« the dosing: prayer. The scene was very 
alarmiiig and trying.. .0 that I might be, Suitably 
humT)le, learrirriy dependence, and be thankful it. was 
no worse. O' Lord, lefrme. not be 'a .cause of shame 
to them that fear thee, nor of triumph to thy enemies. 
Spent the. evening in conversation, -not being able to 
attend the. meeting appointed." ■ . 

Letter to his. wife. " ' , , ' 

" GREENSBOnitrGH, Vt., Sept. 21, 18Q7. 

"Dear Jriend — 1 have had no letter from yi&u, 
though I ha,ve spnt to Montpelier in hope- of finding 
one. ,1 Could; write of-many things, biit must confine' 
myself, to a few. - Ten days ago I began to be- unwell ; 
washowefef enabled to preach three times , the jiext 
Sabbath, and to visit from house to house on Monday • 
followin'g. But Monday night was as sick a night as 
I remember ever to have had^ Tuesday, was confined 
to my bed and called a physician. He also visited 



196 JEREMIAH HALLOCK.; 

me on Wed-nfesday. By the -blessing of God, felt 
some better Thursday— rode ten miles And attended 
a nj.eeting with difficulty in tiie evening. Preached 
on Friday, iand attended a church-meeting on Satur- 
day. Yesterday preached aU day at Wheelook, ad- 
inihistered the Lord's supper, aild .preached in the 
evening td a oro-Wded, attentive meetings This morn- 
ing, felt very feeble and fearful of a settled fever. 
About ten o'clock- set out -with Deacon Fellows for 
G-rfeensborough; After riding more than,- ten- miles, 
most of the way the worst road I ever travelled, ar- 
riypd here about sunset. By the help of God, I feeL 
much better this evening, and hope, to preaph on the 
morrow at Glovet, to spend this week and next Sab- 
bath it these- parts, and then go tiiirty miles to the " 
west, where I expect to spend 1h« next month. I .hope 
to be at Middlebiiry -about the first, of November, and 
to find a letter there from you. • -" ~ 

"I find it wiU not do for me to be anxious abeuf" 
home, or to calculate too .much on seeing you agauu 
I find no way but to submit aU to the Lord, and oast 
every care upon him. . God h^-fe his dear people in 
every place, but the church, in these parts is in her 
low state — ^heij wall demolished, and her gates broken 
down. that Connectiout knew her blessings, and 
that ihpse who wish to exchange the truth fof fabled, 
and to haive every thing in a state of disorder, saw 
thfe folly of their, ways.' - . ^ 

"I have seen no special awakenlqg qn missionary 

ground, except week before last ill B . , It was a 

rainy -day, when I was there. Out of thirteen families 



SECONl) MISSION TO tERMOlTt. ]97 

' '' ' . 

in the- settlement, sixty persons met at the tecture — 

some undfer deep impressions; and some with fresh 
anointings. It seemed njarvellous to see tlie gracious 
goings of the Grod of heaven in the wilderness. I 
thought the angels were uMouht^dly present, gazing 
With holy wonder. 

"I have heen.to Stanstead' in Canada!, where I 
lodged one night and preached a sermon. 

• "I hope Jeremiah is .at home and is steady and 
helpful. I want 'to know whether Homain minds his 
niother, is. at home evenings, and how far he has pro- 
ceeded with Prbyerhs. Remeniher my love ;bo Sarah— ^ 
it is time she began to put away childish' things,, and 
to seek the Lord. Grive my love to jnother-T-sbe must ' 
go in the strength of the\Loxd G-od. Rornember me 
to the deacons, to the church, and alL . 

" Prom your feehiej-needy, anxious, fearing, hop- 
ing iriendj 

' -'iJEEEMIAH HALLOCK." 

"Oct. 5. ;6rother W— — prayed in the- family, 
and we mutually prayed together, in a neighboring 
wood, and oovenantea to. remember each other Satur- 
day evening and, Sabbaith , morning. Went and saw 
the grave of ,Dt. Sob Swift, who died on a mission, 
kt this town (Enosburg) two years ago. He was 
taken unwell at fiiee1;ing, ■.. The sight of his grave was 
impressive with warning, fear, and hope. He speaks, 
though deafd." He was found in -his. Master's field, 
and lived and died. an. honor to the religion of the 
goiSpeJ. ' may J be a follower of them who, throiigh 
feith and patience,, inherit the promises, ' , 



198 JEREMIAH HAlLOCKr 

"Nov. 18. Arrived at home, having been absent 
sixteen week^. 1 have been often feeble in body and 
mind, but have been enabled to ride nine hundred 
and twelve miles, and to preach ninety times. Have 
visited and seen many of the, Lord's people. The 
meetings, for the most part, have -been attentive.' 
Find my dear wife and family well, and tiiat their 
lives, and health have been precious ^in the sight of 
the Lord. . Secular matters as well as could bti racpectp • 
ed. The pulpit has been supplied, and I am not in- 
formed of any special divisions, or root of bitterness 
appearing in the church or society. Two have died. 
This people rnanifest many tokelis of affection. O 
Lord, that I might be truly sensible of my sins afid 
unworthiness, anjd that thou wouldest teach- me thy 
statutes, ani fill my heart with thy love and praise.- 
Hold me up — draw mfei— make me fiiithful as a pro- 
fessor and as a minister, a husband and parent ; and 
0, pour out thy Spirit on this people aiid on my dear 
fmnily, that we may live more to thy glory, for Jesus'' 
sake. Amen. ~ - •- 

- " The laat text from which I preached, the -Sab- 
bath before I4efthome, was, ' I wUl^ in the strength 
of the Lord G-od.' , - This text I often thought of when 
ready to faint. Whitefield's motto, ' Faint, yet pursu- 
iitg-,^ was applioaljle, and often in my mind," 

"While on a^isit to his friends in Massachusetts, 
Mr. Hallock writes, " Jan. 15, 1808, G-oshen. Being 
kept in by the snow, -wirid; and cold, the -day and 
evening -were spent in giving ^ reason, each one, of 
his hope. It -was instructive and impressive. 0- Lord, 



HIS CORRESPONDENCE. 199 

wilt thou search us and lead us into all thy truth." 
A nohle example this, for pious relatives in their 
seasons of friendly- intercourse. 

To his brother a,t Flainfield, 
-'' ~> , " C+'NTOH, Jirne It), 1808. 

"Very dear Brother ani) Sister — I received 
your letter by Jeremiah, and thauk you. for' it: The 
things you wrote of the reformation in Pi?dnfield, etc., 
are indeed instructive and impressive. may the 
■ word of Grod stiM appear pleasant, his name gloriousj 
and Jesus precious -to the young converts. Bui they 
must expect much conflict) for heaven is oT)taiaed hy 
fighting. MayGod make us faithful to our children ; 
and 0, may. it please him to cause them to hear the 
still small voice, which fills 'the souj vVith hurahle" 
adoration and worship. ' " 

" Our family are as yet, through mercy; in usual 
health ; but it is the most "sickly tim§ here we ever 
witnessed. There are perhaps one hundred in the 
town confined to their beds. In two parts of the 
town, secular business is almost wholly interrupted. 
One of Mrs. Hallock's feisters, Mrs. Mf6rd, was bur- 
ied last Monday. The physicians call it the spot- 
ted-fever. It "would take .sheets to give the par- 
ticulars. The patients are generally taken almost 
instantly with a violent pain in the -head — their 
stren^h is gone, they lose their reason, and Uien 
fall into a lethargy.' Where it is mortal, iJi'ey gen- 
erally die in about forty-eight hours. Through mercy, ^ 
but eleven have died;' though we caimot tell what' 
will become' of the many sick, or of <the well, for the 



200 , JEREli|IA,H HA'LI<£»CK. ' 

fever appears to be spreading. Q gracious God, spared 
thy .people. 

"It is- surely' a day of -wrath; that it might be 
a (tay.of healing mercy, knd especially of spifituaL 
blesshigs. How we need- oil, in such a day.. It is a 
day of' tepor, but I jfear of little true. Conviction, 
theugh,we4iear of awakenings in other places^ " , 
"My health. is poor — I feel feeble, and am as- 
tonished at my own hardness and ^stupidity. Ttay 
far me, that it may please. the J^id Jesus to shitie' 
. upon my poor soul; On his head are many crowns 
of- victory— over the world,- oyer sin, over Satan, 
over death^ the grave and^ heU, and every foe. And 
he conquers in behalf of his people, that they may 
be sharers in his victories; happy belieyeis! _ 
Lord, make us rich in the precious faith of the gos- 
pelj. whatever else thou dost deny us.- ' 

'"Your affectionate . ' BEOTHlfB,." 

,- To his apn at- college. 

"IoHd's Day, Oct. 9, 180.8. 

."'A few ,words of .^dVice. In the first place, thinlC 
of the infinite , God, of his eternal power,'- boundless" 
goodness, and other perfectionsj as manifested in bii 
word, works, and Ways. Let him be in your thoughts 
and heart, a^ let him ever be before yoii. Secondly, 
consider that this is a fallen world, and that the 
human beart. is only, evil — ^thirik of alt. your sins pi. 
heart and life, as' against God and deserving his 
eternal wrath-7-hate th^m and long for- deliverance' 
{rota them.^ Thirdly, remember the Lord' Jesus" 
Christ as he , is set before us in the gpsp^, and -fix 



HISOOERESPO-NDENCfi. 204. 

your eyes on him as the all-sufficient Saviour — the', 
only hope, way, strength,' light, righteousness,, peace, 
eternal life, «tc., of this ginfol -and guilty world. 
Fourthly, consider that hy reason of desperate, wicked- 
ness, darkness, folly, an"d- spiritual death, .norie\will, 
or can come to Christ, tut they whom 'the Father 
. draweth:' therefore ever feel notohly your depend- 
ence on Grod for the great supper, hut for repent- 
ance; faith, and spiritual strength to come to Jesus. 
Xn this view 'of 'things, prayerfully and daily read 
some portiojis of Scripture, and he not, a stranger to 
closet prayer.' .. ^ 

*' Aff a student, he faithful acobrding to your hea;lth 
and strength; shun dissolute and, evil company. 'For 
Jehus' sake',, respect .your tutor, the president, and all 
the' faculty of .the coUege;' donsoien^iously -ohey all 
their positive commands, --and the laws of the institu- 
tion. Strive, to fOrm the hahit of rising- early, and he 
at youTrpost at recitations and prayers. , 

"See that' you do 'not despise the kind hints, 
warnings, and. admonitions' of the president or any of 
the authority^ Be a-.helper — ^the scholars make the 
college. Be economical of yoiif time and money. 
"Eour money is Christ's, thje most of it heing the coii- 
tributions of (xbd^s people for the supprart of H;he gos- 
pel.; 'iet,nothinghe lost.' ,. - 

■- "Fjom your infancy, I h*ve daily endeavored to 
give you. ta .Grod. Give yQUKhea,rt and all .to him. 
Cbnsider what I gety, my,sitai, and the Lord give you 
a saving Understanding of all things. 

, "From your a^ectipnate.- PARENT." 



202 JEREMIAH HAIjLOCK. 

'^January 1, 1809, I/ord's day. Communion. 
Thirty-tjyo have died, in this, town the past year— r 
eleven children, eight yoiithy thirteen in the stages of 
life more advanced. • The last year has heen a season 
of great spiritual barrenness with me and the church. 
If is painful to reflect how poorly we have lived. 
Lord, may -that tender mercy which hath spared, our 
lirves to this nefw-year, and which is still continuing 
unto us the gospel di grace, draw our souls and the 
souls of our children iio .Jesus. Lord, forgive, my 
coldness this day in praying, preaphing, and admin- 
istering the supper; and. if it be possible, may this 
year "be a spiritual year to my poor soul, and to thy 
people in this place," 

His reflections on pausing at 'another annual revo- 
lution are more extended.. ",0 Lord, wilt thou make 
me thankf jil for thy kind -care pf me and" my family, 
another year. Thou hast preserved'our lives, saved 
usfrom settled fevers, removed our. bodily eomplJE^ints, 
richly fed and cltithed us, and preserved us from:faU- 
ing into open, -scandalous sins. By thy great mercy, 
I have been allowed to continue in the" ministry 
another year ; and the church and society yet con- 
tinue. And I trust that I have- sometimes hada little 
freedom in prayer, study, and preaching j and that 
there has been some spiritual edification in our. meet- 
ings. Surely we must "say, it is altogether by the 
helpxif the Lotd that we thus continue ; yea, of .his 
•merciful kiadness, for our sins are exceeding many 
and great. Lord, humble my soul before thee, for " 
all my unbelief, impenitenoy, liikewarmness, and great' 



HIS CORRESPONDENCE. 203 

unfaithfulness j and cause my soul to mourn on ac- 
count of the general spiritual drought among us. Of - 
thy great mercy ip! "Christ Jesus, wilt thou pardon my 
great and many sins, and the sins of my family and 
of this church and people; and return and grant 
^tokens of spiritual good^ that thy, glory may appear 
ariiong us in the face of Jesus Christ, and that our 
souls may live, rejoice,' and praise thee. 

"What thou hast determined for us the piresent 
year we know not. If our-pilgrimageon earth shall 
he continued,- guard us from sin and error, and 
cause us to walk with, to serve, and to trust in thee. 
But if mySelf, family, or any of them must this year 
he numhered with those who die, cause that we,^and . 
whoever are to' die, may he found ready. he our 
strong hEtbitation, to which we may continually re- 
sort for all supportisind victory. And however it shall 
fare with the hody, vfilii this earth, and tiie. nations 
of it, yet may, Zion he kept as the apple of-thine eye, 
and this-he, a year renowned for the^huilding of her 
dear' Walls, And wUt thou work ■ in me and all 
thy dear ministers, that we may he faithful in all 
thy work," , 

From a^Lett«r to his son' at Cpllegs. 

• "Canton, July 19, 1809. 

'.'My^deak Son— How precious are our piresent 
probationary moments^ and how- ought sinners t& 
awake without del^y, and hy. faith in Christ to de- 
liver their souls /rom th& horrible pit, as a roe from 
the hand of the hunt'evj and as a bird^om the hand 
of the fowler. How many souls are lost hy spiritual 



204 JEAEMIAH HAHOCfi.. 

sloth and stupidity. Mankind, by nature,' are such 
sluggards in the work of the • Lord, t^ey 09,hnot -win 
the immortal crown. for quickening grace. 

" The judgments of Grod are heavy on the eastern 
World, and poor Ameripa must expect to drink of the 
cup of sorrow. But let us not sink into discourager 
ment, for the good Lord liveth and ' taketh pleasure in 
them that fear him, in those that Ijope, ija his mercy .' 
" Your affectionate FATHER." 

; " Oct. 7. Rode to ray dear father's, in. Groshen. 
My heloved sister Mercy I found in -her grave, She 
died the twenty-seventh of last month, in the thirty- 
fifth year of her age, having been very'sick- about four, 
weeks. She was thou^t to be converted at about 
the age of four years, and ever appeared to bear the 
fruits of a Christian. Blessed,be Grodfor the gospel 
hope respecting her, .and all who believe in Jesus. 
And'O, may this death be sanctified to the bereaved 
parents, and teach of their surviving children; It was, 
marvellous to me to find my dear parents have such 
support " ■ . > . 

' " A-uG. 5, J.810, Lord's day. Had more freedolii 
than I expected, in the forenoon; and much more 
this ifternoon. So it is ; if at any time my poor- soul , 
cdn get .any views of Jesus as Immanufel, it instantly 
lives. ' Last evening, my son Jeremiah retu^yied from 
college, having iclosed his residence there, He has 
now returned, to be a member of my family. Lord, 
make me a father indeed- to him. help me to give 
him up to thee, and wilt tho^ direct him" and respeot-.. 
ing= him, and make him .thine, that he" may serve 



•Hla JbUENAL. 205 

thee. O may he 'become pf Christ's hody; and if it 
is thy will, make him a minister of Christ ; yet, not 
my will, hut.thinfe ha done, for; Jesus' sake. 

"Sept. 5. Attended Commencement at Williams 
eoUege, -a.nd my son took his degree. • He has heeii 
more than five years in getting his education. The 
cost has hepn not far from six hundred dollars. 
. Lotd, wilt thou make us thankful for thy innumera, 
hie mercies, and help, us to live to . iiiee. ' O may- 
Clirist he formed. in the heart -of Jeremiah, that he 
may serve the Lord,. and that the time and cost of 
his education may not be consumed in the service of 
Satan. And O, .direct in mercy iu respect to his 
profession; and if consistent with thy wiU, may h? 
bei. called of G-od.into the gospel ministry, and may alt 
his, classr.mates.l^e blessed. How my soul longs to see 
Jiim among his praying fellow-youth. • - - 

" Got! 26. Last Saturday rode to Notfolk. First 
Sermon, on the spiritual table -set befoi'e. ,us.- Psalm 
13:5. Second sermon, on Christ's buUding his 
church. .ZQchariah 6 : 12. In the evening, preached 
on : the question, why a^rioe is put into the hand of 
the heartless impenitent sinner, ftoverbs 17 : 16. 
Found the dear Rev. Mr. Rohhins in a low state of 
health— nJoubtful whether he will ever, preacb.again. 
But he appeared strong in the Lcard; and -through 
grace to set a gospel example of patience and faith. 
Have great' cause to be .thankful that I live -to see 
this aged servant of the.- Lord, whose coAveisation 
and oondjict are so ilistruotive and impressive. - • 

"■Jan. 5)- 1811,^ Saturday. .Having written my 



1^06 JERESLJAB HALLO&K. 

sermons for the Sabbath, I would, through' divine 
grace^ devote this day to meditation, devotional read- 
ing, arid prayer. I would be sparing .of food at 
breakfast, and not eat afterwards till the sun be set. 
I piurpose to examine myself in respect to my past 
life^ 'espeoially the last year; to lament before the 
Lord the absence of his HoJy Spirit and the low state 
of religion among Us, arid to pray for his gracious re- 
jtui^; to seek the aid and comfort of the Holy Spirit 
ori the approaching Sabbath,, especially in the worship 
and at the table of the Lord ; to pray over my ser- 
mons ; to renew my covenant and' resolves ; to pray 
for all iHie ministers, churches, and interests of JesQs ;. 
to pray for my family, parents, and relatives,. 

" Jan. 6., I tarust yesterday was net spent wholly 
in vain. Have had more freedom and affection*-^ , 
whether liiey be spiritual and savingj Lord, thou 
knpwest — ^in family prayer, in public worship, and: at 
the table, than is' usual for me. 
- "*' Jan. 20, 1811. Last Friday, Jere'miah'went to 
Hebron, to study law with Judge Grilbert. I have 
longed and" prayed that he might study divinity, and 
be a minister of the gospel ; I have felt exceedingly 
unwilling to have him go into the. profession of the 
law. I consider it a scene of great temptation, and 
tremble for fear he will be led away and lost. But 
if it is not the mind of Christ to put him. into the 
ministry, and if lie ma;y serve Christ with Moses and 
believing civilians, ox in aijy other profession, though 
the lowest, hpw infinite will be the mercy, and may 
my soul say. Amen, and praise the Lord. Lord, 



HIS CORIlESPO^!IDENCE, 207 

■wilt thou allow and enaWe me to commit himjtrhoUy 
to thee for protection, for sanotifioation,' for direction, 
and all- things." . > 

To h'is sou-at Hebro'n. 
"■ ■ ' "Febbujuiy 4, 1811. 

"The oiily -way for us sinners to prepare for 
death; is hy ^repentance toward God, and.faifi 
towardour Lord Jesus Christ,' in-whom all fulness 
dwells for the weak and' guilty siimer. 

"Hbman and Sarah are gone to singing-school. 
How dreadful is thi? thought that any, after singing 
these pleasant notes on earth, should. go to. everlast- 
ing, wailings. But unless bora of the Spirit into true 
light and holy lovey hpw shall we make spiritual 
melody to Grod here, and heconie pieet to join the 
everlasting song ahove ? Yet let none, in view Of 
their dependence on quickening" grace, remain sloth- 
ful. " Who ever heard of Grdd's shining with saving 
light into the heart of a stupid siimer ? 

'.*-"We have receiyed" no letter frorii you, but wait 
for one with anxiety. We wish to know hpw you 
like your new situation — what is the state of your 
health^ — what your temptations, -are,' and how it is • 
with your inind — ^whether you have^ tender serious 
thoughts, oir are left to uncomfortable and alarming 
stupidity. , ' '• 

"I know, not which to esteem most, Moses or 
Aaron, Nehemiah or Ezra.. Let our calling be what 
it may, if it is pursued ia the faith of Jesus it ihall he 
yrell.. I wish you, in aU your letters, to use a filial 
freedom to ■ your- father — 'let me kndw your trials, 



208 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

doubts, hopes, and fears. Pfeservfe the letters I write ; 
they m9.y be of uSe to you.when I am in the grave." 

To his parents. 
' "Canton, Feb. 11^, 1811. 

" Honored and dear Parents — It is ^a day of 
gteai dalrkness over ihe lan,d and world, but Grod will 
.fulfil all his good promises concerning his. church, 
and they who watch and "keep their garments are 
blessed. The" apostle speaks much about being cmei- 
fied to the world. And as that which is crucified is- 
dead, so, to have the world crucified to us'4s to h^Ve 
it and its things dead to us, or like a putrid corpsej 
when considered as a portion, or fts a motive to lead 
us from Christ. Had the world been' thus crucified 
to those Mdden to the great supper, it would not have 
hindered therri.frbm cpming to it. And how blessed 
must it be to have the world thus dead to us' in la 
dying hour. ' .. - . . ~ 

"How much we need the" patience of the gospel 
hope iii old 'age. , I trust that through- grace, rfjy-deat 
aged paraits.do, in some good measure, have it} and 
that, my infirm mother will be strong in weakness, 
and have heavenly, support^ according to her trials. 
<3rive my love to brother and sister Hosford, and his 
/aged mother. "We cannot forget little Alicie^ and I 
would go' six rniles to see her. As I have not time 
to write to brother MoSes, I hope you will remember 
my love to him and his — ^to brother Patse also and 
his. Let brother Moses, after you hare read this — ^if 
you have -patience- to read it — see it. I have lately 
received' the folldwing- as a well authentioated faoi. 



HIS CORKESPOlfDENCE. 200 

"In a -certain place, last winter, t&ey engaged a 
professed , infidel to. instruct, a reading"' scHool. Tli« 
school) when they oaine together. oQe day in the after- 
noon, were pot able, to read. -The teacher, after sev- ' 
eral vain attempts to have them proceed .as usual, sent 
one of hf& scholars to^he neighb'oriiig hsouseof a, Chris- 
tian professor, to request him to come irito the school. 
It so was that the Minister was at this Christian's 
house, and wejit vvith him.to the school.- '.As an 
awakening had- begim in the town, the minister had 
little douht. what was the occasion of this state of 
tilings.. When he-cairie in and saw the solelnn ap- 
pearance, he first said to the teachei:, ' Sir^ 'what is 
the rnatter with yoiir school ?' ' He replied, ' I do not 
, kn(jw.| Said the minister, ' Have yo.u not been cor- 
recting thep V ' The master ansvvered, ' N't), we haye 
had no disturbance.' ' Well,' said the minister, 'jvhat 
then can be the matter ?' ' I cannot ,tell,' replied the 
master. ' But youitiiist havc^some opinion about it; 
tefljine what you think it is.' Not able to endu;re any 
longer, the poor Deist burst out iiir' tears and said, 'I 
beliave. it -is "the .-Spirit of Grod ;' and in a short time 
the teacher and fifteen of the scholars had hope id 
Christ. I hVd this the other evening from the mputh. 
of a, w^orthy 'Christian brother, who was knowing to 
the fkct. O vifhen, shall these saving waters, of the 
sanctuary bjBcome an impassable river ? 

" I send' mother a little tea, to let Jier.knowl 
have not forgotten her. 

." Ji'rom your affectionate son, / 

• "JEREIVLIAH HALLOGK," 



2J0 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

•To his son at Hebl-on. 
'••. ' ■ "M:aeeh4, 18U. 

" My dear jEREMiAfi — It affects me when I thiiik 
L of you, atsent from home' and among strangers, per- 
haps sick, and Vfith little pecuniary-' aid. But when 
I think of that state" of sin and alienation from Grod, 
in which all the children of Adam are by nature, it 
looks more a.ffecting. If we have a saving acquaint- 
ance with God in Christ, thougK among strangers; 
if "We have tribulation in the world, but peace in 
Jesus; if outwardly poorj tet rich in faithj we are 
happy, and have cause 'for constant and strong cbnso-! 
"lation. But if moral strangers to God, spiritually 
absent from him, under condemnation, and» always 
liable to be cut off and sent to eternal shanje and. 
perdition, how fearful and gloomy. Let us then first, 
seelt that wisdom which consisteth in the fear of God, 
and with all oUr getting, labor for a true understand- 
ing of the^lpry of God in the face of Jesus. 

"From your affectionate ,■ FATHER." 



> "]VUy 17. Tb-day, Mr. Samuel John Mills, Jun.,. 
candidate, preached for. us. His first sermon was on 
depravity; his second, on giving aU to Christ. His 
preaching wa« Spiritual and edifying. O Lord, make 
me thankful for thy- mercyto thy" servant Mills^ in 
givihg him such a son. MaJT-he bo made a faithful 
missionary and minister of Jesus, a great blessing 
to Zion ;. arid rtiay my heart rejoice in the good of 
others ; jmd 0, wilt thou remember my poor Jeremiah 
and each of my children." 



HIS CORRESPONDENCE. 211 

To his younger BoaVt.'a boarjdLng-sehool inShaion. 

"Canton, Jan. 21, 1812. 

" M.Y DEAR Son— I think of you g.very day, and 
■you caiipot tell how much I feel your ahsence. One • 
of the "calamities of the present world is,-that we d» 
-rtbt sufEciently value our. mercies until they are 
taken from us. ~- 

"I find, I am becoming old and feehle;, and 
though, the Lord makes Augustus a comfort to me, 
and tljiough the pec^le are kind in ftirnishiag plenty 
of wiood, yet>the care of the fires and cattle, with' my 
other labors, is almost top much for me." .. . -^ 

In the. latter part- of thiis letter,' Mr. ilaUock as- 
sociates with his' son several youth from Canton, who 
were at the- same school j arid. addresses them: ■ 

"My dear young friends, a gloomy vacancy is 
made in oUrfamiUes by your a.bseiice. " But were 
yoii removed to the land of silence, never to return, 
it would be far increased. If you should all live to 
return, and then find aU^our friends alive, the mercy 
woiild be. great. We ought always to live ^S those 
who wait for -their Lord, not lEnowing-when-hewill" 
come. Without an interest in Christ, none can go- to 
heaven, learning • and every thing else; will be' in 
vain, yea, far worse than in Vain. In a, letter lately 
received from a missionary ia -Vermont, are tiiese 
words : '.'. Tellypur dear precious. youth that God hath 
mercy in store for those, who remember him while 
young.' Unspeakably the best time to , sefve -flie 
Lord is in yduth^and health. To delay until sick- 
ness or old age, is like delaying to buUd a house until 



212 ;jei!.em:iah halloc-k. 

the coldest day jjiiwinter. Do and get as liitioh good 
as you can — ^watch against all evil to.wMch we are 
ever, exposed. Farewell. Your real friend, • - 

; . ".JEREMIAH HALI,OCi-."' ' 

: "July 2. I this day retiimed from a tour of 
preaching, with that dear servant of .Christ, brothSr 
Giliett. Tuesday, June 23, we jireaohed at Groshen, 
and in the: tour we visited both societies in Cornwall, 
Warren, Kent, hoth societies, in Sharon, - Salisbury, 
and hoth gboieties in Canaan, having heen. Jroih home, 
ten days. Though feeble in' body aiifil miad, have 
been oayried throttgli. In. almost every place, there 
are y spiritual droppings, and in some^ particiilarly 
Kent and South Ca'uaail, the beginning of a spiritual 
shower.. Though one youth, since I haVe'beeh gone, 
has, been drowned, yet my dear vyife and tshildfen 
have been preserved, and my family and friends are 
in usual health. Lord, ' so teach us ito number 
otir days, that we may aj^ly our hearts imto wisdcaiii' 
" The day before I set' out, heard that war was 
declajred agaiast England. It much afiected me. -It 
appears to me sin and folly to enter into this war. 
Lord, may thy people humble themselves, return and 
trust in th«e, and wilt thou be kilo\vn in Zion for a 
re&ge, and in wrath remember mercy." •" 

' This tour of preaphing was, by a:ppointment -of the 
association, for the benefit df churches under its care 
which -enjoyed tlie labors of settled pastors. 

"IS'ovEMBER 5, 1812. This day went vrith rny son 
Jeremiah to Hartford, and left him therfr tp take the 



PARTS WITH HIS SON. • 213 

stage, to-morrow, for Pittsburgh, l^^heiice, lie expects 
to go into the state of OhiOj to enter on the- p^rofession 
of law. My mind turned on the divine government, 
which, I think, looked .glorious and -afforded sweet 
peace to toy soul. I trust,. I was enabled in some 
degree to give- up' my d«ar child to -Odd, and leave 
him at the feet of JeSus. Made such observations to 
him on the way as I thought might be usefuL About 
two o'clock parted with hira and returned home. 0" 
Lord of all mercy, wUt thou lead his heart to tlie,e, 
apd be his guide and protection; make him useful in 
^ion and tiie world, and happy in Jesus; prepare his 
parents for thy' whole wilt respecting him." 

The trial of the- pious father on this occasipn, 
seems to have been not altogether tinlike that of 
Abraham, as be' went forth to offer up his beloved; 
Isaac ; and in neither case did the Lord forsake his 
servant. , Speaking of- this journey afterwards to a 
number of friends, Mr. Hallock rendarked, that when 
he took, his seat in'the wagon he expected it would 
be the gloomiest day- of his Mfe', but that he found it 
one of the.happiest: — ^th^-t his mind was sweetly revolv- 
ing the words of that precious Psalm : 

"The Lord, how absolute he reigns," etc. 

It was probably now, 'that he addressed his son 
with "tender emphasis and tears: "Jeremiah, tliavfe 
been long praying and hopiag .that you might be a 
minister of the gospel— my expectation is at length 
cut off — I see it is not the w;ill of Christ to employ 
you in> this way. And now; my son, I' want to ask 
you one que'stion, Will yon be the minister's friend?" 



2U JEREMIAH HALLOC.K. 



CHAPTER IX. 

REVIVALS IN 1812"aND 1813— DEATH, QF HIS ONIt.y 
DAUGHTER— CORRESPONDENCE. 

The Lord now gladdened Mr. Hallook's heart by 
a third special' work Ijf grace f.mong his dear' people. - 
■ ' "Dec. 6,-1813. Lord?s djay. Texts: * Come, my 
people, enter thou into thy'chamhers,' etc. Isa. 26 : 20, 
21. ' What wUt thou say, when I shall punish thee ?' 
Jeremiah 13 : 21. More freedom than usual for me. 
Last Thursday evening, ■t|ie prayer-meeting was better 
attended than common, and to me it was more solemn. 
Three young men are under conviction, and there is 
the appearance of a little cloud. that it niight, 
through infinite m#rcy, he increased, and the church 
be quicliened. 

" Dec. 27. Last Thiirsday was kept as a day (Jf 
fasting and prayer by this church and a numb^ of 
the society. Had a prayer-meeting at ourhoiise in 
the forenoon. At one, went to the meeting-house — 
had two sermons, three -prayers, and three songs of 
t\e Lord. The sermons were spiritual, instructive, 
and impressive. Met again in the evening ; Rev. Mi. 
Jerome preached. Rev. Mr.. GriUett exhorted. All, the 
meetings were fiiU,' and more serious than- usual for 
us. The contention about sijiging- appears to be sub- 
siding, and things 4ook like pea;ce. An awakened 
youth has, the past week, obt^ed a gleam of hope. 
One was exs!,mined this- intermission, and propounded 



-REVIVALS. ^15 

this afternoon^ to join the churchy Saw a young man 
a^ noon in tears lor his soul. ' Not unto. us, Lord, 
not unto us, but unto thy name give glory.' ' 'fiie 
Hope of Israel.' Have had more freedom in all the 
puhliOj exercises than I expected, alid more attention. 
' Praise the Lord, my sotd.' 
'•'''* " Jan. 1, t§l3, Friday. ~ Spent the forenoon in 
meditation, and vsrriting on Isa. ,44 : 3-5 : '1 mil pour 
water on him- that is thirsty,' etc. Preached in the 
afternoon,-before the Lord's supper. Two youth were 
present, apparent converts, who at the time of. our 
last like meeting were, in a state of stupidity. Some 
were present who, to appearance, are subjects of con-- 
viction. . the Hope of Isirael, carry >on .thy glorious 
work, .and fill thy people withthy love and praise." 

- . To his 5 on in, "Ohio . 

" Januae,Y 25,,1813. 

• - ,. " It has been my wish and resolve to bring up my 
children for Christ. My great desire' is, that you 
might be his^ and I trust I do not cease to pray for- 
you, and especially that he migb.t be formed in your 
heart the hope of glory, ihy dear Jeremiah, linow 
that you are a sinner,, a child of wrath by nature ; 
and do not rest short of winning Christ and. his ful- 
nefe as your portion. And know, that" we have, no 
time to lose in ^s. great matter." May the G-od of 
Abrahafti direct yout way and bless yon, and give 
you prosperity in your profession ; but above all, make- 
you rich -towards &od. Ypur dear mother wants I 
gtould caution you against all evil company and temp- 
tations to sin, and advise you to choose those who fear 



216 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

the Lord for your companions, and to feel your entire 
J dependence on him. 

" Proni your affectionate FATHER." . 

" March 7. Lecture heforei the Lord's supper, 
To-day there were three to one at meeting compared 
with our common number, though I was still barren 
in prayei: and preaching, Lord, make' me humble 
in thy sight for my hardness, and quicken my dead 
soH.1./ 0, most merciful Redeemer, are there not signs 
that thy Spirit is niovipg among us, and wilt thou not 
take' the work- into thine own hands, ana make un- 
toward hearts willing in' this day of ihj power? 
quicken, pardon, and strengthen "me." 

. Feeling not unlike these Mr. HalloSk onoe ex- 
pressed to a Christian fri^ds" After I have been all 
day among my people, witnessed the yeli&f and comfo;"t 
of young converts, and the humble thankfulness of old- 
er Christians for the good Spirit of Ood among us, I 
come homlB to try to review my own donduct and look 
inta my own heart. . Though all the people seem to b6 
moved, Lfind myself so. blind and dead, that I am" 
ready to conclude I am nothing but lotjtenness afld 
hypocrisy. Sometimes, after I go to" bed, I have rest- 
lessi anxious nights,, and am so agitated in view of 
my sin and deadness, that my bed shakes under me." 
Yet he was often raised above these depressing vie^Sj 
and then his comfort and gratitude were expressed 
with a simpljoity^aiid humility peculiar to himself.- 

In -a printed sermon already noticed he says, 
"This awakening began among the youth, and ap- 



REVIVALS. 217 

peared gradually to increase through the foUowing 
winter and spring. In this season of grace, twenty- 
eight joined the church." 

To his son in Ohio. ,■'^^' 

"March 6, 1813. 

" My DEAR CHif,D— We yesterday received your 
letter, dated February 4, which gave us the affecting 
accoujit of your late journeys and hardships. The 
Lord has strengthened, and preserved! you, and to 
him be all the paise.* The mranths of your absence 
are tedious, to your parents. Your dear aunt Chloe 
Humphrey has -fallen by the putrid pleurisy. It 
deeply affects your uncle, and he has set up prayers 
in his family. Five have lately obtained hope — sev- 
eral are under concern— we have frequent meetings^ 
which are seriously attended. Your dear mother 
wants to have you -write with whom you live — -the 
moral and religious state of the people — ^whether the 
Lord's day is -observed, and you have preaching or 
religious meetii^s. Jeremiah, iny chief concern is 
for your precious soul, that you may serve Christ 
and share in his salvation. This world, at best, is so 
vain and uncertain ; did we own the whole of it, we 
sbould be undone wretches, out of Christ. But in 
him, the most poor in other respects are rich indeed, 
yea, interested in the fulness of Grod. Do not neglect 
to read, daily, the word of life, to pray, to meditate ; 
andmay the Holy Spirit show you the things of Jesus. 
I wish you would write once a month. Have you a 
Bible ? Write a few words about the state of your 

HsUook. ' 10 



218 JEREMFAH HALLOCK. 

mind. Eternity is at the door. Be strictly honest. 
Strive to do good. GrrandmothCT sends her love. The 
rest of us sign our names in testimony of affection. . 

"JEREMIAH HALLOCK, 
"MERCY HALLOCK, 
■ "WM. H. HALLOCK, 
, "SARAH HALLOCK." 

-"■•*♦." 
Tothesame. ., - 

"Julys, 1813. • 

" My dear Child— Having you daily in my .mind, 
and hearing your afieotionate mother often speak of 
you, I have set apart this day for meditation, and to 
write to you. Through divine mercy, our family are 
yet in usual health, except Sarah, who has, this, 
morning, some Sjrmptrans of the spotted-fever. Our' 
outward circumstances are comfortable. The summer 
is warm-r-^e have refreshing showers, and a favor- 
able prospect as to the fruits of the earth. The fever 
has been distressing in Barkhamsted. The dear Eev. 
Mr. Eells is among the fallen — sick about three daysl 
Hq was a precious servant of Jesus Christ, and 
though diead yet' speaketh. 

" No troops have as yet been called for from us, 
to guard our coast; though some |rom the eastern 
part of the state are called to New liondon. "We fear 
Hqman will be called for< 

" In respect to spiritual matters, eleven stand 
propounded and expect to join the church to-morrow. 
I hope as many more will soon come forward, though 
I fear the attention is declining. The work is power- 
fill at New Hartford. when shall I be able to 



REVIVALS. 219 

write th^se things to you respecting* Homan and 
Sarah, and the rest of pur family, and to hear of them 
from you-and D ? The. converts naturally ad- 
dress their mates in the' language of Moses to his 
brother-in-law, ' Come thou with us, anji we will do 
thee good, for the Lord hath spoken good concerning 
Israel/ I fear ray great unfaithfulness is the reason 
that my poor family is so passed hy." I think both 
Homan and Sarah have been more attentive. 

" O Jeremiah, outward comforts are desirable, but 
the great thing is a portion in Jesus 'Christ, and that 
rest which remaineth for his people. The Lord make 
darkness light before you. 

': "From your parents, who feel daily and much, 
for yoru." * *■ 

" Aug. 2. This morning, my son Homan set out 
as a soldier for New London. Lord, in mercy 
save him from sin, from the pestilence, and from the 
sword,^ and return hiih in safety, if thou wilt, 

" Sept. 19.' Last Friday evening, my son returned 
from his military toiir of forty-five days, ia health.. 
Make ihe thankful, Lord, and help us aU to live 
to thee^^Banotify the child. I perceive Sarah, my 
deSr daughter, is thoughtful ; may. she become an 
unfeigned believer in Jesus." 

The J-e9.der iias already seen that Mr. Hallock 
was not left of his|ieavehly Father " without chastise- 
ment." "We come now to a scene of severe and pro- 
tracted dorrestic afflictions. 

« Thursday, Oct. 14, 1813. .Last week on Thurs-, 



220 JEREMIAH HALLQCK. 

day, my dear daughter Sarah was taken with a dhiil, 
which was followed by a slight fever. On Friday, 
she, "took an emetic, which operated well, but did not 
relieve her. The next two days, her disorder in- 
creased — it was more threatening on Monday, when 
my dear friend Dr; Everest came to see her in the 
morning ; before this, Dr. Everett had visited -her. 

." On Tuesday the fever, which was of the ty^jhus 
spotted kind, stUl raged, and the child appeared to be 
sinking under it. Wednesday, about four o'clock in 
the morning, it was feared by the "watchers that she 
was dying ; we were all called up. solemn, trying 
scene ! I did not think she would breathe many 
minutes^ |jut on the application of spirits she a little 
revived. The physician came early, and tarried all 
.day. Ill the afternoon we took a little courage, but 
about nine in the everting- she was more unwell ; our 
hc^es very much subsided, and our fears prevailed. 
She has had. a tossing, deranged, distressing night, 
and this morning appears to be wasting away, and 
sinking into the arms of death. 

"And now, Lord, what shall I say, and where- 
shall I go but to thee ?' I know my sins and guilt 
are great ; I have riot been faitliful as I ought to have 
been as a parent, especially in spiritual things. She 
was shapen in iniquity, and her sins are great. But 
0, our heavenly Father, thou hast of thy great love 
given thy Son Jesus Christ to die for us sinners. He 
hath died for us, and his blood eleanseth from all sin ; 
but such is the sinful hardness of the human heart, 
thait unless born of thy Holy Spirit, noneVill believe, 



HIS DAUGHTER'S SICKNESS. 221 

and share in, the salvation of the Redeemer. But 0, 
thou exalted Saviour, exalted af thy Father's right 
-hand to give repentancej. fdrm her heart anew hy 
thy hlessed Spirit. our Father in heaven— for the . 
Father and Son' are one^ — wilt thou effectually 
teach and draw her to the Son ; shine with thy divine 
rays in the face of Jesus, into her dark mind; that 

. she may be a sharer in the light of hfe. She is thine 
hy creation and preservation, .pity the wtsrk of thine 
own hands. She is bought by the blood of Christ, 
has been given to him by prayer — whether in true 
faith thou, Lord, knowest — and I would now, her 
mother joining with me, still give her up to thee, soul 
and body, to be disposed of, in time and in eternity, 
in life and in death, according tc thy holy pleasure ; 
hoping in thy great mercy in Jesus Christ ; imploring 

.through him her sanctificatioil and pardon and eter- 
nal life. K she may live, Lord Jesus, may she 
be thy handrnaid, and an obedient child for thy 
sake. 'If it is thy will to take her now out of the 
world, help us to say from the heart,-.' Thy will be 
done ;' and may she be thine in death, and go and 
serve thee in heaven. "We are unworthy of the least 
common mercy ; how much more so of ,thy dear 

, children's bread — of thy Spirit and its perfect gifts ? 
But we would plead thy great mercy to sinners, the 

tlood and righteousness of Ay dear Son, and -our 

almi^ty Saviour-— the glory of the Father, Son, and 

Holy Grhost, one glorious Jehovah, and the increase 

and joy of thy kingdom. 

. ' "JEREMIAH HALLOCK." 



2i!2 • JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

" Oct. 15, ien o'clock in the mornitig. At four 
we were called up, it teiag supposed that Sarah was 
dying ; she a little revived, but now appears to be 
sinking very fast. Lord Jesus, thou almighty, 
most merciful Saviour, help us to. submit, and to 
resign her up to thee and to our heavenly Father, in 
and through thee. It is all that we can do — ^it is all 
that thou now requircst of us respecting her, and 
may it be all we would wish to do — ^to leave her^n 
thy almighty,, merciful hands. sanctify her heart, 
forgive her sins, and clothe her naked soul in the 
white raiment of Jesus. , Lord' Jesus, wilt thou 
receive her departing spirit in mercy. heavenly 
Father, wilt thou accept of her, in and through thy 
dear Soti. -Amen. 

" Oct. 16, Saturday morning. This morning, at 
half-past twelve, o'clock, Sarah ceased to breathe, her 
age being fourteen years and six months. She had 
been unusually agreeable,- filial, and endearing, for 
a number of months before her sickness. She has 
evidently been a, subject of conviction since last 
March, and has had an impressive sense of her de- 
pravity., guilt, and danger, and of the nearness of deaiii 
and eternity. Many prayers were made on her be- 
half in her sickness, and especially for her soul. There 
was a general, sympathy in her case.- 0. Lord,' help 
jne and- her mother to be thankful for these things 
and the blessed gospel hope, to be stiU and know that 
thou art God, and to make a spiritual improvement 
of this thy holy rod | and wilt thou be our suj^ort 
and consolation, and make her death spiritually 



HIS DAUGHTER'S DEATH. 223 

•profitable to her surviving brothers, the grand- 
parents, and all the relatives — to her mates, and 
every one. 

"Oct. 17, Lord's day. To-day attended Sarah's 
funeral. The dear Mr. Mills of Torringford preached 
on ' The heart of the wise is in the house of mourn- 
ing.' Her precious remains vp^ere carried into the 
meeting-house ; Hie assembly was large : she was 
beloved in life and lamented in death. may we 
bless the Lord, in taking as \vell as in giving-; and 
truly say. His will be done. 

"Oct.. 24. The pastJias been, a sorrowful week. 
I did not know how dear she wasj until J fotind 
myself bereaved of her." • 

The compiler well remembers his first interview 
with Mr. Hallock, It was nearly a year after this 
bereavement, and in company with a friend who, 
like himself, was a stranger to the man of God„ 
The soft appliances of Christianity had now soothed, 
but not closed the deep wound in his heart. - After 
a, little conversation on general topics, he stated the 
touching, oircTjmstances of his daughter's death, and 
read one or two letters which, a little before her .sick- 
ness, she had sent to some' youthful companiofis^ and 
which were the, more valuable as containing some 
evidence of her preparation for an early grave. On 
his leaving the room, Iturned to my frifend, tears fell 
frorn his eyes, his frame shook, he remained silent 
for some moments. It was indeed an overwhelming 
exhibitioii of the trium^jhof grace in the midst of 
parental sorrow. For a rtumber. of years the name of 



224 JEREMIAH H.AiLOCK. 

Sarah was often on Mr. Hallock's lips, eithej/to ishow 
his undying affection in the circle of particular friends, 
or to »give tender and solemn interest' to truth in the 
religious conference. The foUoVing letter to his son 
in Ohio was written immediately after her death. - 

To hlB Son in Ohio, 

" My dear Child — I wrote to you last month. In 
that and in former letters I could write that all otir 
family were alive, and commoidy that they were in 
health. But now it is otherwise. For I must tell 
you that your dear and promising sister Sarah is in 
her grave. Solemn thought ! almost too overwhelm- 
ing for m« to write, or you to hear. But let us be 
still and know that the Lord hath done it, and that 
his ways are most just, good, and wise, and that his 
rod v^ill he most profitahle to the humhle. He 'is 
very pitiful, and of tender mercy.' 

"Sarah, for ten months past, has been peculiarly 
filial and agreeable, so that we have noticed her 
steady, womanly actions. As I wrote, she has been 
the subject of serious impressions the past spring and 
summer. In a letter to one of her mates, dated last 
March, she writes, after mentioning the attehtion of 
numbers, 'And now, Polly, does not this look as if 
the Lord is beginning his work among u;s ? It does, 
indeed, to me. And why cannot you and I pray to 
Him who is able to pluck us out of the fire as fire- 
brands ? I do hope that these tilings will not wear 
off our minds.' In another letter, dated in May, she 
writes, ' My thoughts are these to-day : Q, how vain 
and trifling is this world. It ^s a Wonder that I am 



KIS BAUGHTEa'S UtAIK. 225 

not out off. Nothing can soften our hard hearts liiit 
the Almighty's hand. If h6 is willing, he can save at 
the last moment. He is allowing us to come to him ; 
every day he gives us a free offer. what unwor- 
ttiy creatures we are, not worthy to live. If I had my 
deserts, I had gone down to hell long ago.' The follow- 
ing lines are extracted from another of her papers, dat- 
ed July 23, 1813, written in health, not thiee months 
before her death : ' I think myself, how uncertain life 
is. We do not know at what time He may come 
and call us to his tar. But if we are only prepared, 
it will be no matter how soon. I ^hink that I have not 
a great while to live^ I am on the brink of eternity.' 

"Her anxiety, the past summer, has been great, 
and her feelings exceedingly tender respecting her 
brothers. As she went to the grammar-school, she 
often visited the ppst-ofiioe, to see if there was hot a 
letter from you or Homan. , > 

"Thursday morning, the seventh Instant, she sat 
at breakfast with ua for the last time. Soon after 
she 'said, -'Ma, ma, how cold I am !' , She kept about, 
thougfi. drooping — had a restless night. Saturday, 
the physician was isalled. Lord's day, no better : I 
exchanged with Mr. Mills ; returned about ten o'clock 
in the evening ; found' her exceedingly sick. She 
expressed an apprehension, as she. had done from the 
first, that she cguld not recover. • She told me she 
hoped sbe" could trust in Christ. Froni this time she 
was unable to' converse. She grew worse, Monday,- 
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday. Fri- 
day evening her piercing groans penetrated ^.every 

10* 



226 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

room in the house. About eleven her groajis ceased 
arid she appeared to lie easy, but rattled in her throat. 
This rather increased until half past twelve, when 
she expired without a struggle. Her fever was typhus. 
my sonj you have lost an amiable, . afTectionate 
sister, who bade fair to be a comfort and an honor to 
you and to her parents, to the ohurch and to the 
world. The sympathy was general ; Dr. Everest 
remained by her night-arid day. Every human means 
was used, and the prayers of Zion were made with- 
out ceasing on her behalf ; but her appointed time 
was come, and she must go. Mr., Mills preached her 
funeral-sermon on -the Lord's day. Her body was 
cajried to the meeting-house ; her furieral procession, 
though it was rainy, was perhaps as great as we ever 
had : aU Canton mourned over fallen Sarah. 

" The wound is deep^ and lasting. It cuts like a- 
knife-; it pierces like a sword. But in the midst of 
the lightning and thunder there is a rainbow about 
His* throne. AJid now let us bless the Lord, see the 
emptiness of the world, realize the value of the glo- 
rious gospel of Jesus, tlie certainty of his coming, and 
his near approach; p»ze this ohasteriing of -the. Lord, 
and make a penitent, believirig,. prayerful use of it. 

"From your affectionate mourning parents, 

"JEREMIAH AND MERCY HALIiOCK." 

. * It was common with Mr. Hallook in this manner to speak 
of God. He often .commenced prayer, jn a small circle, with- 
out uttering any of the divine names. In a person of less depth 
of piety this inight have been exceptionable ; but in one who 
appeared habitually to hold communion with his God, it seemed 
like the language of nature, and was often very impressive. 



HIS-DAUGHTER'S DEATH. 227 

In describing to friends the scene of his daughter's 
departuie-, Mr. Hallook said, 

" Before the child wa? quite gone, if I had seen a 
man coming in the street — ^it would have ihade no 
difference whether he was a beggar, or in his coach 
and six — I should, wish to say to him, 'Friend, do 
you love the Lord Jesus Christ? If you do, you are 
the man we want to gee. Come in and kneel down 
with us. and pray for our dear dying daughter.' 

" At the moment her spirit, left her body, these 
four truths pressed upon my mind with amazing in- 
terest: 

"1. the worth, of the immortal soul ! 

"2. the value of an interest in Christ I 

" 3. the emptiness of this world ! * 

," 4. the solemnity of the close of probation ! 

" When I saw she had breathed her Jast breach I 
almost involuntarily spread out my hands, and kneel- 
ed down and said^ ' Come, let us pray.' But there 
was ^n awful vacancy.. She who had so filled our 
suppUcations Was no longer a subject of prayer. I 
seemed for a short time not toJknow what to pra^ 
for. The solemnity of the mqpient was past utter- 
ance." V 

A new and prptracted scene of domestic affliction 
soon opened.- 

'<Nov. 19, 1813. Friday. Nineteen days after 

Sarah's death, my dear son WilUam Soman, in his 

seventeenth year, was taken with the fever of which 

, his dear sister died. This is the sixteenth day of his 



2:i8 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

fever, and he is ^ery low ; it is douttful, to human 
view, whether he continues through the day. 

"And what shall I say ? what shall I do? where 
shall I go? Lord,' keep me from murmuring; I 
would he dumh, heoause it is thy hand, nor would I 
trust in man or go to creatures ; hut in thee would I 
trust, the everlasting G-od of all power, grace, and 
salvation, and to thee would I go, who sayest, 'Call 
upon me in the .day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, 
and thou shalt glorify me.' Lord Jesus, thou know- 
est whether this sick child can live. Thou art the' 
great and everlasting Physician of soul and body. 
appear for our help, ere the child die. Will it not be 
for thy glory, Lord Jesus, to raise him up — ^to hear 
our prayers for his recovery ? 0, if it is' thy wUl to 
grant us this great mercy, bestow it upon us, and pre- 
pare us to receive it, that thanksgiving, and praise 
niay be rendered to thy great and glorious name. But 
0, his precious and immqrtal soul, wilt l3iou save it 
from sin and from wrath. This great spiritual salva- 
tion was thy errand into the world, and now I would 
come to thee for this unspeakable mercy. Thou dost 
suffer parents to bring their children to thee, implor- 
ing for them thy spiritual, eternal, saving mercies. 
heavenly Father, wilt thou by thy good Spirit open 
his understanding and his heart to receive thy dear 
Son, and make him a partaker of his fulness. He is 
a sinner by nature and by practice, and deserving the 
curse of^tfiy law. I am sinftil and unworthy of the 
least favor, how much more so of these eternal bless- 
ings ; but I would plead thy great mercy in the Lord 



HIS SON'S SICKNESS. 239 

Jesus; I would plead his "atoning tlood- and right- 
eousness, the travail of his soul, and the edification of 
his kingdom. most mercifarCrod, if it can be con- 
sistent with thy will, that he might leave some evi- 
dence of his heing a subject of gospel faith and par- 
don — ^but 0, that in this I might also be resigned. 
And now, .0 Lord my God, whose are all creatures, 
worlds, and things, and whose is the everlasting do- 
minion in the world of nature and of grace, wilt thou 
help us, his parents, to give him up without reserve 
to thee, soul 9,nd.body, for time arid eternity, implor- 
ing that he may be thine, through' sanctifioation of 
thy Holy Spirit, in life and in death, and a sharer in 
the pardon and great salvation of thy glorious gospel ; 
and that we may never consider him as ours, but as 
given to thee. To which may I, through th.y assist- 
ing grace, sincerely sign my name, this nineteenth 

day of November,' 1813. 

"JEREMIAH HALLOCK." 

" The child lay for about three hours in an appar- 
ently dying state — ^his extremities cold — ^his head 
stretched back — ^his bWath very short, attended with 
.a quick, vdry, 'dying pulse. For several hours, we 
expected every minute to see him eipire. But the 
God of Zioh, who can save to the uttermost, was pleas- 
ed to keep his expiring' breath, and to revive him. 
Encouraging symptoms attended him the. following 
night and the day afterwards, Saturday,. November 20. 
But he was worse Saturday evening and on tixe Sab- 
Ibath, so that I expected all day to be called out of the 
meeting-house to see him' die. But the Lord was 



230 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

pleased to revive him ageiia, of his great mercy. On 
Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, thin^ still jboked 
encouraging respecting his recovery. 

" On Friday the 26th, Mrs. Hallock was taken 
with"the fever, and was sick about four weeks, though 
at no time so low as Homan had heen. To have her 
fail was exceedingly trying to hody and mind. Hav- 
ing lately buried my only daughter, to have Mrs. 
Hallock, and my -only surviving child at home, both 
sick in two adjacent Tooms, overwhelmed my spirits. 
But I was favored with usual health,' and enabled to 
preach on the Sabbath. 

" On the 20th of Becember, I was myself violent- 
ly seized with the fever. I had been unwell anum- 
ber of days, and kept about, hoping it 'would wear 
off; but now it came on like a whirlwind, and I was 
lost, for the njost part, about twelve days. , I have 
now, March 14, 1814, been confined by sickness from 
public worship thirteen Sabbaths, and the most of 
the time flonfined to my room. I have had two re- 
lapses, and am now feeble, but just able to walk out 
a few rods in a pleasant day. These have been weari- 
some days and weeks. But rny dear Saviour has not 
left me to sink in despondency. Sometimes, I trust, 
I have had refreshing views of. iJie truth as it is in 
Jesus, and our trials have been mixed with countless 
mercies. Though the, first two who had the fever 
died,, namely, Deacon Andrew Mills* and Sarah, yet, 

• This was the beloved friend of Mr. HalloDk, whose- re- 
moval to Vermont and great usefulness there, have already 
been recorded. While on a, visit to Canton, he foil a vietinj to 



HIS OWN SICKNESS. " 231 

Mrs. Hallook and Homan are restored to comfortalfeje 
health, and I am. much tetter ; and we are not called 
to sorrow for the deceased without hope. 

" The pulpit has been supplied, for the most part, 
, by friendly neighboring ministers. The people have 
also been exceedingly kind q,nd- helpfnl, not only in 
word, but in deeds. Besides watching by night, and 
helping by day, and sending in nee&fiil articles, they 
have given us not less than a hundred dollars in 
money. The young men, the day after Thanksgiving, - 
gave me forty-eight'doUars in silver, and the female 
youth presented Mrs. -HaUook a muff and tippet. 
0, may I See -all these helps from the Lordj and feel 
my increased obligations to him and his people. And 
may the parents and' children be blessed of the Lprd, 
and rewarded of his great mercy in Jesus a thousand- 
fold for their works of sympathy and love. 

" Since I have been sick and shut up, this eccle- 
siastical society -have agreed to build a house for pub- 
lic worship, and they appear to have adopted wise 
and energetic measures for its speedy accomplishment. 
This I consider a very great mercy, and inay-»the 
, Lord bless and succeed ihem. 

"Apbil 8, 1814. State Fast. Had a reading meet- 
ing in the forenoon, and pieached this afternoon from 
Joel 2 : 12. Had more strength and freedom than I 
expected; This.is-the first of my preaching since the 
19th of December, having been unable to preach for 

this fever, after an illpess of three weeks, at Mr. Hallock's. 
house. He died a few days before Miss Sarah Hallook was 
taken sick. 



232 JEREMIAH HALLOCJC, 

sixteen Sabbaths. Lord, if it is thy will tp restore 
me to health again, wilt thou make me thankful, and 
lielp me' to meet every trial and temptation, to be 
more faithful in. the ministry of Jesus, and to serve 
thee better than I have ever done, to thy glory and 
the edification of thy people." 

The fact s6ems worthy, of record, that besides 
these Sabbaths and a very, few more just be&re his 
death, Mr, Hallock was prevented &om preaching only 
one .Sabbath in the whole course of his pastoral life. 
In seasons of; illness he ever exhibited, in attf ac- 
tive lustre, the mild and lovely graces of the. Chris- 
tian. At such times he seemed to make an effort to 
lighten the cares of those around him ; while the 
expression of his warm .thanks for every little atten- 
tion served at once to strengthen their personal attach- 
ment and heighten their already high opinion of his 
piety. 

Letter to his Son in Ohio. 

"Apbil 6, 1814.' 

"Beloved CmLD — In my last letter to you I gave 
you an account of the death of dear Sarah, which 
caused us daily tears. I gave you some, particulars 
]?e§pecting the state of her mind ,befpre and in her 
sickness, which we cannot biit consider a precious 
ground of hope that it is fair better with her now, 
than when she was with us. She appeared to me to 
be one of those self-diffident converts, who give -evi- 
dence- to others, while they profess no hope for them- 
selyes, and who often make the best members of the 
church. 



JilS CORRESPONDENCE. 233 

"I Would now give you the outline of what has, 
come to pass in our family since I wrote, and which 
will account for my not writing sooner. .Novemter 
4, seventeen days after Sarah's funeral, Homan was 
taken with the same fever. It soon assumed a very 
formidable appearance — we generally had two watch- 
ers. Dr. Everest gave as constant and faithful at- 
tendance as he had done in the other, case. At his 
request we sent for Dr. Bestdr. Paint to, yourself the 
situation of your, parents : their only daughter recently 
laid inlthe dust ; their elder son,whom they loved as 
their own eyes, in a far country ; and their only 
remaining son in this situation. But^D, the sixteenth 
day of his fever, on which he appeared to he as really 
dying as Sarah did just before she expired : we 
expected for more than two hours that every minute 

would be his last. Mr. E. C -, who was in and 

went home, said to his wife, 'I believe poor Homan 
is dead before now.' We had done giving medicine, 
aiid were waiting the dreadful moment. 0, how in- 
supportable it .looked to be -deprived , of them both. 
But the Grod of all mercy and hfelp was pleased to 
appear for us, and restore him, though the scales 
hung in trembling doubt for a week or more, and it 
was some weeks before hewas able to go out. He is 
now in good health, and the L^d makes him no 
little-oomfort to his sorrowfnl parents. And now let 
the Father of lights have all the praise for ever and 
ever. 

"Your dear mother was taken with the fever the 
26t3i of November, ten days* after we supposed Homan 



234 JEREJUAH HALLOCK._ 

was dying ; she was sick about twenty days, but not 
so severely. I never came nearer.fainting than when 
deprived of her i*lp, and seeing- the mother sick in 
one room, and the child in the other. The forepart of 
December, Homan was so w<ell that I drew him in 
his chair into the study-r-he had lain in the parior — 
he begged of me not to draw him back into that 
dreadful room, which was like the realms of sickness 
and death. He of course had a bed brought intoi;he 
study. When his mother, who lay in the bed-room, 
was able to sit in her chair by the kitchen fire, after 
she had sat a little while, I desired her to lie down. 
She replied, I must first go in and see Homan. It 
was one of the most exquisitely agreeable visits I 
ever witnessed. Your loving mother, by divine grace, 
is now in comfortable health, and a great blessing to 
her family. 

"On the 20th December, previously worn down 
with fatigue, anxiety, and sorrow, I was violently 
seized with the fever. I lost my reason in half an hour, 
and can remember but little for about two weeks. 
By trying to get about too soon, I have had two re- 
lapses, each of about twelve days.. The most of the 
time for three tedious months I have been confined to 
my room, and much t)f it to my restless bed ; but, 
through mercy, am now in a great measure comfort- 
able, and faopeto begin to preach again next Sabbath, 
God willing. Thus, are we called to sing of his mer- 
ciefe and his rod ; but it appears to me that his mer- 
cies far exceed. 

" There has been the winter past, and is, a gen- 



HIS CORRESPONIEK-GE. 236 

eral awakening in Simsbury. It has been powerful 
in Hartford, and is great in Wethersfield. The civU 
and military events of the Worli are astonishing, but 
not more so than what Grod is doing for Zion. The 
religious accounts ftom Europe and Asia, in the mag- 
azine for last month, are wonderful^ I feel some- 
times as if the glorious day must be nigh ; and 
happy are they who are, prepared for it. I have late 
and direct iateUigence fi:orh Goshen and Plainfield. 
Your grandfathier Hallock has become very infirm, 
as well as grandmother. . Your uncle Moses, and "all 
the rest, weU> It. has been a healthy time in this 
town. There were eleven deaths the last year, be- 
sides Sarah's. This yeas, four. One is that precious 

man G. C , who was instantly killed in falling a 

tree, aged thir]by-five — he. has hardly left his equal, of 
his age,, in the , place. Through a most kind provi- 
^dence, not one has tak«n the fever from us, though so 
much with us,, and forgetting as it were their own 
lives. ' Your dear sister has left a number of letters, 
altogether on spiritual matters, which,- if -we live, I . 
intend to copy and send you. "We caflnotexpress the 
comfort your last sympathizing letter was to us, 
though they dared not show it to me, until some 
time after it was received. Do write when you can. 
Grandmother, Holnan, and all of us send love to you, 
and the family where you live. 

" From your affectionate pareiits, 

" JEREMIAH AND MERCY HALLOCK." 



236 ^JKREMIAH HALIiOCS. 



CHAPTEE X. 

LAffOBS IN IHE MINISTRY— CORRESPONDENCE- 
REVIVAL OF 1816. 

In 1814, as in 1812, the Litchfield North Associa- 
tion, of which Mr. Hallock was a distinguished mem- 
her, appointed several of its memhers to go, two and 
two, throughout the churches within its limits, to 
promote their spiritual interests. Mr. Hallock was 
one of the hrethren designated for this service. The 
tour so much resemhled some already noticed, that 
particulars may be omitted. 

"Jan. 22, 1815. Have heen feehle and discour- 
aged the past week, and looked forward to this day 
with trembling; but have been helped in every part 
of public worship beyond my expectation, especially 
in the latter sermon, so that I came home refreshed 
in body and mind- Lord, help me to thank and 
praise thy glorious name, now and for ever. 

■ " March 12. Though full of tossiags the past 
night, worried and discouraged this morning, yet 
have had more freedom, and mental comfort, and at- 
tention^all day than usual. Bless the Lord, my 
soul. God's spiritual law has been a pleasant theme ; 
let me never rest short of perfect conformity 
to it. 



HIS CORRESPaNDENCE. 237 

To his nephew, William A..Hallock, soon after a reTival' of 
■religion in Flainfield, -where he was then . fitting . for col- 
lege -with hie father. 

"Canton, Match 18, 1815. "■ ■ 

'" My very dear Cousin William — I thank, you for 
your rich letter of Fehruary 4, so full of interesting 
intelligence. We have also received your father's 

letter of Fehruary 16, hy Doctor p: . This, too, 

was like cold water to one athirst. I do sincerely 
wish that the few Of our name might not he stran- 
gers to each oliher. What you write respecting our 
decayed,, decaying aged parents, is affecting, and full 
of awakening instruction. As you live' near them, I 
hope your father will see that they have what is for 
their coiilfort. I hope that we may aU so honor them 
as to he sharers in 'the first commandment with prom-- 
ise,' instead^ of heing tortured, after their decease, 
with the harrowing accusations of a guUty conscience. 
The situation of my afflicted sister, your dear aunt. 

P , none can know hut hy experience. How 

comforting to hear of her apparent &ith, patience, and 
submission. may she have the peace of Jesus, 
And though we meet no more on- earth, yet may her 
hope he' realize'd. How sweet that eternal rest vrill, 
he to the Lord's weary, almost fainting pilgrims ! 

" The prosperity of my beloved brother's family 
is surely joy to me. But we must never depend on 
any earthlyenjoyments, which are all fleeting as the 
wind, and withering as the grass and its flowers. 
Where is your late blopming, afieotionate cousin 
Sarah? Her pleasant form lies vdthered in death. 
Yet all Grod's outward blessings, viewed in their true 



238 JKREMIAH HALLOCK. 

light, are precious, and to be thankfully received, and 
piously used for Jesus ajid his cause. I am glad ^ 
hear that you and your brother are studying, and 
thafyou make proficiency. I have long, been of the 
opinion, liiat industry is not only essential to useful- 
ness, bftt also to happiness. If those in heaven had 
nothing to do, or were they to become idle and in- 
•active, j believe their "happiness vFould cease. , ^ 

"Grive the love of my .heart to your dear sister 

Martha and.Miss D ," two young convertsj " with 

whom I conversed. How glorious indeed, my dear 
William, is their situation who are walking in the 
paths of peace, and prepariiig for a happy eternity 5 
and how do Utey excel tho^ who are grovelling in 
the dust, even though they should gain the whole 
World) and the Christian Mve and die in the most un- 
ctomfdrtahlBj destitute condition. 

"In respect to your observations concerning your- 
self, I haidly know how to reply. You think yoil 
have had little or no real sense of the divine perfec- 
tions, of sin, of the hardness of your heart and its 
opposition ; and that your late serious impressions in 
the awakening are abated, so that yon shTjdderitp 
reflect on your dread situation — the harvesi pagt, and 
you not gathered. But how came you to be sensible 
of all this ? It must be the awakening, of his &irit, 
and because it is still striving within you. "It is 
much better to be even many years under distressing 
conviction,' ;than to rest in the joys of a false hope. 
But there is hope in the free, akti^hty, sovereign 
grace of God in Christ. We know not what God in 



HIS JOURNAL. 239 

his, gteat mercy itiayyet do for yott. I hope the 
prayers and good instructions of your anxious parents 
will not he lost. May Grod prosper you in your 
studies, and. shine into your heart with the rays of 
his glory in the face of Jesus. I thanfc you for your 
affectionate notice of our dear Jeremiah, for; whom 
inj feeliugs have often heen unutterahle. ■ I am feehle, 
yet through mercy able to supply my pulpit. 
" From your laving uncle, 

"JEREMIAH HALLOCK." 

In Mr. Hallock's familiar circle of ministers, two 
persons were referred to who gave equal evidence of 
piety, while one professed a hope in Christ arii the 
other did not. The question was, how far the ahsence 
of hope was evidence against the latter. One and 
another -gave their views, when Mr. Hallock said; 
"Suppose I send down my two hoys to cleai out my 
well, and it caves in upon them. The -neighbors help 
me dig down to them, when it occurs to 'me that 
possibly they might hear my voice. I cry out» ' Jere- 
miah, are you dead ?' ^ No, sir.'' 'Homan, are-2^0M 
dead?' -' Yes, sir.'' -They report themselves differ- 
ently, but I have equal evidence that both are aUve." 

" Saturday, April 1, 1815. Having written iicnr 

the Sabbath, and hoping brother will come and 

be with us to-morrow, I wotdd ^devote this day to 
prayer and a review of my journal. I would pray- 
first for the Lord's presence' with us on the morrow, 
and that we might be. once more blessed.,with a spir- 
ituar revival J secondly, that I might be enabled to' 
review my jpumar with gospel candor in the fear of 



240 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

G-od. Thirdly, I would look to the Lord respecting 
my health, which has heen and is poor, and that I 
might be directed aright respecting medicine, and that 
his blessing might attend it. Fourthly, as the times 
are difficult I do pot receive my salary, hence am 
rather straitened for the necessafries of life, therefore 
would make this also a subject of prayer. In review- 
ing my past life I see many things amiss, and am 
sometimes almost ready to feel as if I had no reason 
to think I am a Christian ; but on the whole cannot 
but hope I have had some spiritual views and feelings, 
though, my faith is certainly small.' Lord, search", 
try, and quicken me. 

" April 3. Felt quite unwell, but comforted with 
the thought that pbrfeot love casteth out fear. 

"April 4. Felt, I trust, instructed, comforted, " 
and a little encouraged on reading what the. apostle 
saith of the gospel treasure -being in earthen vessels. 

" April 9. Have been of late feeble Hi body and 
faint in mind, but have found my journey to and" 
from Farmington pleasant beyond my expectation. 
Was enabled to perform on the Sabbath with more 
strength than I expected, and the evening meeting 
was attentive apd precioug. It seems as if I never 
had greater cause tp say, 'hitherto hath the Lord 
helped me,' and ever to trust Immanuel and live to 
his praise." 

'To his son in Ohio. 

"April 29, 1815i ' 

"There has been of late a powerful awakening 
in Yale college. A.bout seventy of the students have 



HIS CQHEESPONDENCE. 241 

oMained hope. There are revivals in other places; 
and events pertaimng to Zion's interest in' the world 
are truly wonderfiil and encouraging. My dear child, 
r feel anxious respecting your precious soul, and long 
to have Jesus formed in you the hope of glory. Qur 
painful separation here will be ^hort, and shpuld we 
meet in heaven, never to part,- our present trials will 
he forgotten. But how dreadful to he, lost for ever — r 
separated from all good. At my .period of life I have 
some sense of the disinftl state of those who in old 
age are unprepared for death and have no portion hut 
in this husky w*orld. ' All the kihgdo'iiis of this world 
are mere hubhles when compared with an interest in 
C3hrist and a preparation to meet our Judge. Aiid 
now is th©^ time for this great wort;. Your "dear 
mother came into the study the ptherday, and "with, 
an expressive countenance and emphatic accents ex^ 
pressed herself in about 'these words: 'I feel as if I^ 
could not' be recoficiled to-have Jeremiah live so far 
froni us. ~ Bowrrite to him, and a^ him if he keeps 
and reads his Biblej and how he spends the holy Sab- ' 
bath. I fear many waste it ia family visits.' 

"Your aged graindparents at Goshen are very 
feeble and near tb death, if .aUve. How thankful we 
ought to be for the hope we have that they are in 
Christ, and by grace -meetphed for the rest above. 
Your aUnt Perkins fell asleep the 8th of last Jfareh, 
comfortable in - ixxiidd. Your uncle. Moses and his 
family are in usual health and prosperity. 

"My sermon at the dedication of thd meeting- 
house is published- I cannot write the tenth part I. 

iHaUTOk. n 



242 JEREMIAH -HALLOGK. 

wish t&: must therefore close, committing. you,tothe 
mercy of G-ofl in Christ. 

" Frcwn yoiir aifectionate PARENTS.' 

V .•* 

To the same . 

"Mat^T; 1815,- 

" I think the following things never appeared more 
tone and real. Pirst, that this world as a portion is 
vanity of vanities and vexation of spirit, not only in 
its poorest hut in its hest state. ^Seocaidly, the im- 
portance of religion, or an interest in Christ, especially- 
in ttie decline of life. And thirdly, that it is a great 
thing to be a real Christianj a partaker of the Spirit 
of Christ, and meetened for 'the inheritance, of the 
saints in light.' I feel as if I had hut « little while 
to stay in ihis world. May you he blessed in out- 
ward things, but above all be a true friend to Grod, 
have the peace of Jesus here, and his. heavenly rest 
hereafter. Your calling is attended with tempta- 
tions, but abide by your old lesolutirai to be always 
strictly honest. 

" From your affectionate FATHER." 

To the same . 

"OcTOBKE 22, 1815. 

"You are remembered in all our prayers. "We 
pray for your outward prosperity, but especially that 
yoii may have an interest in the dear and only Sav- 
iour, and be saved from all tiie ^nares and tempta- 
tions of this evil world. About twelve of our children 
and youth have becon^e serioris this year, and ±he 
most of them hope in Christ. It is a day of unusual 



HI'S CORRESPONDENCE, 243 

awakening in these parts, and many youth are brought 
into Crod's everlastii^ kingdom. We long to see you 
before we die." 

To tae same. 

"December 25, 1815. 

"My Dear Child — ^It is now more than three 
years sinee we saw you. The time seems long, and 
you little know how much your parents want to see 
you before they did. You will not suppose that we 
impute your delay to come home to a neglect or for- 
getfulness of us ; but if our lives are contiauedi do 
not fail to pome next summer if possible. 

" Yoiir grandfather Hallook has fallen asleep. I 
made our friends in Groshen and Plainfield a visit as 
usual in September. Parted with my dear father on 
the twelfth, and have since received, a letter from 
your uncle Moses, in w;hich he writes, ' On Satixrday 
evening last, October 21, 1815^ our beloved father 
deceased. Ivisitpd him on Friday, and Saturday I 
■ held his venerable head in my hands, and leaning on 
my breast he expired without a struggle or the least 
apparent anxiety. It hardly seemed like death. His 
fimeral Was attended on Monday. All was calm and 
solemn, the day pleasant, and the attendants numer- 
ous ; and all seemed to feel afe if they were burying 
a friend.' ' ' 

" He was eighty-fiAre. Last summer he raised a 
plenty of provisions for his little family with his own 
hands. According to the time from which, he used 
to date his hope, he has, been a spiritual pilgrim en 
the earth seventy-seven; years. He did not outlive 



244 JEREMIAH .HALLdCK. . 

his active iisefalness. The scene to rrie is very sol- 
emn and impressive, hlit th^re i^ no terror or sinking 
grief. You,, as well as I, 'have lost a dear -praying" 
friend, and we- ou^t to h.e for ever thankful for such 
a parent. - ' 

"•I am still fthle, through grace, to ,continue- in 
the hlessed work of the gospel ministry. My catarrh 
is somewhat trouMesome, but I think no worse. Your 

' dear, mother is afflicted with something like a pal? 

-pitation of the heart, tut through mercy is ahle to 
attend to her. family eoncerris, in which she .is greatly 
needed. Grandmothef Humphrey has . been very - 

'sick; I think she appears mpre and more like a shook 
of corn f ast ripeniiig for eternal rest. She is a teight 
example of patience. .She wishes to be fememberfed' 
to Jeremiah. '- ' 

- " Some cjf the cihjirch appear to have' a Uttle-life,, 
arid here and there one is awakened and apparently 
converted,' And now my -heart cries, When sliall it 
be. thus with my beloved far-absent child? Jere, • 
rniah, we.cantiot hope because we may think our sins 
are small, we cannot trust in our supposed good works, 
we cannot hope in view of our hearts, for they are 
bad. And shall we hope in'1;hie present life and its 
things ,? God forbid. . The Lord Jesus is the only hope 

-for us sinners. And now let us make &, wise improve'-! 

^neht of all this, and flee to Jesus as our all in all, 
" From your affectionate father, . • -,- . 
■ ■ . "JEEEMIAH H-ALLOCK." 

"•March 3, 1816.; Lord's day. On Saturday 
attended a morning prayer-meeting. -If Was full 



EEVIVALS. ^ ■■'■ ^45 

and solemn, and iMngs look SnooToragmg. But this 
lias been ,one of the most trying, days as -it respects 
my own leanness. Have ieeii greatly straitened in 
all the prayers, in the sermons, and, alas, at the 
Lord's table. 'It seems as if my Saviour was de- 
parted. Some were indecently playful, and one, I 
fear, who has been thoughtful. why am I so for- 
saken, and why these dreadful frowns? Lord, search 
me and 'try me. Show me. why it is t^-ou dost con- 
tend with- me. Help me to search and find out 
the accursed thing and to repent. ■ May we all lie 
in the- dust- under thy rebukes, and .0-, have, mercy,, 
blot out our sins, • and still' carirjr on thy work, for 
Jesus' sake.'* ■ ■ • 

' Possibly it was in- reference to this Sabbath that 
Mr. HaUook, quite in his own marmej*,' onoe gave- this 
vivid illustration of' the passage, ^^ And we hid asit 
were &u/r fates from him." " It looks to me' like 
this : the Lord Jesus comes into the assembly in all 
his love and gloiy, , stands in the broad aisle,', and 
calls on poor. sinners to look at hirh and live; but the 
men raise their hats before their faces, and the women 
put up .their fe.ns,"^o as hot to be seen." 

, "-April 7.- We have had, many xeUgious meet- 
ings, silch as leottires, conferences, and conceits, in 
the course of the last week, which have been full and 
serious. One or^two have "manifested a hope, and 
soihe are the siibjeots of serious impressions. , It is 
hoped that the work of divine grace is still going on 
amol^ us. Grod of mercy, wilt thou abide with 
us, and support and extend .thy. work. :. 



246 ' JEEEMIAH HALLOpK. 

" May 9. Election-day. At the desire of the youth 
it was piop'osed to have a religious meeting instead 
of the former usual -vanities. Rev. Messrs. G-illett, 
Baker, aiid Yale, were with us. The cojigregation 
was large, serious, and attentive. 

"May 1(X We met at New Hartford hy request 
of iiie youth. The ybiith gave brother Yale and my- 
self- the money which they had^heen .accustomed to 
spend at the ball. 

" May 22. Lodged last night with brother Beaohj 
at my dear brother Dr. Everest's. He gave me this 
morning five dcdlars, of which I was in special want,-, 
and farther tpld me that he had crossed all his charges 
for attendanee on my family for twenty-fiv^ years. 
Lord, hiay I ^ee and know that all these needeli 
mercies are from thee, and may myself and family 
make a right use of them.. And O, bless thy dear 
servant and his for ever, and, may J be thankful to 
him as the instrument." " - 

^0 his elder son. * 

'. "JuHE 27, isie'.' ■■ 
"My dear CmLD-^Though, I have not written 
for, some ^;ime, it is not because yiju are out' of my 
thoughts, but on account of my -bodily infirmities and 
pressing calls in my work as a minister, at horne 
and abroad. I feel as if I should not be able to . 
endure much longer.. O for gospel faith, patien'ce,- 
and resignalidn. The rest of our femUy ate in Usual 
health, and it beoonies us to praise the Father jof 
lights for all his great,, many, and "long-continued 
favors. , - . . I- , 



REVIVALS. 247 

"Your gfandiriotlxer Hallook died, or rather fell 

asleep- in Jesus, as -we trust, the 8th of last April. 

The attention which began i^ this place eafly in 

March oontinuea. Fourteen were added to the church 

on the first Sabbath in May. Day before yesterday w^ 

had an examining meeting at our house, when eleven 

were examined and cordially approved.. More than 

five hundred have made a profession of religion within 

the limits of this association since la,st June, and as 

many ^s five hundred mbre have, manifested hope. 

There have been spiritual showers, some of them very 

great, in"other associations. 

" From your affectionate father, 

-"JEREMIAH HALLOCK." . ' 
■ , T 
To.tne 5p.me , .soon after a Tisit'to his parents, Ind his 
■ marriage .' , . 

"NovEMBEH. 5, ,1-81,6. ■ 

t' It is truly a iiay of wonders in respect to the 
conversion of poor sinners, and the building up of 
Zion. We rejoice to hear that you have obtained a: , 
house. I pray for you every day, that your little 
young family may be a Bethel. Your mother ferfs 
anxious for your immortal souls, and says, ' Do vrrite 
to Jeremiah and Sarah that a solemn eternity is be- 
fore them.' Will you not, beloved children, think on 
these things ? do not neglect the great work of a 
gospel preparation." ,. ^ "^ 

" Jan. -5, 1817. Fifteen were received to-day into 
the church, making sixty-four who have been admit- 
ted on profession since the 'first Sabbath in last May. 
Se(yen, the past year, have been Teoeived by letter; 



248 JEREMIAH HALLOCK;. 

in all, seventy-one. There are not less thjtn twenty 
more who hope since Mardb, and some are suhjects 
of serious impressions. "V^'e are yet favored with very 
solemn, precious meetings. - When we' coijipaje the 
•fruits of the "Resent revival with those of the awaken- 
ing in 1799, they exceed those of that glorious day. 
This is a very impressiyej solenm, and awakening ooh- 
sideration, and calls for deep humility, gratitude, and 
praise. Though attended with the catarrh a>ndTnany 
infiriniti&s, and many times ready, to faiat, yet, hy 
the merciful help of the Lord, I havp heen eiiahlediio 
attend the meetings, not less thanfive or six in a week, ' 
and I trust my bodily health is better tiban it was 
"eight months ago.' And I believe it- is in answer to 
the prayers of the Lord's dear people for ra«, of which, 
I am so unworthy. OLOTd,. still hpld me up, and be 
my strength. Let me not wander from thy paths, ia- 
doctrine or practice. , If I shall live this year, may it 
be to serve and please tliee, in doing and submitting 
to thy wiU. If I must die, niay it be in Jesus.. 
when wUt thou come unto me as thou didst to the 
houseofZaocheus and She jailer? ' .^ 

"Parted with my brother and, sister Hogford for 
■ Southafjiptori, SeptembieE 23, but soon grew very un- 
well with symptoms of fever. Did Jtut just arrive at . 
brother Grould's at Southampton. "Was kindly receiv- 
ed. Took an emetic administered by Dr. Woodbridgiei 
which operated powerfully,^' Had a disti:essing night, 
but through mercy felt some relieved in i3ie mctrning. 
'Tarried all- day, September 24, at brother Gould's— 
next day, went home. Neither Dr. Woo.dbridge nor the 



AI SOUTHAMPTON. 249 

others wKo ■watolied.'withme and took such care of 
me, would a.6oept any recompense. May the blessing 
of the Lord rest upon them." ' 

The following description of this scene is fi:om a 
member of the: family .of E,ev.-Mr. Croiild, with whom 
he lodged, and for whom he usually preached, in his 
anflual visit to his friends in G-oshen and' Plainfield. 
'^.I saw Mr. Hallook come up to the house much 
fatigued ; , I sprang' to his tissistance,,aad said to him, 
'Are you unwell, Mr. -Hallook.?' Pale and trembling," 
he replied, ''I've come to die J with you; God has 
heard my prayer : 'I was afraid I should' die on the 
road,. and that my dear family would never know how 
I died; I knew you would tell them : I want they 
should know how deaf Christ appears to me ; I think 
he never appeared so precious ; .1 want you should tell 
them this.' These'seritenCes he uttered with difficulty, 
leaning on my arm, and staggering into the. hbu^e. 
As soon as he was upon the bed panting for breath, 
h§. said, 'I do. wonder how brother W — — can givd 
up such a Saviour ; how he will need him in such an 
hour as this.'' A physician was immediately called, 
bjit could hardly get at the case, because Mr. Hal- 
look's conversation was so full of 'the love of Christ. 
He sunk down,' at length," and seemed to be at the 
-point. of death for, a time, but in- a day or two he was 
so far relieved as to return to his family." i 

. About the last meeting he attended- in South- 
ampton, where for years he was. a great favorite with , 
the- crowd that flocked together dn his arrival, he re- 
marked at the close of his sermon, that probably he 

11* 



250 JEREMIAH ITALLOCK.. 

should never see theim again. He then sat down, but 
in a little time rose andsaid, "My dear friends, there 
is a diflferenoe 'Ijetween prohabiUty and possibility.- It 
is not probable I shall meet you here again. lam 
gld and gray-headed. I live daily very near to death." 
- ."'Sept. 28.- Lord's day. "Was enabled to write 
yesterday and the day before, though with much 
weakness and infirmity. Attended the concert in 
the-interftiission, and the conference' at five o*olook. 
Have had unusual strength, and freedom, and I trust 
tha Lorfl. was with us. Have eriioyed of late un- 
usual serenity and peace . of mind, I trust, in Jesus 
the consolation of Zion; and may he have all the , 
praise, to the glory of the Father. 

" Nov. 26. Homan was evidently mofe.ill, and we 
feared his disorder was becoming putrid,-and about 
one o'clock, P. M., he appeared to fail very fast. 
We feared he- had but a few hours tolive. He said 
he did not know that he. had any reason to think he 
had an interest In Christ. Now, the languish of my 
soul became unutterabl^' But npt far ifrom sunset 

toy dear brother E. A having heard of our trial 

came to see us, and we kneeled in prayer, he -being 
the speaker. His prayer and conversation-seemed to b^ 
so blessed to, me, that an unusual peace and calmness, 
and trust in Christ, pervaded my mind, so that I 
could converse with Christian friends who came in, 
with freedom and delight. Sometime in the. evening 
a suppuration took place in his throat, and. he was 
relievisd. It was therefore a night of unusual com- 
fort arid praise. - ■ 



}HS CORRESPONDENCE. ?51 

" Nov: 27, X817. Tp see such companies of youth 
and children cdleoting for play and vanity, and the 
cruel practice of sh(X)tuig. at living fowls, is distress- 
ing^ because indications of the Lord's. departurte, of 
our awful stupidity, and the everlasting perdition of 
all who are out of Christ. These things try and vex 
my soul, and cause sorrow and. heaviness." - 

To liis elde'r^son. ' 

"^JuLY 11, 1818. 

"My dear Childeen — ^Wereyour mother and my- 
self to. go to Steuhenville corporeally as often as we 
do mentally, there would be a hard-beaten path be- 
tween us. 

"Although there is do special awakiening amdng 
us hera, but it, is a day of alarming stupidity, yet the 
churcb are united and steadfast, and ■Qie late appar- 
ent converts seem to endure; conferences on the Sab- 
bath, tlie meeting for yomig people, and the Thurs- 
day concert, arc attended. But the church dimin- 
ishes, both by death and by removal to other places. 
We have buried seventeenf since the beginning of the 
year. The tweiity-fifth of last month our old neighbor 
and friend Ephraim Mills left this world, after a short 
sickness. This is a sore loss, to me, but tbe thought 
that Jesus the Saviour and owner,of all things still 
lives the same for evermore, strangely" supports my 
sinking jnind. 

" Your mother is favored with health and vigor, 
a great blessing to us for which we ought to be thank- 
ful. She Would set out any day to go, and see her 
Jeremiah. My general health is better: on the. last 



262 JEREMIAHHALIiOCK. 

tw6 SaMathsj with the intervening week,- I was 
enabled to preach nine sermons, praised he the-great 
Physician of soul and body. My study is pleasant to 
me. ■ It would be agreeable in itself to have Jiealth 
while we stay;, and to be oaUed by the Lord of the 
harvest right put of his field ajid with sickle in hand. 
I am now in my Sixty-first year, and your mother 
but about three years younger, I feel of late, espe- 
cially by turns, great anxiety for the soiils of my' 
children, lament my unfaithfillness, and desire to be 
more faithful in affectionately warning, instrueting, 
and persuading them to come to Christ, that so they 
might please Grod, be blessings, ajid be for ever 
blessed. ■ How these lines will-find you, my dear son 
and daughter, whether stupid or thoughtful about 
eternal things, I know not ; but I beseech you, if out of 
the spiritual ark, not to rest nor let any thing hinder 
your pressing into jt, and without delay. 
" From your affectionate father, ' 

•"JEHEMLiH, HALLOCK.'! 

"Dec. 21,. 1818, Returned from Barkhamsted 
very feeble in body and mind. Could not ride, nor 
hstrdly walk ; wanted sometimes to lie down in the 
road. But my mind was calm and comfortable, and 
the hope of being able to move with all the activity 
of an angel was refi:eshing ; also, the thought that in 
that blessed world they will not have to. take a third 
of the time or more. to. recruit a feebje, clogging, bur. 
densome body. 



CAftE FOR HISH:$USEH0LD. 253- 



CHAPTER XI; 

LA30RS IN AfiTANCiNG YEARS— COREfESl'dNDENCB 
■ • — RETIYAL X)F 1821. '.: 

One pleasant trait of character, in, Mr. Ha,116ck 
was. the deep, interest which he manifested in. the 
. welfare of all the merhheis of hi^ household. In the 
course of his life, with the concurrence of his worthy 
partner,- he took seyertil children and trained them 
up to manhood,, whom he treated with so nluch 
parental affection and ca,re that a stranger could not 
distinguish them from his own phildren; And even 
after they went out from his roof, the strength of his 
affection and solicitude for their souls did not suhside. 
Sometimes, OQ the: day of theif. departure, he noted 
.in hia journal his sense , of unfaith&ilness and his deep 
regret. .Often did he, i^peak of them afterwards with 
the tones of a father, and it was his uniform practice . 
to address to them now and then, an affectionate arid 
parental letter. One of these letters was written to 
_Mr. J. M- — '— of the city of New York, who had 
lived, in Mr. Hallook's family from th& age of foujc to 
that of twenty-t^o .years. ^\.'-.'* ' 

■■ ■ ■ "JutTC-19,1819. 

*' Our dear Children — ^We thank you for your 

kind letter by Mr. H -. We are always glad to 

hear from yoii' and of your welfare, and to learn that 



254 JEREJIIAHHALLOCi. 

you do not forget us, as we cannot forget you. It 
gave Tis no little joy to hear that you were blessed^ 
with an infant son. The lives of infants, especially 
of those so small, are a brittle thread. - But thatGrod 
who gives them can preserve and raise thein. We 
pray jn respect to' yours, that it may live, that you 
may be prepared fox such a ^me^cy, be enabled to 
giv6 yourselves and babe to the Lord, and do your 
duty towards him according to the word ; that he 
may be an obedient child, a comfort to you, useful 
in the world, a blessing in Zibn,and that both the 
child and his parents ijiay be blessed of the Lord. 
But if you should be called to part with it by death 
in its infancy, childhood, or youth, as many have- 
been, may you be prepared and enabled froiii the 
heart to bless the Lord in taking as. well as in 
giving. 

."Should thd Lord of his great mercy restore &e 
mother to health, and spare all your lives, do try to 
come and see us as soon as you can, and bring the 
Uttle one with you. But should you be preserved to 
come, who of us would be aUve to see you we know 
not, for we are truly sojoiuners, and our days on earth 
are like the passiiig shadow. There were twenty-six 
deaths in Canton the past year, some of all ages. 
It was ftequently the case that some ope at a funeral 
in health was the next carried to the grave. Truly 
the Son of man came among us ihe last year in a 
way and at an hour we knew not. The text for the 
new year was, ' that they were wise, that they 
understood this, tiiat they would consider their lat- 



HIS CORRESPONDENCE. 255 

ter.end!' Indeed we are pilgrims, and the life of 
man m this world is cedled w way. Oui latter end 
is the close of life, to which the way we now go 
will lead. 

"We read of two ways :. the darrow path whose 
end is life and the eternal salvation of the soul ; and 
the hroad road of sin -which endeth in eternal death. 
Now if one on a joarney should, though instruciied 
and. Varned, heedlessly take a road in the morning 
which, however easy, pleasant, and inviting at liie 
beginning, would yet end at sunset, in reproach,, 
complete poverty, and wretchedness, all would con- 
sider s;ich a traveller as void of wisdorfl, and would 
exclaim against his folly. But if the traveller should 
consider, and take that road in the morning which, 
though at first more rough, stony, hilly, and impleasT 
ant, would yet end at sunset in -hoUor, safety, fulnessj 
and happiness, who would not esteem such a man 
wise, and speak of his great wisdom ? And now^, my 
dear children, for yhbrii I daily try to pray, let us he 
as wise ia spiritual things. We know that Jesus 
aiid his blessed gospel are the way to l^e, whatever 
reproach, crosses, and difficulties may, now attend it"; 
but the way df this selfish, prayerless," impenitenii, 
unbelieving,. andT disobedient world endeth in eternal 
woesj however pleasing it may now appear to an eye 
of sense. Consider these lines,, and the Lord give you 
understanding in all tjiings. Farewell. 
"Erom your, affectionate parents, 

■. " JEREMIAH AND MffiRCY HALLOCK." 



256 JEREMIAH HAJiLOCK. 

*" ' .To his .ean in Ohio. ^ •" 

"January, 19, 1819. ' 

" Though feeble and many times reaSy to faint, 
I am enabled to study, and to preach on the Sabbath 
and at othCT times ; and fdr aught I know, to usual 
acceptance. "No place is so agreeable to me as my 
study, and it is often delightsome to read, write,^ etc. 
The world has truly almost slidden from under me, 
and is fast sliding away ; and I think my only hope 
and support is the precious Jesus and his blessed gos- 
pel. You, my Jeremiah, are now in your twenty- 
ninth year, and should you live, you will not only soon 
T)e in the decline of life, but where I am, advanced, 
and the world all sUdden, or fast sUding from under you. 
And I often think, what will my children do when this 
approaching period shall arrive, or if they should find 
theniselves by sickness -or other means on their. dying 
bed,and all the solemnities of the judgmeniatthedodf? 
Nothing can tfiea, as I know by experience, aSbrd Ihe 
least support, but the consolations of Jesus." 

To his taephew Wm. A. Hallook*, at Williams College. 

,"The account you ^ve of the awakening in Wil- 
liamstbwn, as well as in other places, is wonderful 
and interesting. X am more and more convinced by 
the word, and I think by experience, that we a;re by 
nature destitute of holiness, carnal, sold "under sin. 
Hence in need, perishmg need of the new birth,' or trf 
Christ as oUr sanetification and Saviour from wrath, 
yea, ^.s our Ufe and all in all. How it is with you, 
I know not. The day is approaching when you.expept 
to leave college and turn your thoughts on some pro- 



HIS CORRESPONDKNCE. 257 

fession. . It is tliereforei. a most, interesting period to 
you, as well as to your "parents^ and also to me. 
How soon have .your- four years at Cbllege passed 
away; and how short is our period of probation on 
^ajth, even at the longest: I. trust I. pray that you 
'may, first of all, give your heart and your whole self 
unto the Lord Jesus, whose we of "right &t6^ whose 
yoke is easy and' his burde^ light.- Tt is my desire to 
have you study divinity, and wear yourself out in the, 
good work of the gospeL Such I know is the wish of 
your parents. But we must lov'e and serve Christj let 
our profession he what it may, in order tto he accepted^ 
of hiin, jhoth now and when'lie' oometh. Farewell. ' 
"Your^affe'ctipnate UNCIE." 

To Lis son in Ohio. 

"July 8, ,1819. 

"Our dear children, often thought of and longed, 
fcH", We were not a little affected to, learn i^^ poor 
state of your health, and havfr endeavored daily to 
remember you in 6ur 'prayers. You think your dis- 
order is of the nervous Mnd. Soon after I was settled, 
I had nervous com,plaints to a very high degree^ I 
know what they^are. Alfliough they are commonly 
not so mortal, yet they are deepj far out- of the reach 
of medicine,, and hard to cure. "They are attended with , 
the symptoms of almost every disorder, are apt to 
prevent sleep, and to make ^every thing look gloomy" 
aM discouraging. .They, debilitate the mind and unfit 
one for the service pi G-od or man. I do sincerely 
pity you. But let our disorders and trial's" be what 
they Hiay, evei so, long and severe, they are^ like 



268 JEREMIAH HALLOOK.. 

every mercy, from the God of Jacob, wkp is the great 
Physician of soul and body, and our help is nowhere 
but in. him. President D wight says that people 
under affliction are always attended with one.of these 
three thiligs, murmurings, brutal stupidity, or sub- 
mission to Grod. Let us watch against insensibiUty 
and murmurings, learn submission under the inighty 
hand of the Lord in all our afflictions, and resign our 
souls and bodies and all our concerns in tibe way of 
well-doing into his hand for time and eternity. 

" I have just read Dwight's sermons on the duty 
of parents to their childreni and of children to their 
parents. Aniwlule I find them very instruotiVB and 
entertainingj I feel greatly reproved for my nnfaitiir 
fulness as a parent ; but all the. past is sealed up for 
the judgment. Yet, blessed be the Lord, while in this 
world we are ptlspners of hope. Hence, if we tsonfess 
and forsake our sins, and return unto the Lord, he 
will- abundantly pardon all our offences and purge 
away our guilt in the all-cleansing blood of Jesus. 
that I may, if continued in this world, have grace to 
be more faithful,, as a minister and parent, and in all 
respecte.- 

" 'It is good,' saith the preset, 'for a man,"'that 
he bear thfc yoke in his youtibi,' Thus may your 
afflictions be made beneficial, even in the highest and 
best sense to yon both. And if you are experiencing 
his restoring mercies and other favors, may his great 
goodness lead you to repentance, and to lift up your 
hearts in his fear. The longer I, live, the veord of 
Grod appears more and. more real, true, divine, and 



HIS CORRESPONDENCE. 259 

precious, and our only light^and hope. ■ And as David 
said to his dear son Solomon, I will now, my children, 
say to you. Forsake it not, but bind it continually 
upon your hearts, and tie it about your hecks ; then, 
' when thou goest,' it shall lead thee ; when; thou 
sleepest, it shall keep thee ; and when thou awakest, 
it shall tp,lkwith thee ;' yes, about the most wise and 
excellent things. 

" From' your affectionate FATHER-" 

"Oct. 3, 1819. Last "Wednesday, attended • the 
ordination of Messrs. Bingham arid Thurston, as mis- 
sionaries to the Sandwich islands. Little did I ex- 
pect to be appointed to make the consecrating prayer. 
But the Lofd Jesus supported and helped ihe, so thaj 
I trust reUgionand the dear cause did not suffer. All 
the other parts, were performed to edification. The 
assembly was the greatest that I ever saw at an ordi-- 
natiori, and the most universally solemn and interest- 
ing^ P Lord, how unworthy ani" I, even of the least 
of all thesS thy metoi^s. May ^hey all humble and 
lead my soul unto thee in hope and aU spiritual 
obedience." 

To a- nephe'a;f in Uie The o^ogusal seminary ,' Andover, iinm e -. 
diately after his making a pulilic profession of Veligiori. 

" March 18, 1826. 

"Dear William — A brother was received into 
tha church l&.st. Sabbath. The communion was full, 
and I thought the day and the holy ordinance were 
more refreshing than usual for us, who are so lean at 
best. Last year none were received, hy profession, 
into the Chujrch. ' "Two others wish to' come folward. 



260 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

who appear well.. that these things might be as 
ail fearnest hefore a glorious harvest. Th$se Ipng 
spiritual' winters of harrfennesg are pai^ul and trying 
to dear Chii^ians, who pray and pleadj',' O Lord> how 
long?' I know of no special revivals in this region. 
Our religious meefings are attended as usual, and the 

• concerts for prayer are tetter attended than ihey were 
SLK monlJis ago, and appear more fervent. But the 
children and ;youth are unusually thoughtless and 
vain. It is inexpressibly distressing to see them wast- 
ing, away their forming age in forgetftilness of Grod, - 
which they ought to spend in his fear; that if they, 
live to come on the stage of action^ they may Be pre- 
pared to he useful, and if the;^ must die, may meet 
their Jijdge in peace. 

■ " Although the Son of Grod was made flesh— which 
was so necessary in order to his laying down his life 
for our sins, and doing many other things as the 
Mediatpr — ^yet divine honors are equally and unre- 
servedly ascribed to him in the "Scriptures of truth as 
to the Father ; and there is not a chapter, Uor scarce 
a paragraph where Cmist is spoken of, in which "his 
absolute divinity does not shine ; and there i^ no fair 
explanation of them but by giving equal divine honors 

^to the Saviour. - 

"No subjects are of more importance than the 
candid examination of ourselves and. daily self-denial, 
to which the selfish heart is so "opposed ; for there is 
nothing in the native heart of rnan but. sin, sin, sin. 
"We therefore stand in eq^ual need of the new birth as 
of the atonement. I am glad you went to Andover-^ 



ADTA.HCI-NG YEARS. 261 

rejoice to hear the" things you wrote respecjtibg your- 
self. If we have not received Christj it is high time 
to do it, and to live unto hini. Some of .the last words 
of President Edwards to hiS/anxious friends were, 
'Trust in G-od, and you need "not fear.' How much 
better it is to trust inlmmanuel, than in an. arm of 
flesh. May it ever be your delight to rely only^ con- 
tiniiaUy, and altogether on him. -Be a fruitful branch 
in the true' vine ; glorify God, and have the joy of 
Christ fulfilled inr your own happy hreast. Let us 
pray fot one another, for, each of our families, for 
cmr colleges, the seminary, and Zion. Adieu. *- 
" Your affectionate uncle, 

'■' , ' "JEEEMIASHiiLOCK.'" 

.. In a former part of this work, we'sawr Mr. Hal- 
lock, with no common ardor, devoting the pj)right» 
liness of his youth to the service, of Christ. rWehave , 
inarked also how, in one steady, inhdeviatkig- course, 
he exhausted in the same glorious cause the strength 
of manhood. We now find him,. under the pressure, 
of more advanced years, still in' the harness, laborious 
as ever for the -honor of Christ and the s'alvatioii ' of 
souls, praying more earnestly for divine aid, ^rid 
rnakipg iaereased effort to fulfil Hie responsibilities 
of his station. ■ . . > ^ . 

" March 13, 1820. This day I am sixty-two years 
old; I have been, continued almost thirty-five years 
in the iflinlsliy. It is about fi>rty,-one years since I 
trust my attefation was turned tcx religioli.j so that I 
have been- professedly as long on the spiritual journey, 
as Israel, was on the way from Egypt to Canaan. 



262 JEREMIAH HALLOCK.. 

Smely ray race must be drawing ta a close. My 
mind has been interested in reading G-od's holy word, 
especially the ninth and .tenth chapters of. the Acts-; 
and the late Religious Inteilligencer, in pstrticular the 
account of revivals. If I niay live a little' longer, may 
Christ be niy only, all-suffioient hope ; and may I live 
in, the faith and reUgion of the holy apostles, and of 
the present revivals of the Holy Spirit. If I must die, 
•may it be. in this faith and with the siipports of the 
•gospel. My own, and the deadness of my people, is 
truly distressing,, and especially the stupidity and 
vanity of our poor children and youth; ' .Bxd I think 
it is a consolation, that Grod will be glorified and his 
gospel kingdom eternally flourish, whatever becomes 
of us. Lord, Jiave mercy on us, and pluck us as 
brands from the burning, for Jesus' sake. This, for 
sorne reason, has b6en to me the most solemn birth- 
day I ever knew."- 

* In.liie autumn of this year, the monthly^ meeting 
of ministers tO'whieh'Mi'. Hallock belonged, divided 
itself into classes of four and five, with a view to 
some endeavors to fouse the slumbering churches; 
It w&s the custom of Mr. Ha'llook's class to visit two 
churches every week, and attend- three meetings at 
each place.. After making the circuit of the ^hole 
a few .times, one of the brethren proposed that it 
should no longer be the duty of 9,11 the five to attend 
every meeting, but that two brethren should be present 
besides the minister of the place. <' No," said Mr. 
Hallock, who had himself rarely if ever been absent, 
"we must all be on the ground. If I had a child 



REVIVALS. 263 

sick, and could not make him believe that he was -in 
a dangerous state, I know of, no better way to unde- 
ceive-him, than to calla council of physicians. No, 

■ brethren,' we must all endeavor to be at every meet- 
ing, that poor, sick, dyingsinners, who are so hard, to 
take alarm, may begin .to think something, ia the 
matter, and that they must attend to tbeir souls." 
It need scarcely be added, that the arrangement 
remained without alteration. These efforts the Lord 
was pleased to bless. Some tokens of his special 
grace were immediately visible, and the following 
year was marked with uncommon mercy, not only in 
tibis vipinity, but in very many towns' throughout 
Connecticut. • ■ -. 

' This was tlie last general revival of religion in 
which Mr.. Hallock took a part. Though his iage and 
infirmities might seem to have pleaded eloquently for 
some remission of service, and especially in the- most 
inclenjent seasons of the year; yet w;e shall find him 
at his post by -night and by day, and somethtles at 
the distance of ''twenty miles and -more from home. 
And should he, to persons who can patiently see a 
waste of life in any .thing but religion, seem to have 
been impelled forward by a principle little less opera-r 
tive than that whichr for thirty years glniijaated Pautj 
and for a less . period . elevated Henry Mattyn tq a 

- height of holy indifference in respect to personal com- 
fort, health, and even life itself, the Vn'iter. is not 
anxious to offer an apology. His -course furnished at 
least a practioar comment on a sentiment which he- 
often expressed, in the evening of his days, in sub- 



264, JEREMIAH HALIOCK 

stance this : " I view myself, like a man stationed in 
a toat, with oars put iiitohis hands, and directions 
given, him to row with all his might so Iprig as life 
lasts." He sometimes used a kindred figure to illus-> 
trate the need of severe and continued study in the 
clerical office,' comparing the ministers of Christ tb 
toatmen rowing up a strong current, who must ply 
every nerve to advance, at all, and will certainly .go 
backward if I3iey relax for a moment. 

" Nov." 30. 'Thanksgiving. Met at ten for prayer, ■ 
iU the conference-house. : It is affecting to think how 
many of my age are gone, aftd to- find myself and 
such of.thehi as are hving, weakened, -beinumbed 
with age, and just going, and the poor children iind 
jTDuth vain and tihflngbtlesS. Hope, my soul, in 
tiie unchanging Ood of Zion. ■ 

" Dec. 3,- Lord's day; Attended the intdrmis- 
sion-prayer, and the conference in the central school- 
house. My mind -Was peculiarly solemn,' arid "I trust 
. refreshed, on Friday in my~ study,' in writing on, 'Seen- 
" of 'singels.' O if my poor youth kiiew these tkingsf, 
how soon would they leave their vanities for Christ, 
and how much more- -honorable and happy ■vroUld 
they be. ' ; . 

"■ Jan". 14, 1821. Hear of revivals, Wrhile our fleece 
seems to be left dry. Help us, Grod of our sal- 
vation. . 

" Feb. 11, Lord's day.- Had tinusval freedom in.., 
all tiie performance^more attentiw than usual — a 
solemn intermission at my house — several appeared 
serious, and some old professbl^ a little quickened. 



-REVITALS. 265 

the Hope of Israel, wilt thou not revive us again, 
and let thy mouinitig saints rejoice in thee ? ■ 

" Feb. 15. Last Friday -went with brother T— — to 
'Goshen, Ooiih. ; attended a meetingin the evening at 
deacon T 's, who lately hopesfor four, of his child- 
ren. Had some freedom in speaking from Acts 13 : 43. 
Rev. Mr. Mills and other ministers present made oh- 
servations- It was a fuU, serious meeting.' Yesterday 
we went to Litchfield— ^had freedom in speaking in the' 
prayer-meetmg. Rode in! the- evening to Mr. Mills'. 
To-day attended a fast at^orringford; - Heard brother. 
Beach in the forenoon. I preached in the afternoon 
from Jonah 1 : 6,~' ' What meanest thou, sleeper ?' 
Recent accounts of the wonderful awakenings' were 
, related. . Lord, bless this day to this thy dear peo- 
ple. "We rode home in the evening and found all welC 
praised be the Lord. > '' ■ ^ 

"March 4., It appears to me that the awakening^ 
though small, is begun both in the church and society. 
Lor^, pause thy saiut-s to pray, a,nd may the incense 
of the > Angel of thes.coyenant ascend with their pray- 
ers before the throne of .grace and. prevail, that all 
may.not wither, but a rain of righteousness descend, 
for Jesus' sake. Amen. 

"March- 12. Last Tuesday went to Bristol, and 
tarried lintil' Friday noon. Preaohedl four^germons, 
and heard brother ^ice preach two. Made several 
family visits, etc. , The impressiou is generail — a 
goodly number have obtained hope in Christ, -and 
others are under conviction. Friday we rode to 
Farmingtoii" and heard brother Nettleton preach in 

HaHack. ' 12 



266 JEKEMIAH-HALLOCK. 

the ^evening. It was thou^t he had one thousand 
hearers; The work, appears to-be on theJncreEise. 
Saturday I rode to Simshury, and preadtied there 
yesterday. Had an infermissicai-meeting. A glori- 
ous work, it appears, has hegun there. Hear that 
the. work of. the Lord has greatly reV-iyed in Bark- 
hamsted; and more encouraging things appear of 
late in Canton.- Lord, the work is thine, wilt thou 
hot carry it on, that thy glory may appear in the 
conversion of manyito praise and serve thee, s. ^ 
" March 25, Lord's day. Text in the afternoon, 
John 4 : 35, 36 : ' Say not ye. There are yet four 
months,' etc. Have attended meetings every- evening 
the past week except last evening, and some in the 
daytime. Some of the meetings have iheen unusually 
solemn. Several appear to' have come to "the .birth, ~ 
and to linger. Lord; do not let them go back ; do 
not let them stay where they are, but make them 
willing in this day of thy power. i 

> "April^ 15. The fii'st Sabbath in. this ^onth I 
was at Jforthington, the second at Bristol. I have 
attended' meetings almost every evening, afld some in 
the daytime, but find rays'elf Tery feeble, and jeady 
sometimes to give up my hope respecting my being 
in Christ. itiy leanness, rtLy leanness in prayer, in 
preaching, and every performance. why am I thus ? 
Lord, if it is because I am not thine, show it to me 
in mercy, and pluck my soul as a brand.' from the 
burning. If it is on account of some right-hand sin, 
show it to me and help me to cut it off; If it is ohe 
of the trials ofjbhy children, support me under it 



. REVIVALS. a67 

and bring me out of it. Make me truly humble 
under thy mighty hand, and revive me in thy own 
good time and -way. Although I fear and tremble to 
say ity yet -I -fear the awakening is declining, that 
Israel are turning their backs. Lord, have mercy ; 
humble us, and return again as thou didst of old, in 
the days of Joshua, fdr Jesus' sake." 

The preceding selections from his journal have 
been made with particular reference to Mr. Hallock's 
labors abroad in a season of religious revival. They 
furnish a |air specimen of his common practice ■ at 
such a time. It was an opinipn. which he often ex- 
jMressed, and which received very happy illustrations 
in his own course, that a minister should not only be 
■vv>i]ling to go from a cold to a warm moral region for 
personal, warmth, but equally ready to go frpm a 
warm to a cold region with the -benevolent intent to 
diffuse, any warmth of heart which God may have 
given hxrn for the benefit of other churches.- Henpe, 
while he often visited places at considerable distance, 
which were favored with a work of grace,, we find 
him also, in all the revivals of religion at' Canton, 
encouraging an interchange of labor with his brethren 
in the ministry. And unless this had been his course, 
the excellent spirit that was in him must have been, 
to human view, much circumscribed in its -benign' 
influence. Nor was he alone in this practice. The 
excellent ministers with whom he acted, such men as 
the venerable Robbing, Gillett, Starr, and Mills, were 
accustomed to. make a revival of religion anywhere 
in their circle a sort of common cause, and tc foster 



268 ■ JEREMIAH" HALLOC'K. 

it 'W:itli -wakefiil solicitude.: And this practice, under 
God, may go far to aecount for the fact, that when- 
ever a work xjf grace was enjoyed 'hy any one ,of the. 
churches under the pastoral care of these servants of 
Christ, it was to some extent common to them all. 

But the example set by these, fathers cannot be 
safely followed without a large portioil of the same 
spirit. They might always go and labor in a revival, 
however powerful^ without first waiting in silence at a 
-single meeting ; because, by a constant and clo^e walk 
with Grod, they were always so much in the spirit of 
a revival. , No one, it is presumed^ who, was "^e^ 
acquainted with Mr. Hallacfc, ever trembled to see 
him rise in the desk or in the poiiference-room, at a 
time of great divine influence, lest .his feelings should 
not be sufficiently elevated. But, 

" These Buns are Set — ^O rise some other such.'' 

To his rieph.ewat Andover. 

~ ■ "May'27, 1821. ■ 

"."You have heard of the- showers >of divine ^ace 
in our region. For a wbile it appeared as if poor 
CBnton would be the marshy place, where the fertil- 
izin'g, reviving waters- of aalvatioh never come. But. 
it pleased the God of all grace, who heareth prayer, 
to begin his gracious work among vs. It began in 
the month of March in the middle of the town, and 
in the south part about the same time. Youth who 
had been full of levity, became at once the subjects 
of deep conviction. "We never' saw meetings- more 
visibly impressed. ' Poor children, they could not hold 
lip their heads. "W"e hope the awakening is on the 



HIS COE.E.ESFONDENCE. 269 

whole increasing. - I cannot say exactly,.but perhaps 
forty have ohtained hope. Many are still serious. 
The. praise is all djie to G-qd, and 0, may he glorify 
his' power, love, and mercy in still carrying on his 
work, until it shall. extend to every district and family. 
The work has been much greater in some neighbor- 
ing places. Perhaps they hope for two hundred in 
i'armington, anH one hundred and fifty in New Hart- 
ford., You do noifc know how much I wish to have you 
corhe and see us, and attend our ineetings, and help 
your aged, feeble, uncle." 

•To friends at Pla.infi«.ld. 

, " Canton, June 14, 1822. 

" It is -pften the case that people wish each othei; 
a happy new year. "We have reason to th^nk that 
1821 - was a happy new year to a goodly number in 
Canton J and to. hundreds and even thousands in our 
region — ^the year to wMch they will look back in a 
blessed eternity as that in which they passed, through 
free grace, from the love of sin to the love of holiness,- 
and from condemnation to pardon and eternal life. 
What a happy new year "was the past to all stigh, in 
our region, nation, and wojrld.; But hovir many 'are 
left of whoip it must be mournfully said, as the. last 
year found, so it left them, dead in sin and children 
of Wrath. ^ 'What Christian would not pity them and' 
'pray, '0 that 1823 might be the happy new year of 
their repentance and pardon.' And- may it be the 
happy, new. y<far to .all in Christ,, at Canton and Plain- 
field, in which they shall love the 'Lord Jesus Christ 



^70 Jeremiah h-allock. 

more, serve Mm better, and have greater degrees of 
his consolations. 

" Since last Jlay, fifty-six have been added to the 
church, five of them by letter ; the most of the fifty- 
one date their hope last year, and they appear to 
stand; fast in the Lord. The change among our 
-yputh is great and comfdTting." ; 

"April 5, 1822. Preached thefuneraltSeTmon of 
Deacon Solomon Everest, who fell asleep, we trust 
in Jesus, the "third instant. Text, 2 Timothy, 4 : 7, 
8, 'I have fought a good fight,' etc. Deacon Everest 
wanted a few days of sixty -two years. He obtained 
hope in Christ, and made -a public professioriin his 
youth. He adorne4 his profession by » life of spirit- 
ual fruits ; was one of the most beloved and success- 
fiil physicians and surgecais. For many years he 
filled the office of justice of the peace with dignity ; 
and also fot several years that of judge of probate. 
He had the esteem and confidence of the church as" a 
Christian brother and a deacon. He was blessed with 
property and i^nusual mental powers. Hje has been 
my family physician grg,tis, made me inany presents 
in money aM other wayg, ,and has done much more 
than any man among us, for missionary and Bible. 
societies, and kindred objects.* He was very edify- 
ing in prayer-meetings and conferences, and jn revi- 
vals of ' religion.- Great is our loss ;, but, Lord 
Jesus, thou remainest the support, friend, and builder 

< * Dr. Everest left by will, for bharitable purposes, about 
16,000 dollars. . , ' ' , 



ADVANCING- YEARS. 271 

'of Zion. Do not leave us, but raise up some Elisha, 
instead, of this departed Elijah ; and grant to poor me, 
aged and weak, thy guidance, grace, arid every needed 
help, that I may he faithfal'and useful to death, and 
also he found of thee in peace. Amen." 

- "> '^ ^ ' ^' . 

To his nephew a,t AndoVer. 
J ' ^ . ., "May 2, 1822. 

'Mother Jliimphjey fell asleep,, as we trust in 
Jesus, last auttjimii, in her ninety-ninthTyear. Indeed, 
my sun is far'in the yy^est, having just closed my sixty- 
fourth year, and it give^ me feelings unutterahle. 
The world all slides from under me, and I see nothing 
here hut vanity. But the divinity and truth of the 
word of Grod appear more and more real and of amaz- 
ing importance. The testimony of the word con- 
ceming. the sinfulness, wretchedness, and weakness 
of man;, concerning the Lord Jesus Christ as God 
with usj his atoneiuentj righteousness, intercession, 
and infinit,e, unchangeahle, g,rid eternal fulness ; and 
respecting the Holy Spirit, to change and sanctify the 
heart, to show us the things of Jdsus, and fill the 
ibroken heart with peace and consolation in.hiin: 
these and the like things increase in my view ; all 
aside from the gospel is ahsolute darkness and des- 
peration. - But 0, how needed and inestimahly pre- 
cious is the gospel of Christ, ^s the' true,and- only light 
of hfe. I- think I can say, my study was never so 
delightful ; I wduld write, my sermons if it were only 
for the pleasure of -writing them, and my desire is to 
go out- of this world testifying of Jesus to all I leave 
-hdhind ; and that that good prbmise might he fulfilled 



272 JEREMIAH^MALLOCK. 

alsQ in poor me, 'They shall.be fruitful .in dd age.' 
Go oh, my dear poiisin ; the work you have chosen is 
truly good, the test of all callings ; and may a double 
portion of dear brother's piefy, love, and faith rest 
upon- you, . - 

" From your afFeetiohate- uncle, who loves you." 

" MaV 12, .1823. Last week I ^et apart a portion, 
of -my, garden to the Lord, for missionary" purposes, 
and planted it With corn and potatoes. , Should my 
life and health be continued, and any part of it fail 
through iny carelessness or sloth, then I aih to ifiafce 
it up. "Whatever it produces I consider solemnly 
consecrated to. the treasury of tKe Lord, or the full 
worth/of it in money. ■ Lord, what are we, that 
we should be in a situation to give' thee thine own! 
0, give me' grace to.db it fr^m the heart, and may I 
know hovv' spjemn and blessed it is to be tJie Lord's, , 
and live and do all.to Him -who hath done and suf- 
fered so much for poor sinful pie and -thi^ world of 
sinners." ' 

Speaking of the smallness of his contributions to 
■ send the gospel to others, the good man once saidj 
"If, "through amazing grace, I at last arrive in heaven, 
possibly some redeemed ^oiil may there come to me, 
and say'with liveliest gratitude, ' Ohf I ani indebted to 
your charity for my salvation.' And how should I, 
feel, if this happy spirit should then ask,; ^How much 
did you. give ?'" • 



CONVERSION OF, HIS SON. 273 



CHAPTER Xri. 

CONVERSION OF HIS §0N— CLOSING- LABORS— ' 
TEAiVs OF CHARACTER. 

The parent who has long prayed and wept and' 
waited for the conversion- of a beloyed ohild, will take 
no common interest in the fact now to, be recorded-^ 
a fa"ot equally suited to make him a partaker: of an- 
other's joy, and to inspire him with confidence in the 
Hear6r of prayer, slow as the ^acious answer may 
seem to come. ^ . - 

"May 19, 1822. Yesterday I 'received a letter 
from my-sweet brother, ReV.. Mr. Jennings of Steu'- 
benville, Ohio, containing^ in many respects the mpst 
reviving intelligence I ever hpard, namely, the news 
of the hopeful conversion of my dear son Jeremiah; 
and' of his public profession of "^he Lord Jesus, the 
last Sabbath in Ajiril. If ever, I now had something 
T)f Pavid's feeling when he,weht and sat before 'Grod 
and said, ' What can David say more unto thee ? for 
ttou. Lord dod,' knowest thy s.eirvant.' He has been 
a child of my daily prayers ;' I have often thought of 
those words,- where the psalmist speaks .of vpraying 
until 14s throat Was dried, and of looking until his 
eyes failed. I could hardly believe- for joy. And how 
rcAdving was the news to his dear rhother. Whe;ther 
I think of ray unworthiness, or of the Lord's- being a 
prayer-hearing Gr'od; of the love and precioiisnessof 
12* 



274 JEREM-IAH HALLdOK. 

Christ, of .the emptiness of. this world, the need "we 
stand in of Jesus, arid the hlessedness of iaithjnJikn, 
or of the free grace of G-od in bestowing it ; all I can 
say is, turn which way I wiH, tlie scene is rather 
overwhelming, and the thought arises. What shall I 
render unto the, Lord? It is all the travail of Jesus' 
soul, and let him have all the praise, to the glory of 
God the Father. I think I have rejoiced with many 
parents,, in' seeing or hearing of the apparent conver- 
sion, -of their children ; and now I want to call on 
them to rejoice with me ^nd help me praise the Lord. 
And L would wish to_ do it with trembling a,nd holy 
fear.^ ; - . '•Ki; ' 

"Dear Saviour, I give, him. afresh to thee; Do 
not let him be deceived. take the full possession 
of-his heart, aUd make him wholly and for ever thine. 
be his guide and support in this evil world, and 
make' him iiseful to thy "church on the earth, in the 
way in which it shall seem good .to thee. O, not only 
come into' my poor nnwortiiy family, but g& through. 
take Saraih his wife, Homan and .Glarissaj J— — - 

and L , the graiidehildren Jeremiah, Oliver, Le- 

rdy, and the. youth .and children 'with me,.A^ — and. 

B , S and J. A . Are not thy atm and 

grace sufficient, and the atonement and fulness of 
Jesus infinite? Cause my soul to be humble deep- 
within me; to thank thee, to take "fresh courage,, to 
believe; more_and serve thee better as a minister of 
the gospel, as a parent, eveiywhere and in aH things, 
unto thy coming and glorious kingdom, with, which 
this world and all its good things are not worthy to 



CONVEasiON 0F HIS SON. 276 

be so much as named. ' Blessed be the Lord God, the 
God of Israel, wTio anly doeth wondrous, things. And 
blessed be his glorious name for ever-: and let the 
whole eariii be filled With his glory. Amen and Amen.' 

" Ji^REMtiH HALLOCK." 
"July 9, 1823. I had a sick day — some of th& 
time partiaUy deranged. ' When the hour of the con- 
cert camft it affected me to see the dear friends of 
Jesus meet and I ooujki not go with them. And 
thinking this might be my last sickness,^ it excited 
thoughts like these* < Farewell, pleasant conferences 
and sw^et concerts of prayer ; may you ever be hon- 
ored and blessed with the presence of the God of 
Jacob.' And if I must die, may the ever-living 
and> mo^t exalted' Jesus come down and fiU all his 
meetings with his refreshed, joyful saints, and quick- 
ened sinners.' For some reason I felt rather calm in 
mind, and "not. anxious whether I went now or came 
back to life. That which my poor family and the 
dear .church need is not me, a feeble, ereatijre, but the 
all-refreshing presence of our exalted Lord and, Saviour 
Jesus. 

" July 10,. Thi-ough mercy, rested latst night bet- 
ter than I feared, and things respecting my recovery 
look more encouraging. Lord, fit me and my dear 
family and people for thy most holy and blessed \|\rill. 
Giily grant this one blessing, that we might live 
altogether in and. unto our everJiving and exalted 
Redeemer, as c<ur blessed ^11 in all.'' 0, in either case 
deny us not thy presence, so much better than life. 
Amen and Amen." , .,, 



/^, 



276- JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

To his elder si)n,- " ' j 

" December 4, 1822. 

" BfiLovED Chilprbn — Thiougli mercy we aj-e 
all favored' with usuar health. What a contrast he- 
tween this and the autumn of 18X3, when qurbeloved 
and . deeply lamented Sarah was cut down like a 
flower in the mormnfi;. The 16thi. of Detoher, nine 
years ago, ,we saw her draw her last breath and fall 
'into the arms of death. Never, never can t fraget 
the aifeoting' scene, so beyond utterance; a promis- 
ing, pleasajit daughter, a dear sister — ^what beauty, , 
honor, and strength .to our family. .When the same 
season arrives, it briiigsher fresh to our minds. 

" The ReV. Mr. Jepnings' letter was surprising", 
and cause of great joy to your parents, to this church, 
■and the neighboring churches^and. liiinisters. Your 
letter was most acceptq,ble. The great change, I 
take it, much confeteth in a change. of the moral 
tastes and affections respecting the gospel .iand its 
truths, a desire after holiness, and to follow the Lamb 
in 'obedience to hi^ sayings. Jeremiah, has (xod 
of his great mercy begun to shine into your heart, to 
show you his excellent glqry in the" f^ce ef Jesiis, 
with a transforming view ? It is infinitely more than 
if he had given you all this world; and let him have 
all the praise. The Lord. hold. you up and daily 
quicken you to walk in his ways, that so you may. 
know by happy experience that his" goings forth are 
as the iriOTiiing." 

".March 13, 1823. I am this day withia. five^ 
years of seventy, the age of man. I tjiipk I do not 



CONVERSION 6f HIS SON. 277 

■wish, to go back for the 'world or any of its-enjoyments, 
hut hope, through, grg,ce, that I can bid them ar tear- 
less farewell. I think I do still love the Bible, 'the 
day, 1316 meetings, and 'people of God. <. To part for 
ever with these and the like, things of Jesus, I could 
riot endure. But, blessed' be "Grod, we need sot go 
back for these things; the brightest prospects are 
forward^ even beyond the grave ; so that grim death 
. doth not remove the Christian from, but bringeth him 
near the Saviour." . •.- » 

^ "June 29, Lord's day. Second sermon on th& 
election of grace. Have had, by turns at least, un- 
usual sweetnisss and solemnity of soul, in writing and 
in .preaching this sermon. The audience appeared 
solemn and interested. Returned home with a kind 
■of sweet serenity of mind. Surely.the word of truth 
exalteth God alone, and nothing is so suptoorting and 
eomforting to the Christian. -. 

"Aug. 10. Last Friday ourdeat son Jeremiah 
returned hom6 from Steubenville with Sarah, ' fte 
has, been to Saratoga Spririgs for his health r- trust 
they are usefLd — ^but he. is feeble. I think he "appears 
to be a new man in spiritual things ; may he be a 
Christian indeed. 

"Sept. 7. To-day my dear Jeremiah Ws herCy 
and partook withL us at the Lord's table. "0 what 
shall I render to the Lord? I have long prayed and 
looked for this desirable day, and now having, seen 
this. Salvation of my Saviour, I/could wish to leave 
the -v^orld and go' to my Saviour. Amen." 

This meeting seems to have been searcely less 



278 JEREMIAH HAIiLOCK. 

happy than! -that of the venerable Jacob and bis Son 
Joseph; After such a result of paternal anxieties 
and pious effort, protracted through a course of years, 
what Christian parent, long.arnd severely as God m9,y 
have tried his faith and. patience, -will not put up one 
more prayer for the -oonversion of : his dear child ? 
Nor let the godly 'minister fainl^ who with liniited 
means and many sacrifices educates a son in hope 
that he inay yet minister at the altar after the father's 
r^mo^ fcom his work to his reward, even whenhis 
son prefers some less sacred employment; for he may 
live to see aiid admire the wisdoni of Providence in 
the disappointment of his own plan. ' Strong as was 
Mr. Hallock's desire- that his son might be a minister 
of Christ, and though his grief and disapipoiitment 
were great when he saw liinci choose the profession of 
law, yet he lived to see him raised from the bar to 
the bench,, a professed friend of Christ, an officer and 
pillar in the church; ]je lived to aoknowledge that 
the Lord had placed, him in stations where he might 
as effectually promote the cause of Zion as he prob- 
ably would have done in the clerical office. 

" Feb. 15,- 1824. Lord's day. Second Sermon from 
Numbers 10,: 1-10. This sermon was preached in 
reference to the bell which was^ fixfed in its. place tbe 
past week, and rung to-day for the first time. ,CXmay 
it remind Us of the Lord's day, "house, and worship ; 
andj as was the case with the silver trumpets, be the 
Lord's memorial of Jiis grace in favor of his people." 

Mr. Hallock was very happy in his choice of sub- 
jects. As Jiis sermons were remarkably appropriate, 



CLOSING LABOES. - 279' 

they contained; of couise great yaiiety of matter. To 
show his care' in adapting his preaching- to the- cir- 
cumstances of his people, he once said to a friend, " I 
never preach against cafd-playing, h'ecause the people 
of Canton would inquire what it i^" ; 

"'Feb. 19) 1924. This morning dear E , who 

has lived with us from a little child^— sixteen or seven- 
teen years^^left us with- her father.- I mourn for 
E— ^^ — . 0" if I had been more, faithiial, and she ha^ 
gone away in Christ by faith, what a, consolation.: 
But I fear this was not th^ case. .Q Lord, forgive 
my unfaithfalnegs, and^fonri her, heart anewln- Christ 
J.esus ; an4 may we meet, of thy wonderful grace, in 
heaven.* ' ' . •- 

"May 2. It seemed. ^desirable, that if we could 
not have a -revival, it mi^ht be given us to mourn, 
to' give up our souls to sorrow.- Lord, let-us not be 
stupid ;\biri; may we either rejoice^ in thy return,., or 
liiQurn with deep sorrow thine absence. , 

' " JmjY 18. Lord's day. -Spent last Monday iij vis- 
iting the meoibers of the- church in the.west 'district, 
with brother; Taylof. < Tuesday, went ,to Torringford 
to the - monthly taeeting.. Wednesday, returned. 
Thursday; spent in visitiag^members^ of the church 
on Bast hill, witii Deacon Theophilus Humphrey. 
Friday, attended the prayer-meeting." ' 
' It rnay be proper in thfs place to give some 
account of the monthly meeting noticed in the, last 
extract, and of Mr. Halloek's practice in relation to 
it. At his ordination, an affangement was made by 

* This youth hai^siiice given evidence of a saving •change. . 



280- JEREMIAH HALiOCE. 

himself and several of the clergy located in the vifflni-- 
ty-j to form this meeting, as well for the culture of 
Christian and ministerial friendship, as for personkt 
improvement, and mutualaid in 'their high and holy 
calling. 

When the day arrived for the organizatioa -of this 
little Jsand of hrethren, and before he left his lodgings, 
Mr. Hallock wrote in his diary, "Resolved, to make 
no idle talk, and to attend to none-; but to endeavor 
to fix a sense of Gcod always iipon my mind." And 
judging from his uniform deportment, this resolutidu 
was ilot only renewed on his knees, but saeredly kept 
ever afterwards, whenever he was enabled to attend 
"the meeting in its monthly return. It was mora 
especially in the frequent, sessions of this body, that 
his rare piety and worth became known to his breth-^ 
ren.^ Here, in the absence of that jestraint which a 
man of his delicacy, or rather deep humility, is-worft 
to 'feel in less select or larger circles, he could give 
flow to liis soul. "Until the last year of his life his 
seat was seldom vacant, however iiiclemeiit the weath- 
er, and though "the distance sometimes exceeded twen- , 
ty miles. ^ And he "seemed always to come, not with' 
a rnanuscript preparation merely, but with sopaewhat 
of milch higher bearing on the best intjerests-of th6 
meeting — witli a miij,d soleniQ,,frpm a, late look into 
eternity ; a heart dissolved in love, as under the' very 
cross of his Master ; a countenamje importing, high 
and heavenly purpose, glowing, like Moses', vrith some 
lingering rays of the divine glory wiich.had beamed" 
upon it in his morning devotion-, or as slowly and with 



IRAITS OF CHARACTER. 281 

undiverted eye he had moved in meditation on the 
way. And when he entered. the loom where his 
brethren were sitting, and passed around his friendly 
handj there was at- pnce visible a general aspect- erf 
joy and of deepened" solemnity, often a sprt of in- 
voluntary pause and eager look throughout the circle, 
as in expectation of somethiug fresh from above. 
If, in the course of the session,, ihe business; took a 
turn rather aside from things of moment, he was seen 
apparently absorbed in his own tjontemplations, as if 
remembering his early resolution to attend to rip idle 
■talk. At such times his eyes, half-olpsed and elevat- 
ed, seemed to be looking away from earth, to heaven, 
as if fixed on objects unseen save by the ,eye of faith. 
His accustomed heavenly look now appeared to the 
best advantage. It was a rnixture of devout graArity, 
with a cheerfulness calm and holy. 

If his -pre.sence ever "failed to exclude levity £fom 
the meeting, his gentle reproof was sometimes heard, 
yet in such a tone of mifigled love, and reluctance, as 
to awaken only the emotions of gratitude and regret. 
He was not, however, averse to pleasa^ anecdotes. 
Few men could select flrom^ richer fund ; none could 
give them more thrilling interest, or more salutary 
point. - But it is worthy of particular notice, that 
facetious as were some of his' anecdotes, they were 
always so niodified by a peculiarity of, manner quite 
past description, that the smile they brought on the 
face was withotit levity in the hdg,rt of the listener. 
" This fact," said one who had often tested the reali- 
ty, " is to me good evidence that Mr. Halloek's wit 



282 JEREIOAH HALLOCK.-. -^ 

was sanctified*" . In the hour set apart fey the meet- 
iiig for devotion, he was manifestly in. his element. 
Silent he often was at other times, much as his 
brethren loved td hear his voice ; hut now, his swell- 
ing soul found utterance, in the intervals of prayer? 
and some heart-stirring intelhgenoe, or highly spiritual 
remarks, were sure to give this season a marked in- 
terest. No other memher could. fiU his seat at dny 
time, -and especially now. His' entire influence was 
very peculiar, and of the most salutary kind. It is 
believed, that while his direct influence on adjabeiii 
dhurches, by personal intercourse, preachmg, wise and 
friendly counsel, was great and good, the indirect 
influence which he exerted upon th^, through his 
frequent seasons of intercourse 'With, their pastors at 
this- monthly meeting, was even greater and more 
benign.*,^ ^ ^ : 

* Clerical meetings of this kind- are very common through- 
out Corinecticutj 'and in other parts of New England and the 
United States.- The made of conducting them is of course Vari- 
ous. . For the information of clergymen who may he strangers 
to these meetings of rare interest and utility^ the order of ex- 
ercises in the One which was so dear, and so riiuCh indebted to 
Mr. Hallock, is here subjoined. , ', _ 

Organizationj by the choice o_f a. scribe and moderator i 
prayer by the moderator; public worship; friendly remarks 
on the public pe^ffei^mance ;, discussion, at some length, of two 
questions, on which "Writers have been appointed at a previous 
meeting; season of prayer, in the coui'se of wliioh one of the 
members, by previous appointment, makes an address; theo- 
logical essay ; exegesis' of some passage of Soripturfr; criticism 
of a sermoif; a review; skeleton of a sermon by each-member; 
miscellaneous conversation; review of reading for tjie last 
month; proposals tor doing good ; remarks on the meeting; clos- 
ing prayer by- the scribe'. 



^ CLERICAL MEETINGS. 283 

" Sept. 13. LasI Friday eveniiig, my dear brother 

Moses with his sob L came to see us. This^ 

morning, after prayer together, they set out for home. 

1 The visit has been unusually pleasa&t, and I trust 

mutually profitable in the things of the Lrad. May 

I follow' my dear brother wherein he foMoweth Jesus. 

9 Sept. 19. Lord, how long before, of thy 
wonderful grace, we shall see a revival among us? 
come, I beseech thee, for Christ's sake." ■ ■ 

This desired revival the excellent niari liVed not 
to see ; but if sainted spirits> look down from their 
blessed abdde on their late. fields of action, "he saw 
it and was glad " in a few months after his arrival in 
heaven, when more than one hundred, under the 
early ministry of .his successor, were added to this 
highly favored church. 

"Feb. 6, -1825. Last Monday set out to. attend 
thfe installation of Rev. Mr.' Lathrop over the church 
in Salisbury. Arrived at Norfolk and lodged with 
brother Emerson. Tuesday, went on to Salisbury ;- 
it was pleasant to meet the consociation. Wednes- 
day, Mr. Lathrop was solemnly installed. , There was 
a tedious snow-storm. Thursday we rode, the wheels 
wading, through the snow, to Gantoni Bless the 
Lord, aiy soul." 

The last extra;ot is a fair speoiinen of Mr. Hal- 
lock's course through life", in respect 'to attending 
ecqlesiastical iheetings. In settling the! point of duty, 
hfe seemed scarcely to take into consideration either 
the distance or the state of the weather. In this, 
instanoei he left home on wheels in the heart of 



284 JEREMIAH KALLOCK. 

wmter, to perform a journey. cff more than thirty 
miles, and to he ahsent seyerat days,^ when mdst of 
Jiis brethren in the conspciation were younger and less 
infirm, aU of. them nearer the place of meetfiig than , 
hirhself. Andt I well recollect how he went twenty 
. miles, the following winter, on a similar occasion, 
when the cold was .so intense that several members 
of the consociation were on iheir arrival much firozen. ,' 
But this was the lasj? time he ever met that body ; 
and such was the effect upon him, that he- expressed 
some doubt of his ability to return to his family., 

His influence in the larger clerical meetings, was 
great, yet he said But little. He always seemed to 
prefer silence, unless, in his view, Sopie point under 
discussion was Mkely to receive a wrong deciaon. Jn 
such case his words, were few, very deliberate^ mark- 
ed with much -candbi:,> and commonly decisive. He 
was peculiarly- happy in jiourjhg upon almost any 
subject whateyer light the Scriptures obviously fur- 
rnsh. On questions of great intricacy, egfeciaUy if 
their solution depended ipmewhat upon nice meta- 
physical disquisition,, or an extensive acquaintance 
-with history, either civU or ecclesia^ical, he seldom 
spoke ;at all. The high respect in,whioh hb wisdom 
and his conoiliatairy turn were held by the churches 
in Connecticut, is sufficiently manifest from the fact 
that he was often a member of seleot'councils for the 
settlement of ecclesiastical difficulties.. That his ap- 
pearance to entire strangers wag impressive and some- 
what peculiar, the following fact is evidence. ■ 
' Some' years ago, a del^ate from the general as- 



TRAITS OF CHARACTER. 285 

sembly of the Presbyterian church attended the gen- 
eral association of Conneotiqut. On his return to the 
south,- he called on a clerical friend whose residence, 
fca- some years had been in the neighhorhood of Can- 
ton. ' After some expressions of high satisfaction in 
the appearance of the Connecticut clergy, he said in 
a tone of marked interest, "There was one man who 
attracted my attention in partiotilar ; but his name I 
have forgotten." He then described in vivid colors 
the^ person, tone,, and manner of Mr. Hallpck. \' 0, 
that 's the apostle John," said the once northern cler- 
gyman, with a significant sniile; "True, true," re- 
joined 4;he other, and then had the, happiness to learn 
Ms jiame and his. uncommon worth. 

The most prominent feature, do.ubtless,- of Jlr- 
Hallock's character, was that first and indispensable 
requisite- in a good' minister pf Christ, ardent "piety. 
This spread over his other estiniable. properties a sort 
of divine lustre, and gave, them sterling value. His 
was not that periodical religion whiph returns only 
one day in seven, or at tiie hours of family devotion, 
morning, and • evening ; its presence .and powerful in- 
fluelice were daily apparent in the relaxation of the 
fireside, i^ the social circle-,' in the common affairs, of 
life, as_ well as in the house of God, or even in the 
act of spreading forth his hands and- uttering tdnes 
of deepest devotjon, at the communion-table. "W-ith 
him every day was a sort of Sabbath, every hour' ap- 
parently an hour of holy intercourse with G-od, He 
seemed, -to fasten his hand on heaven and bid the earth 
roll beneath him. - ' 



286 JEREMIAH HALL-OCK. 

We should wrong not only him, hut the, graces of 
God which made him what he was in piety, "were 
we "to oiriit the chastened smUe which hletidpd so 
happily with the deep gravity of his aspect and saved 
him from the charge of austerity, a charge some- 
times brought against high spiritual attainment. Bew 
men if any did hotter, than he recommend ardor of 
piety to all sorts of people hy personal amiaoleness. 
To an uncommon extent he secured the love and con- 
fidence of youth and ohUdrenv His piety Shone-with 
such steady lustre and. in such fine propoi;tions, and 
with so little admixture of any thing foreign or incon.- 
gruous, that it was prohahly far more attractive,, cer- 
tainly far less repulsive even to the careless a,nd the 
vicious, than a much lower degree of piety often is 
in a character of inconsistent features, , , 

To all his intimate acquaintance, the -.uniforin 
and' marked agreement hetween his looks', language, 
and actions, denoted an Israelite, indeed^ Nor did 
he more- resemhle guileless Nathanael than-^he did 
godly Enoch, or Barnabas a son of consolation, ai.that 
disciple whom Jesus loved. Such was, the jextent of 
his spiritual attainments, I mean of course in human 
view, that • it would seem impossible to characterke 
him by some, one or few Christian graces, as is often 
done in characters of less symmetry. It would be 
nearer the truth to say, that by the gr.ace of Grod, re- 
oeivM in UoxoiUmon measure, he .had so successfully 
folldwed the direction of Peter in adding to hds, faith 
virtue,, and to virtue knowledge, temperance, patience, 
and all the other graces of Christianity, that his char- 



TRAITS OF CHARACTER,, 287 

aoter did in fact seem to combine, in, very happy pro- 
portions, and in high excellence, those various ti-aits 
which constitute a well-formed and full-grown man 
in Christ Jesus.^ And- through the mercy of Grod, he 
endiUred to the end of his course without any hlot on 
his -character; hiaj^'sun even increased in brilliancy 
until it setj or rather irose above human sight to. illu- 
minate- and adorn a Isrighter sky. ' Not even lene- 
mies — for we cannot suppose so good a man in- so 
evil a world without them, especially as his immacu- 
late Master was ,here crucified— -not even enemies 
have whispered a' suspicion of his integrity.' Those 
wlio attack Christianity through the persons of its- 
pr^fessors, select other eharacteis than the one be- 
fore us. 

Have we then' found a character without ai^y 
defects ? ■ Was Mr. Hallock free from moral stains ? 
No; W.6 have seen the bitteri;iess of his own soul in 
view' of his Sinful heart ; we .have heard him , ©fteij 
groan over '.his pollutions ; and doubtless he more fre- 
quently poured dut repentant sorrows before God, than 
he either spoke of. them to men or recorded them in 
his. journal. .But without giving him a sinless char- 
acter, those who knew him b,est do not hesitate to 
place him, jn poijit of consistent and mature practical 
piety, in the very first class of Christians' who in^any 
age or country have blessed our ,world. Throughout 
the circle of his acquaintance, he was commonly 
spoken of as "the good Mr. Hallock." Some, and 
these always among, his "most intimate acquaintance, 
would add the epithet "great." That his moral out- 



288 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

shone his intelleotual qualities,- none will deny. His 
intefleot, however, though, at once aided and sur- 
passed by something of higher excellence, was of no 
inferior order. His aS'sooiations of thought; as we, 
have seen in the course of this work, were often orig- 
inal and striking. He had a power of graphic delink 
eation which could entrance those around him. If 
the images of his imagination were not the most pic- 
turesque, they were always well-defined' and Vivid; 
for they were seldom secondhand, hut genuihe, 
bright coin, ^esh from his own mint. His memory, 
especially in regard to facts; was tenacious and exact. 
But the ^ most prominent of 'his intellectual powers 
was a sterling judgjnent. All his faculties of rmind 
seemed to owe not a little of their strength,, and their 
facility of operation, to the sublimity of" his moral 
and religious feelings. ProbaHy it would not be 
wide of the truth to' sayj he'was a, great because -a 
good- man. ~ 

He ever seemed, to feel and act as under the .eye 
of his divine Master, as one that loved his Lord and 
the service assigned him, as one who sought ■ the 
advancement of Christ's kingdom under a constant 
sense of the final account to be given of his steward- 
ship. His sense also of the worth of souls, and his 
strong and unquenchable ' love for Ms own people, 
appeared in his unwearied. eiForts for their salyatioil. 
He is believed to have spent more time than most of 
his clerical brethren in preparation for the pulpit,' 
He seemed to be shocked with the idea of bringing 
to the house nf God that which had cost him nothing. 



TRAITS OF UHARACJ-ER. 289 

His study was emptatioally Ms tome. Yet his char- 
acter was preeminently pEtstoraL He found much 
time to be ahroad among his people, with the, sick 
and' dying, visiting fronr i.ouse to house, and attend- 
ing funerals, conferences, and prayej-meetiiigs. Very- 
few have had an equal talent, hy familiar intercourse, 
to fix attention, awaken interest, and lodge valuable 
truth in the minds of all classes. vA stUl smaller 
iitimber have been alike faithful in' that part of a 
clisrgyman's duty termed parochial. If he did not 
adopt the resolution of one devoted servant of Christ, 
"to let no person go away from his presence without 
an .effort to'do^him good," it is believed that few 
ever went &cta him without- having received some 
salutary influence. ., A philanthropist of the true 
Chi^istian -stamp, 

" He watehed, te wapt, he felt,^ he prayed for all." 

In the various relations of private M6, he was 
what w© might expect in a man of such high aim 
and gMieral consistency of character. He never . 
seemed to forget, in moments (d relaxation, that he 
was an ambass'ador of Jesus Christ. ' His general 
deportment among his fellow-men, while it corar 
manded a -respect bordering .on veneration, secured a 
high degree of confidence and love. His life, as the 
reader has seen, was -not: distinguished by remark- 
able incJ.deQts.. Lite the gentle and uniforrii stream, 
it passed along year after year with little variation, 
tin at length he found himself rapidly sinking under 
the pressure of age and infirmities. - He now cast his 

Hallook. 13 



290 . JEREMIAB HAIiLOGK. 

eye. forward iwo or three years, to the age of seventy, 
as the termidation of his active labor in the' ministry, 
should Grod continue his. life to that period." His de- 
sign was then to ask for a colleague in, the work he 
loved. But G-od released him from his charge a little 
before the close of. the natural day of hurnan life, 

.' A worthy*,pastoT, at whose ordination Mr. Hallock 
pffered the ooijseerating prayer, says, "I still sefsttito 
feel at times thepressure of his liand fresb. and warm 
as wben be laid it on my head at that solemn hour; 
nor shaU I ever forget the words be spoke to me not 
long before bis death,' 'My young brotberi iTrant to 
say one thing to yoii for your encouragement: I have 
been a minister almost forty yeats, and T find thip 
work sweeter and sweeter.' '^ 

Another, wlio had spent a night' witb him, in 
coinpajiy with a feUow-student; writes, ^' After edify- 
ing conversation dur^g tbe' evening, as b^ Conducted 
us to our chamber, he ^aid, 'There is the bed I keep 
for- pilgriiilS. - A "great deal of farith has slept there, 
and I hope some loye.' His few words were ah em- 
phatic and impressirve seimon, Suggestive of many an 
instructive, pleasing,- profitable thought. The impres- 
sion on my own mind, was that of his strong, eiidur- 
ing love for all the servants^ of Christ. Mr. Hallqci 
•was not a mere Sabbath preacher. / He was an every 
day, and therefore an effective, eloquent, siicqes^fal 
preacher. A divine unction attended his words. 
The Heart and conscience felt their power." 



SICKNi;SS OF HIS WIFB. 29-J 



CHAPTER XIII. 

SICTCNKSS OF HIS "WIFE — LAST PUBLIC, SERVICES- 
DEATH. 

In the spring of lS25,-a scene of deep affliction 
commenced ip. Mr. Hallook's family, which was pr&b- 
ably a- means of hastening his dissolution. The 
wife of his youth, who had shared with him the joys 

' and sorrows of life," to whom his affection had for 

. many years been increasing in strength and tender- 
ness, and on whom, next to his Saviour, he had 
leaned as the staflF of his age, was smitten with dis- 
tressing and alaimiilg illness. "When he found that 
her disease was dropsy, and probably inourabW> his 
agony-of soul became intense. As she sunk gradually 
before his e.yes. He felt tiiat she must soon, leave' Him ;. 

- and by anticipation' already stood over , hex dying bed, 
pressed her cold hand, committed her soul to God, 
and ter body to the dust, and felt '-all the loneliness 
df her absence — a tr^ial, in his own apprehension, far 
greater than if its occurrence had been earlier in life. 
But the severity of ihis affliction caii be best leatned 
from his-, own account of it, taken partly froni his 

journal and partly frdrn letters to friends. ' 

«' March 6,, 1835. My dear Mrs. Hallock is un- 
well, and not able to go with me to meeting ..either 
Friday, oi: to-day. Her disorder appear^ to be the 
dropsy. Her physician and friends think it d9,nger. 



292 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

pus. She grows weaker every day. Perhaps it is 
-the oomiiig-of the Son of man. O LotcI Jesus, grant 
her thy sensible presence, and prepare ^oor me, with 
^her anxious childxen and Mends,-&r ail thy will. 
Sometimes the thought of parting with her.isover- 
whehningi at other times I feel- more quiet and rec- 
onciled. She, for the ttiost part, appears calm in 
mind- and ready. Q Lord, let her not be deeeive'd, 
but may she build only on Christ, and be accepted 
in him. preserve her to us a little longer, if^it be 
thy blessed will. may all be sanctified, and work 
to "th^e furtherance of thy blessed kingdoin in us and 
ainong.us, for Jestis' sake. Amenl " : , 

" March 13. Lord Grod of aged Pavid, make 
me thinej and be my helper and refuge unto deathi 
My wife has had a sick and ; trying Week, I never 
heard her groan as she did Thursday night from. 
aboiit nine to three o'clock. She then grew easier 
through niercy.. We begin to Jippe she may be. spar- 
ed to u& a little longer. Prepare her, and all of us, 
Lord, for this mercy ; but if — ^ — receive her spirit,, 
and be with us, our light, life, shield, andportion. 

" I am this day sixty-seven years old. I feel the 
increasing infirmities of age, and know that the end 
of ail probationary iiiings is, to me, Ut hand. Lord, 
quicken and strengtheu me, both to live unto Jesus, 
and testify of him and his so great and needful sal- 
vation, to the children, the youth, and aU. And when 
thou shalt call, may I submissively resign my minis- 
try, life, soul, and body to thee, and go supported by . 
the blessed gospel hope. Let me not be deceived ; 



SK3KNESS OF HIS WIFE. 293 

teach my heart ; make it right, and lead me in lie 
way whiph is- everlasting. 

" ' O reeeiva my soul at last.' ' 
" May 8, Lord's day. ' Northington. Mrs. Hallook 
was so unwell that I did not go until morning, and 
returned home after meeting. I greatly fear het de- 
parture is at hand. may she he r6a.dy. And 0, 
Lord Jesus,' strengthen and prepare me for all thy 
will, for Jesus' sake, Am£n." 

To his brother 3.t, Flainfield. 

"CANToijj'May 17, 1825. 

• " Very dear and respected -Brother'and Sister— 
The p'rohabilityis, that the wife of my youth hag not 
long^to stay in this world. ' For ten years she has 
been blessed with unusual health, to the great com- 
fort of her family. But sometime in January last, 
she was taken With that dlarming disease the dropsy. 
I have often feare'd that she would not live twelve 
hours. You know she. hsls been the builder of her 
house, under Providence. To me, .she is ' as the 
iovihg Mad and pleasant roQ.' This is the greatest' 
outward affliction. I ever' experienced^ ■ Sometimes it 
looks overwhelming, and I feel .as if I shopld sink 
under it. At other times I feel a strange support, 
and as"if t could do and bear all things-, by the help 
of oiir blessed Jesus. 'Do pray for us— you knowrfor 
what. Mrs. .HaU6ck is for th& most pkrt'calm in' 
mind, leaning, as we trust, on the Beloved;" 

" June 5, 18R5.- Last Friday rode vdth'.Mrs. Hal- 
lock to see Doctor — .- of Colebrook, fiefqrewegot 



294 JEREMIAH' HALLOCK.; 

home she was taken very ill, so that she could not 
endure to ride. To-day she. appears to me more like 
soon leaving us. must I "be hereaved -of the dear 
wife of my youth ?" I trust I received her in answer 
to prayer^ and! would give her up at the call of Him 
who gave herj and who hath nlade her such a bless- 
ing to me. Loijd Je^us, do, I beseech thee, shine 
upon her. . be Tier support ; fit her for thy heavenly 
mansions, and receive her there. And prepare poor 
me to follow, fot Jesus' sake; ^^ Amen.," 

In November, Mrs. Haliock's health was "So far 
improved that they performed a journey to Plainfield, 
at- the close of which Mr. HaUock writes, " I think, 
for forty years I n6ver had a more pleasant visit to, 
my friends in Massachusetts, although I set out undiear 
gloomy apprehensions. Intrust the journey has been 
beneficial to Mrs. Haliock's health. niSiy Grod in 
Christ have all the praise j and may we be wholly 
his, devoted to his fear' and service. , Amen." 

. This was his last journey to his belevecl friends! 
The last Sabbath in- November, he writes as follows : 
" More freedom and attention than I expected ; came 
home encouraged aoid comfortable in mind. . Had .a 
more pleasant conference than, usual in the eveniog: 
The meeting was smaJl in number, but remarkably 
stiU, and sweeti Why art thou so disquieted and cast 
down, 0. my s6ul, of late? Thank the Lord, and 
take courage. He hais, he doth, and will deliver, and 
I shall yet praise him, with his saints, for the health 
and help of his countenance." '\ ^: 



HIS CORI!.ESPONDENCE, 295 

To his ne-pkew, Mr. Gerard Hallock. . . 

"Deoembek. 19^, 1825. 

" Dear and Hives respected ' CqpsiN— I lately 
g^ve you an account of our remarkably pleasant, 
visit at Pls^infield, which I trusty you have resoeived. 
After thi^ I received your precious, letter, now on the 
tahle before me. The Holy Due of Israel, and great 
Physician of soiil and body, has raised the -wife df my 
youth from the borders of the grave, so that she is 
able to oversee the affairs of her family, and go with 
me again" to the house of the Lord; 'and! trust, in 
answer to the many prayers put up for her precious 
life. Although she appears to me like one raised out 
of the buryihg-ground, whai. the fj.nal issue will be, 
God only knows. I thinl it sounds like the coming 
of the Son of man, and that this terrible dropsy Vill 
fia9,lly wear the deai* woman put, who has "been the 
builder- of her family, a jwife "indeed to me, about forty 
years. Her mind appears calm. She says it is no mat- 
ter," if we are prepared ; and requests. us to pray that 
she may be able to sa^, '^Thou knowest that 1 love 
thee.' If we should live till March, I shall be sixty- 
eight, an4 she sixty-five; People of our age must be 
near to death. may we live and <iie_ in Jesus, and 
be -perfectly submissive, like those blessed occupying 
servants,, whom their Lord, when he cometh, shall find 
waiting i^r him. I well remember the changes which 
have passed over you, as .a member of my dear Moses' 
family^ I rejoice in the prosperity of your paper,* 

* The Boston Recorder aai'd Telegraph, lof which Mr. G. 
Halldek was then ■one of the editors. 



296 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

which I consider of the cause of Imilianuel, and to 
savot more and more of. him. Let us feel our de-; 

. pendenca on Jesus in .prosperity ; know that this is a 
chaiiging wx)rld; and should adverse scenes arise, 
never feel as if some , strange thing had happened. " 

" Jeremiah, with his .dear Sarah,, came last sum- 
mer seven hundred miles to see a siek and. dyiiig 
mother. Their weeping mother says, ' No one can 
douht their affection for their sick mother.' She 
styles it, ' The love of seven hundried miles aiid raie 
hundred and fifty dollars.' Jeremiah is perhaps more 

. useful in the kingdom of the Redeemer, than if he had 
entered the ministry. , I do not ^udge the' eight hufii- 
-dred dollars expended for his edjicatiori, or think i 
have given too much. 

"I have often thought and. said I would riever^ 
give over hoping^ for and expecting the new song of. 
salyatioriirom any poor sinner, so long as -he was in 
any measure awake and anxious. I feel more and 
more estatlished in this : that Christ is God, one With 
the Father ; that his atoning hlood, rigliteousness, and 
intercession are the only hope and salvatiorr of the 
sinner ; and that we become interested in Jesus and- 
his fulness, by that faith in. him which vforketh love. 
I also feel that much of the experience of the Lord's 
people in this world, consists in poverty of spirit, la- 
menting their leanness and barrenness, hungejing 
after ri^teousness, and desiring the advancement "of 
Christ's kingdom in the world, ' and to be made in- 
strurnents of good to Zion. If these and the like 
things, which belolig to ouf Lord*s character of the 



LAST LABORS. . 297 

blessed in Matthew, fifth chapter, he in us, they, may 
and ought to he cultivated; And if they should 
continue to pervada the mind and increase, we should 
have and give evidence that we are in Christ, and he 
irL us the hope of glory. < 

" Fxom. your affectionate 

" UiSTCLE." 

^ " Jan. 1, 1826. The past has heen a year of new. 
and great trials, on account of Mrs. Hallock's dis- 
tressing^- threatening dropsy. "We little thought, last 
spring that she would live to see this d^-y, hut, God 
has heen better to us than our fears or deserts ; so 
that her precious life is spared to us, and she is able 
of late to oversee the affairs of her family. Lord, 
make us penitent and humble, for all pur sins against 
thee, thankful for thy innumerable mercies, and 
for^ve, sanctify,- and prepare us for thy holy and 
blessed will.' If we must die this year, may it be in 
Jesus — ^if bereaved, support us with thy consolation. 
Thus honor us, tha,t by faith, love, obedience, and 
submission, we may honor thee' in the Lainb of God 
who died to save us from death, and lives for ever- 
n^ore, the life of all his people. Amen and Amen.-- 

"'Jan. 29, Lord's day. "Wednesday, Thursday^ 
and Friday have been three days of bodily infirmities 
and distress, so that I sometijnties thought my days 
on' the earth wetre almost closed ; I especially feared I 
should not be able to -perform in publjo. But bless- 
ed be my good Shepherd,- the. Lord Jesus hath ena- 
bled me to perform as usual, and I felt in better health 
and stronger at night than in the morning. , My dear 

13* 



298 JEREMIAH HAL-LOCK. 

companion is very low, and I fear sinking imdBr.her 
distressing, wasting disease, - thou most great and 
good Physieiaa of body and mind, prepaye tor and 
poor me for all thy Messed Will. Amen. Amen. 

" Jan. ^1. Went with brother Titus Case to attend" 
the ordination of his son over the chureh in Goshen. 
It proved to be one of the most Qold, tedious days. , I 
was appointed to make the consecrating prayer, and 
was carried through better than my fears. 

■" Feb. 2. "We retuirned to Canton, and found all ia 
outward peace ; but poor Mrs. Hallook is i^O' better. 
I fe^-r she is sinking and drawing near to death., 
B^it it is a pleasing thought, that Jesus holds its 
keys. By reason of the oold^ on -Tuesday, I am so 
lame I can hai^dly get about. 

"Feb. 5, Lord's day. First sermon from Psalm > 
72 : 6 : ' He shall come down as rain upon the mown 
grass, etc.' Second 'sermon from Rev. 2 l4: 'Never- 
theless I have somewhat against 'thee, because thou 
Hast left thy first love.' Friday and Saturday felt very 
unwell, hardly able to sit up, and my dear wife still 
more ill; but have been carried through another day 
pf my public labot far better than my fears. what 
shall I render' unto the Lord for-all his great and 
innumerable mercies:? may iny- whole heart be 
Christ's, and he my blessed All in all." 

.<r Mr. Hallook's xeniarks, on each of the next four, 
Sabbatbs; are similar to the last extract, save that 
he speaks of his wife's increasing weakness,- of his 
own Unusual comfort of n;ind, and of the sickness of 
his beloved Deacon Humphrey — a man'who had stood" 



LA&T LABORS. 299 

by Mm a fast friend during, his entire ministry, and 
■vrhGS,e sickness and death at this most trying time, 
added not a little to his other afflibtions. 

"March 26, Lord's day. Northington. Usual free- 

■ dom and attention. Rode home a:fter. meeting, against 

a cold northwest wind — ^very had -for my rheumatism ; 

called and prayed with some of the si6k, on the:' way. 

"ApRit 33. Trust my sou! was refreshed.with the 
truth I preached to o^ers. It was wonderful to think- 
of the price in onr hands to get the unspeakable love 
of, Christ the Lamh «f G-od, Immanuel, by loying 
him. How astonishing, that if we vile sinners will 
but Ipve the Lord' Jesus, ■ so exalted and divinely 
precious in .himself he will bless and honor us with 
his love.' Ill the afternoon felt more -feeble and a 
little embarra,ssed. 'She swelling- on my throat more 
afflictive and threatening. O Lord, prepare us all 
• for.thy wiU.' ■ " ' 

'.'April'30, Lord's day. Simsbury. "Was'feeble in 
,bpdy, and low in miiid,' ,0 Lord, giVe success to thy 
feruth, altbough spoken with so much weakness, for ■ 
thy naine's sake. Rodp home after, meeting,- on 
account of Mrs. Halloek. Fouiid her in some respects 
more comfortable, though, I fear, reklly no better. 
My dear brother M'Lean "tarried with us. Spent- 
the -evening and indrning in conversation on things' 
above. ; - 

"May 1. Confined to the bed most -of the day,- 
parched with thirst, and groaning, with pain in my 
teeth- and face. Strengthehed myself, and at five 
o'clock -attended the monthly concert. . Though fevv 



300 JEE1EMIAH HALLOt!K. 

attended, yet it was, I thought, a spiritual, precious 
meeting. . • . ' 

'' May S. Have had a distressing night. Poor 
Mrs. Hallock, a mere skeleton, went out and dined 
with us, which she had not done for months. 

"May 14. 1 haye not been able to attiend meet- 
ing on this nor the last Sahbath- It was trying, to 
see the people go tothg Lerd's house, and not be able 
to be with them. ,0. for a ^humble, resigned" heart. 
-I trust ihy ancles are getting better, and that I may. 
be restored to the work of the • ministry. O Lord 
Jesus, if this is thy will, may it be, and may I be, 
more faithful and edifying, and edified. , If thou hast 
otherwise determined, be with and- prepare' irie for 
the trial ; and when thou hast no inore for me to do 
or suffer here, receive me, of thy great mercy, to thy. 
self in the heavenly mansifjns. Mrs, Hallock is more . 
comfortable, ; praised be the Lo^d. ' , • 

" May 21, i826. Lord's day. Lord's supper. First 
sermon froin John 4 : 10 : 'If thou knewest the gift of 
Grod, and whp it isi that gaith to thee,^ Give me to 
drink, thou wouldest have asked ' of him, and he 
would have givjeii thee living water.' Second sermon 
from fsalm 91 : 1: 'He that dwelleth in the secret 
place of the Most High, shall abide under -the shadow 
o'f the Almighty.' Have been strengthened and carried 
through the- public perforrpances beyond my fears, 
■praised be the Lord, my never failing helper." 

Here his public service ended, Since his deathj 
one of the. sisters of his church, with gushing tears, 
said to the compiler, in reference to this last exhaust- 



LAST SICKNESS. 301 

ing effort, "I thought ii would be so at the time.; I 
thought I should never see him there again ; his pale, 
deathlike face, and his slow and faltering steps as he 
ascended the pulpit, were to me a premonition of 
wliat has since proved reality j he seemed, on that 
memorable Sabbath, to be finishing his. work." 

•"May 22 and 23. Have been very unwell ; kept 
my bed most of- the; time, was unable to attend the 
concert, Tuesday. Monday, renewed my will ;■ a sol- 
emn, impressive transaction. may we be Christ's, 
and Christ our eternal portion. Amen and Amen." 

Here ends Mr. Hallook's journal. " The scene was 
ncfw fast qlosing. He sunk rapidly under a debihty 
of the whole system, yet was not entirely confined to 
the house. JHe even Wrote two sermons of common 
Jength; one on Acts i5 : 42, the other a funeral-ser- 
mon, on Eccl. 7 : 1. 

"When in this declining state; the itev. Mr.. 

McL— , a minister greatly beloved by Mr. Hallock, 

and who,- for twenty years, had been pastor of the 
nearest sister church, called to" see the deaf man. 
Said this son in the gospel,' "Father Hallock, I have 
two 'requests to make, which I h6pe you wUI. not 
deny me. The first js, that you will promise me not 
to destroy your journal . an3 other writings." Mr. 
Hallock made reply, "I had thought of burning them, 
"some dark night — ^perhaps they would give as much 
light in that, as in any way ; .but as you have made 
the request, I will not burn, them." "The other 
request is, that you. will teE me how you feel in view 



302. JEREMIAfi HALL-OCK. 

of death." He replied, "Brother, I am far from hav- 
ing distressing douljts. -If I hav'n't loved Christ and 
Ghrist% things, I don't know what I have loved." 

On the twentieth of June he for the last time 
sat with Ms family at ther breakfast tahle.' He also 
attended family prayers,- though manifestly in a state 
of "great debility. About two o'clock P. M., after a 
season of extreme restlessness, he rose from his bed,; 
took a chair and said, "Let us pray." Mrs; Hallook, 
thinking him deranged, reminded Kim that- it was ' 
not night. He then obseryedi " I-am almost gone,">- 
went into the; kitchen and called on the family to 
attend prayers. His son's wife noticed something 
singular in. his 'appearance, and giving him a chair, . 
requested him to sit. He sat down, and immediately 
sunk into a state of insensibih^. A physiofan came ■ 
wi&in half an.hour, and prohouhteed it a fit of apo- 
plexy. H-e lay appaientjly in a dying state tiU one 
o'clock at night, wheii to the surprise of all he so far 
revived as to speak, yet he was detaiig^d, and thus 
continued untU about ten o'clock. He then rose up 
in bed-, clasped bis hands and made a short,^^but able 
and conneoted'prayet, oommendiflg himself and fajnily • 
ta-the care of God.; , 

He now lay down^ but observing his little- grand- 
child about eighteen months old coniing Up to his 
bedj hje said, "Oh, you little dear,' you and your 
Jittle brothel's have been tbte objects of my^dailypray-^ 
el's from 'the tim« of your conception. May you'long 
li-ve and^e a burning and shining light in the church 
of Christ; may ycal -serve, God and your generation 



LAST SICKNESS. • 303 

well. I hope to meet my dear grandchildren in 
heaven." At this time his son's wife offered him 

some medicine. He said, " I thank you, G , for all 

your kind and abundant care of me." Then turning 
to his son,. "I thank you, my son, for your kind and 
filial attentions." His son remarked that if his father 
had a sentence for his ahsent brother Jeremiah,- he 
w;ould prize it. Mr. Hallocfc, after a little hesitancy 
and apparent confasion, said, ' ' Tell him, I have always , 
felt .that the dying hour is the trying hour; and we 
, then want all the graces of the covenant blessings." 
An orphan youth who had been a member of Mr. 
Hallook's family from a child, now came into the 
room. He rose up in bed, -and leaning upon one 
elbow, extended his deathlike hand to the young man, , 
and said with a heavfenjy smile, " 0, Augustus, attend 
to the great things that boncern your everlasting ' 
peace." His grandchildren Jeremiah and' Oliver 
"were oaHed. He'rose, put his hands upoh their heads 
in a truly patriarchal form, and in a most eloquent 
and pathetic manner commended them to -the Grod of 
their fathers ; told them^they were descended from a 
lolig line of pious ancestors, and that feUgion was the, 
great concern;, charged them to give their hearts to 
God, and added; ^'0 may G-od enlighten your hearts,', 
arid may ■ you be active and useful servants- of Christ 
when your grandfather- is sleeping in the dust." 

•Mrs. Hallock at tliis time came uitb\the room. 
He gave her'his hand and said, " Poor Mrs. ^Hallock, 
I am glad to see you ; may Christ be sanctified in 
you : we must part, but if, as I trust, it is in Christ,, 



304 JEREMIAH HALLOCK. 

it is well. My hope holds out strong." , His whole 
appearance, in look, tone, and manner, during this 
touching scene, was peculiarly pleasg,nt. He had 
heen, throughout bis sickness, as always before, very 
patient, but never so jemarkably pleasant, in the judg- 
ment of his neatest friends, asm this lucid interval 
of about two hours. He now lay back upon the bed, 
and appeared to be in the agonips of death, but soon 
said, "Oh, can this be death? - .Trust in the Lord., 
may I have peace and support. 

" ' Tell me, my soul, can this be death?' " 
Those around his bed supposed he would- say no 
more ; but he revived and added, " save from evil 
and errof — yes, from error. Oh sin, it will eat like 
ja. canker. Oh, my dear Hoiiian, may he -not fail of 
salvation." 'At this time, several of the neighbors 
came in.- He addressed them" separately, and gave- 
them his parting blessing: and farewell, He lay 
awhile in extreme distress, gasping for breath; then 
said^ with difficulty, " Lord, have mercy, make us 
partakers of that blessed hopis. "We can never be tpo 
soUoitous about a good hope in Christ. Oh, how we 
alllieed the supports of Jesus in this trying hour. . 
meeten me for, and take, me: to thyself. thou, who 
hast said, ' I am with you alway.' grant me tly pres- 
ence even unto death. .0 may I go penitent ; go-in 
fa,ith,; go in love to JesuS." He now cast, his eyes 
upon hi3 son and said, " Oh, Homan, what is not 
Christ worth in such an hour T Lord, come and take 
me." " He lay some time apparently in a dying state :. 
as little WiUiam came again into the room, he ..turne J 



HIS DEATH. 305 

his head and said, "0, you little hoy, may it be said 
pf yon, as of Enoch, that you ' walked with Grod.' I 
trust I have the happiness of Christ's presence." 
Here his reason left him, and never returned. He 
lay for some hours in extreme pain, catching for 
breath ; then became more easy, was able to swallow, 
, yet in a degree of stupor. In this quiet state he' re- 
mained tilL about five o'clock iti the morning, ^vhen 
he uttered a loud groan, arid expired, June 23, 1826, 
aged,68, in the forty-first year of Ms ministry. 

The .day- following, his funeral waS attended by 
several of the clergy and a large concourse of people 
from Canton and the adjacent towns, when a sermon 
"jvas preached by the cofmpiler, founded on Gen. .5 : 24, 
" And Enoch witlked with Grod ; and he was not ; for 
Grod took him." The general burst of grief on the 
occasion was no uncertain evidence that the church 
of Christ had lost one of its ablest supporters,., the 
Christian ministry one of its purest, brightest orna- 
ments, the communi^- a. firm pUlar, and each indi- 
vidual a personal friend. 

In his person, Mr. Hallock was above the middle 
stature, and of good proportion. His face was' rather 
long and spare— his features prominent — his skin 
dark^— his eyes of a bluish gray, and deep-set under 
thick black eyebrows. A chastened smile commonly 
softened the -fixed and" deep solemnity of his coun- 
tenanoej while an expression of devout contemplation, 
kindness, humility, and grave cheerfulness, saved hirft 
from any thiiig like repulsive austerity. He walked 
with his head inclined forward, and his eyes toward 



306 JEREJIUH HALLOCK.. 

, the earth. - All his motions, .\^hether of the hody and 
limhs, the head^.thoveyes, or-the organs of speech, were 
slow, and with unconscious dignity. His utterajioe 
was ijaturally imld and somewhat monotonous, often 

^ energetic, always distinct, and inimitably grave and 
sincere. His presence was suited, in no CMnmon de- 
gree, to impress with a sort of religious awe, as well 
the young and gay, as others., . He Was a' rare speci- 
men of clerical politeness. His .v^y peculiar look and 
manner went farther than in almost any other, case to 
give emphasis to Words and interest to action^. It 
might he said of him, as •£ Fenelon, "A noble siogtr- 
larijty pervaded his whole person; and a certain un- 
d&finable and sublime sim^hcity gaye- to his appear- 
ance the air of a prophet." 

I^r. Hallocll's Farewell Address to his bereaved wife and 

. cMldren, found, after his decease ^ith his la^t will and 

testament. - . - . r 

"My dear {"riends — ^As it is. my desire and ex- 
pectation fliat ydu,"my beloved wife and son Homauj 
will live together IzntU separated, as you and I have 
been, by the stroke of death, may you live in love, 
United in heart, daily performing those important 
mutual dutie's which are incumbent dn adear parent 
and child. ■, - 

" As the Saviour, when dying,. said to the beloved' 
disciple, ' Behold thy mothef !' I woilld say,:my_,dear. 
Homan, to you,- EemembeT how much she hath 
borne and dose, for you, and feel your great obliga- 
tions to her. Sympathize with her in her lonesome, 
trying situation-; seek, esteem, and hearken to her 



HIS FAREWELL ADDRESS. 307 

advice and cburiser in all things. Bear with her in- 
firmities, and despise her not, if slie ^wuld live, to he 
old. Always honor herj not in wOrd only hut in 
deed, according: to the fifth commandment, and you 
will do right, and please God J and it wiH he well 
with you. 

" And to you, my dear wife, I would say, ' Behold 
thy son !' ?ray for, be tender of him, esteem and treat 
him with respect, cover his failings, feel in his trials, 
provdke him n9t, hut seek and rejoice in his welfare, 
and encourage'.him in every right way. • Know, niy 
dear wife aiid child, that the most wise and judicious 
arrangement of things hy will, and -ever so mijch. of 
this world's things, cannot make us happy, or mutual 
hlessjngs and com^fbrts, if love he -panting, a,nd hatred 
and 6ovetousness fill the breast, , After all that is or 
can be done, the whole must turn on the great hinge 
of love, with whieh a dinner of herbs so much ex- 
ceedeth the richest feast," where', love is -wanting. ' 

'■' I would now add a few words to you all,,includ- 
ing eadi of the children.* I have endeavored to pray 
for you all dajly, and give you up to the Lord, wish- 
ing aboye all things, that Jesus Christ might be form- 
ed in you the hope of glory— that your whole selves 
and whatever you have might be the Lord's and con- 
secrated to his service — ^that you might set your hearts 

* '-'By all my children, I-tnean my ■'beloved J%remiah and 
Homan, Vith ray, dailghtera their wives ; jiat eiclliding dear 
Jonathan," brought np hy Mr. Hallock years ago, "or his wife, 
Augustus, Else, or little Julia Ann." The last three wele, at 
the date of this address, memhers of his family. 



308 JEREMIAH HALLOOK. 

pad hopes on Grod in Christ, seek his kingdom and 
glory, and lay up a treasure in heaven ; that so you 
might be interested in the last will and testament of 
the once crucified, hut now ever living and reigning 
Redeemer. Then you will he rich indeed. 

" Your times are in the hand of the Lord. It is 
he that huildefli up families and individuals, and that 
puUeth them down. Fear, therefore, and acknow- 
ledge him in all your ways, and he will perfect ttat 
which ooncerneth you. Whether we have little or 
much of this world, it is equally, in itself, ashes, vain- 
and perishing, as a portion : hence the wise vrill not- 
set their hope and heart on this world and its things. 
Take, therefore, my dear children, the whole word 
of- <xod tor. your portion, your study, and your 
guide in all things ; read it day and night-, and med- 
itate upon it. , 

" You have seen a thousand weaknesses, follies, 
and failings in me ; I ask your forgiveness and the 
forgiveness of God through Jesus Christ, to whose 
eternal mercy I commit myself and you, ' See that 
you lo^e one another, and rejoice in each other's in^ 
terests. .Ohey, love, and honor your dear mother. Sae 
to it that you, always respect .the miriisters of Jesus, 
for his sake. t\Open your doors and your hearts to his 
missionaries, and to aU his friends.. Always remem- 
ber to relieve the poor and ^ffljcte^d, so far as in your 

-power. Eeel for them. Be public spirited, not prodi- 
gal. Be cautious io contracting debts, and, careful 

. to .pay them. Buy the truth, and sell it not. In a 
word, live soberly, deal justly, love mercy, and walk 



MRS. HAILOCK'S DEATH. 309 

humtly with the Lord, and your end shall he pfeace. 
And if we die in the Lord, we shall soon ixieet, to part 
no more, in that comfortahle. and blessed eternity 
which the Son of God hath brought to light in the 
glorious gospel ; which is the prayer of your affection- 
ate friend arid father, 

« JEREMIAH SALLOCK. 
"Canton, March 24, 1817." 

'■ N. 'B. The -above farewell address was Written 
March 24, 1817; and. having this day, August 23, 
1822, reviewed it, I leave it with the will, as ratified 
yesterday." 

Mrs. Hallock, after the JeariJi of her husband, 
lingered out a few thrice-painful months. The last 
time she went to the house of God, she was support- 
ed to her seat to witness his faneraL solemnities. 
This scene, in respect to her better conceived than 
described, God enabled her to bear in a Christian 
manner. She. meekly said to one who attempted to 
impart' the consolation of sympathy, yet . consciaus 
that the pressure of her trial left little encouragement 
to the, attempt, " I found it hard to endure the last 
painful operation of the surgeon,' without the aid of 
Mr. Hallock's prayers." ■ A faint smile of resignation 
was on her countenance as she said" it ; its seeming 
import, that her Saviour was with her. The opera- 
tion, of depletion here ElUuded to, was performed in 
the interval between her husband's death land inter- 
ment, in> the hope of enabling her to attend his 
funeral. The strongest cord now severed which had 



310 JEREMIAH HALLOCS. 

boanjd her to earth, she gradually declined until early 
in November, "when her released spiriif joined that of-" 
her hushand. 'They were lovely and pleasant in their 
lives, and in their death not divided 



SKETCH OF THE LIPE 



OF • 



REV. MOSES HILLOCK, 

OF PLAITSTFIIiLI*, 'MA^S.,' 

ONIiY BEOTiaEB OF EEV. JEEEMIAH HALLOCK, OP CANTON, CONN. 

". The meek will he guide in judgment; and the meek ■will he teach 
his. wa/." ■ ' ^' 

Jeremiah and Moses Hallock were -so identified^ 
in history and in characterj that a hiography of the 
one can hairdly he considered complete without at 
least an outline of the other. They were, within two 
years of the same age, the' only sons of the family, 
with seven younger' isisters. The history of their 
early days up to manhood, is almost one and the 
same ; and from the point wh6re they separated for 
puhlio life, there, is a ^trjking resemblance. They 
were bom on Long Island in 1758 and 1760, and when 
the eldest was about eight, the losg of their father's 
property at sea caused him to take. them, with three 
little sisters, to Groshen, then a part of Chesterfield, 
' iSamp^hire^ounty, in the moui^taiiipus wilds of West- 
em Massachusetts, to subdue the forest and obtain the 
mean^ of suhsistenoe. When they were at the age. 



312 -MOSES HALLOCK. 

of eighteen and sixteen tib.e struggle of the Revolution 
commenced, and both were ■several mdnths in the 
army, in 1776-7, including the period' of the capture 
of Burgoyne; though fev? men were less inchned to 
war than their father or themselves. They were 
dutiful sons, moral and inoffensive in their lives, but 
without relish for vital godliness, aiid on one ocoa-" 
sion, Jeremiah had become so interested in a bsdl, 
that he sharjdy rebuked his brother ioi declining to 
attend. 

In 1779, at the age of twenty-one, Jeremiah was 
brought to the saving knowledge of Christ; and soon 
commenced study for the minisify. ' Four years after, 
divine grace reached the heart of Moses, and when 
he, graduating at Yale, in 1788, received flie degree' 
of A. B., Jeremiah, who had already entered the 
rnihistry, received that of A. M. Jeremiah , labored 
almost forty years as pastor in "West Simsbury, now 
Canton, Goimeotiout, till his death in 1826 ; Moses 
nearly- fprty-five yea*s as pastor in Flainfield, Massa- 
chusetts, till his death in 1837. The one object of 
both was the glory of G-od in plucking sinners as 
brands from the burning, and r?iisuig them, to heaven. 
The heart of Jeremiah^ was more fixed on labors as 
an evangelist, in which he was richly blessed ; while 
" Moses did more in training others for the ministry 
and missionary work; and the labors of both 'were - 
owned -by the presence and gift of the Holy Spirit in , 
conversions whi6h produced rich perrrtanent ftuits in 
a devoted and godly life. 

Both recognized the hand of G-od in the early dis- 



SKETCH OF HIS LIFE. 313 

asters of their father, by which their lot wa& cast in 
a part of the ooimtry preeminently blessed by "the 
great awakening of 1740." Their residence in Go- 
shen was tv?^elve miles from Northampton, where 
President Edwards so succiessfiiUy labored and wrote 
his immortal work on revivals ; Plainfield was near. 
G-oshen; and Canton 'not far from Windsor, thel)irth- 
place of Edwards. That' portion of the country was 
"as a field which the Lord hath blessed," not only 
in the outpouring of the Spirit in President Edwards' 
daysi but in the, perhaps more glorious and extensive 
revivals commencing about the year 1800, " when," 
in the language of Dr. Griffin, "thalt, moral change 
began which swept from so large a part vf New Eng. 
land its looseness of doctrine and laxity of discipline, 
and awakened an evangelical pulsp in every Vein of 
the American church." To the furtherance of this 
great, work of- God, the two brothers devoted their 
noblest energies till- death.^ Out of it they saw the 
great and belpyed missionary enterprises of the age 
evidently spring, and in it hosts of devoted men 
raised up, who are pillars in the church of God far 
and wide in our Own land, and at mission stations 
abroad. 

The two pastors were located. each about twenty 
miles west of Connecticut river — Plainfield being upon, 
and Canton within the Green Mountain range. They 
were sixty, miles apart, ,bnt the chain of brotherly 
love, and Christian sympathy and encouragement, 
was^ kept bright till they, were gathered into "the 
general assembly and church of the first-bofn, whoSe 

llallock. 1-4 



314 MOSES HALLOCK. 

names are written in heaven;" If either of them had 
sat for G-oldsmith's picture, it could scarcely have 
been more minutely accurate. 

<" '^Near yonder copse, where onoe the garden smiled, 

And stiH where many a garden flower grows wild ; 

.There, where a few -torn shruhs the place disclose, - 

The vii,LAa£ fjieachsr's modest mansion rose. 

A man he was-to'all the country dear, 

/ And passing rich '*ith forty pounds ayear; 

Remote from towns lie ra^ Jiis godly race, ' 

Nor e'er had chattged, Bo'r Wished- to cfaauge his place; 

tJnskilful he to fawn, or seek foi? jowei 

By doctrines fashioned to the .varying bo^r; 

Far otli^r aims his heart had learned to prize,' - 

More'hent to raise the wretched, than to rise. ,. 

. - ' . ■ . . ' 

" M church, with meek and unaffected ^face, 

His looks adorned the venerable place ; 

Truthirotn hii lips prevailed with douhle sWay, 

And fools who .earae to seoffi remained to pray. 

. The service past,, around <thepiousvmaji, 
With ready zeal, each honest- rustic ran; . 
E'en children followed with endearing wile,- 

'And plucked his gown, to share the good mto's siiiile. 
' His ready smife a^parent's w-armth expressedV 

Theii; welfare pleased hfm,a;nd their cares distressed, 
To them his hear^, his love, his griefs were giVen, 
But all his serious thoughts had rest iil hes^ven': 
As some tall cliff that- lifts its awful foriri, 

"Swells from the vale, and midway leaves the storm, - 
Though round its breas-t the rolling clouds^are spread, 
Eternal sjansjiine settles on its head." 

MosES Halt^ock was horn in Bropfehaven, Long 
Island, February 16, 1760, and died M Plaiilfield, 
Massachusetts, iuly 17, 1837, 'aged seVentyrseven. 
He did not leave even a fragmeiit 'Written as a me- 



SKETCH OF HIS LIF'E. 315 

morial of himself. -A short -time Before his death he 
committed to the flames all his maiiusoripts, except 
a few that he might still wish to use ; and when his 
only daughter, who was the solace of his declining 
days, seconding the desire of her brothers, requested 
that he would prepare at least an outline of the facts 
of his history, he rephed, " No, Martha ; the ahsent 
sons might wish to see it ; but there is nothing re- 
markable about me. The grace of Grod shines every- 
where. There are books enough- to read.'* 

The present desjgn is simply to give a summary 
view of his Ufe, character, and usefulness ; and gems 
of thought' and-'Christian counsel and instruction from 
his own private letters, preserved by those who valued 
them more -highly than he did. 

In the surrimer of 1783, at the age of twenty- 
three, he- was broiight to see his ruin by sin, and 
early in the ;autumn " ffiund himself happy," says an 
intimate Christian friend, "in contemplatiag the 
perfections and glory of Grod, especially as displayed 
ip the work of redemption ; not at "first aecounting 
for his peace' and' joy by, his suppo^d adoption into 
ih.e family of Christ ;" btit from that period he. dated 
his conversion. His attention being now turned to 
the rninistry, he commenced study with the Rev. Mr. 
Strong, of WiUiamsburg, residing about three miles 
from his father's, going and returning daily on ifoot ; 
and in ihe autijnm of 1784 entered Yale college, then 
under the presidency of theEev. Dr. Stiles, whomhfe 
ever remembered with great veneration. In the col- 
lege strifes he was a peacemaker | he was a member 



316 MOSES HAlLOCK. 

of "the Phi Beta Kappa Society, and graduaTed iiil788. 
He loved to recall the tender scene when, in their 
devotional exe^-oises, the aged president was over- 
whelmed with efnotion as he read with faltering 
tongue the lines, - 

" I'll praise Him -while he lends me breath'; 
AniJ Vheh my yoioe is lost in death, . ^ ' 
Praise shall employ m^ nohler powers." 

On completing his coHege'course, he' found that 
his father had need of him on the farm, to which he 
devoted himself for som^ months^when he. commenced 
the study of theology with the late Rev. gamuelT^t^ , 
. man, who had then been settled" in Goshen. At the 
tinie of his lioehgure in G-oshen, ^June 30, 1790,. he 
was requested hy the church at Plainfield to supply 
their pulpit ; and in March following received a tman- 
iinous call to become their pastor. This- call beiBg 
declined, was uhaniihdusly renewed, March, l792, 
and he was ordained and installed the first pastor of 
that church on tl^e 11th of July fbllojring, in a com- 
modious house of worship then erected ; and retained 
"the confidence of the whole commlinity unabated" 
for forty-five years until his death. 

At the very commencement of his labors in 179(H^ 
the church having been formed of fourteep- members, 
August 31, 1786.-^G'od poured out his Spirit, and the 
teroord is, " In consequence of, this ' glorious work, 
seventeen joined, the church in one day." Among 
the numher was Joseph Beals, long a deacon of his 
church, whose history is given in the tract ."Moun- 
tain Miller." ' ' 



SKETQH OF HIS LIFE. 317 

In 17^7, "another effiision of the Holy Spirit 
entered into almost every part of the town, and in 
some parts was very powerful ;" and in 1798, just 
preceding the great revivals in which his hrother and 
others -rejoiced in Connecticut, thirty-one persons 
joined the church, tweiity-four of whom "adorned the 
aisle atone time." In September, 1805, six were ad- 
mitted, 6ne of whom was Greorge Vining, whose strid- 
ing conversion is narrated in the tract "The Mother's 
Last. Prayer," and another was the lamented James 
. Richards, missionary to Ceylon; In May, 1808, as the 
result of another visit from on high, thirty-fouj joined 
the church, and ill July following, twenty-six. In 
September, 1816, ten were received, of whom three 
were then students with Mr. Hallbck; in 1826, fifteen 
others ; and in the latter part of 1827 and beginning 
of 1828, at three communion-seasons, sixty-sis. Ad- 
missions of one or more individuals also occur from, 
time to time thrbtighout the whole- period, massing 
the whole number received previous to the settlement 
of his colleague in 1831, ttree hundred and fifty-eight, 
nearly all ujfon profession of their faith; no one of 
whom was admitted without a serious examination 
of the evidences of saving conversion, a relation of 
which was usually given by the individual at a 
meetiag of the church; and scarcely one of whom 
failed to adorn the gospel of Christ in a consistent, 
prayerful,, and useful life. _ 

The town having been recently settled, hjs sal- 
ary small, and the opportunities of young mqn to ob- 
tain an education far less than at present, he received 



318 MOSES HALLOCK. 

V 

some students' into his family in' 1793, and ooritin- 
ued Ms instruetions until ; 1824, by whidi means 
he ever conSi<iered that, in the providence of Grod, 
his usefuloSss to the church had heen greatly ia- 
ereased. The vfhole numbet of these students , is 
three hundred and four, of whom thirty were yoimg 
ladies; one hundred and thirty-twt) ^ntered college, 
and. fifty became ministers of the gospel — seven being 
missionaries to the heathen, namely, Eev. James Rich- 
ards, at Ceylon, and Rev. William Richards, at the 
Sandwich Islands, sons of James Richards, Esq., who, 
tiirough the whole of Mr. HaUock's ministry, was a 
beloved deacon of his church ; Rev. Levi j^aisons and 
Rev. Pliny Fisk, in Palestine ;> Rev. Jonas King, D. D., 
in Grreece ; Rev, William M. Ferry, among the -North 
American Indians, and Mr.. Homan Hallockj his 
youngest son, missionary printer in Sm)rma. Otfiers 
have entered various professions,-among whom are the 
late, early fallen, Rev. Professor Sylvester Hovey, and 
Rev. Dr. Bela B. Edwards, Professor of Bibhcal Lit- 
erature at Andover ;* Hon. WiUiam H. Majmard, lat^ 

• Amongthe clergymen who pursued classical stuffies with 
him, exclusive of those aboveriiamed and his eldest son,'^were 
the following : Rey. Messr?. Clifford S. Arms, Eli Adams, 
Joseph M. Brewster, William M. Carraiohael, D. D., Abner 
Clark, Benjamin F. Clark, Tertius Clark; Erastus, Ealph,,and 
Sumner Clapj), Charles C. Danforth, Erastus Dickinson, Adol- ^ 
phus Ferry, Horatio Flagg, Pindar Field, Mr. Hurlb\it, Caleb 
.Rniglit, Nathanael Lathain, John C. Morgan^ Ansel Nash, 
Daniel Nash, Mason Noble, Isaac Oake^, Theophilus Pack- 
ard, jun., Elijah Paine, Dudley Phel^)?, Augustus fomeroy, 
Thaddeus Pomeroy,-' Jephthah 'Pool, Austin Richards, Henry 
Ejch(u-dson, iolm H. Russ, John W., Salter, Aldea Scovel, Syl- 



SKETCH OF liiS LIFE. 319 

of the New York Senate, and Hon. Jeremiah H. Hal- 
lock, late Presiding Judge in Ohio. Many of these 
received their preparatory education at an expense 
but little exceeding, oiie dollar a week, and thdse es- 
pecially who -were indigent and lobkiag.to the min- 
istry, received a. father's sympathy and counsel, and 
not a small measure of gratuitous assistance. Some 
were hopefully coftvertied while under his roof; sev- 
eral were, active helpers in promoting the spiritual in- 
terests of his congregation; and the, 'frequent inteUi- 
genee of the godly lives and , usefulness in the church 
of many, especially those amdng the heathen, " em- 
halrged? their memory in his heart, and was the rich- 
est reward of his endeavors. Only one of these three 

.hundred and four students died while Ajrith him, and 
this was the only death that occurred under his roof 
for forty ,y«ars. , ' ' ^ 

In 1806, he lay. in a lingering typhus, for* many 
days almost beyond hope of recovery, which wasfoU 
lowed by a fistula in his side, that for some, nlonths 

' gradup,lly exhausted his strength and threatened life ; 
but after seeking inedical advice in vain, a vagrant 
physician by the nime of Rogers forced his services 
upon., him, and at length' burned out the rfistiila with 
a hot iron, and he was restored, and his life prolonged 
thirty-one, years. . 

In 1815, he buried his venerated and cherished 

, fether, at the age of eighty-five, who for sixty years 

vester SCQvill, D. D., Hervey Smith, John Starkweather, John 
Stb^rs, Elijah Thayer, Noah. Thotaas, Wales Tilestori, Benjamin 
B. Westfall, Joseph H. Ware, and Ebenezer B. Wright. 



320 MOSES HALlOCK. 

lived a life of liumbte godliness— leaving "one 
-wofd," received from Ms father, which he wished, to 
be transmitted to thff latest generation : " Kemember, 
THERE IS A Long ete^rnity!" Ih 1826, his belovied 
and only brother, the Eev. Jeremiah Halldck, having 
adorned the ministry almost forty years, also rested 
from his labors, aged sixty-eight/ 

On reaching his seventieth year, he communicated 
to his pefople the result pt a decision some years pre- 
viously formed, on his arriving at that age to request 
them to' unite with him in calling a colleague ; and 
as they did not abound in wealth, to. prevent embar- 
rassment from pecuniary considerations, he proposed, 
on the settlement of a colleelgue, wholly to relinquish 
his own support. His people delayed about two years, 
when a colleague was installed-; the aged pastor 
assisting in the supply of a small destitute congrega- 
tian in an adjoining town. He was,.howev€r, again 
to beecHne sole pastcw; emd continued the patriarch 
of the congregjition and their bond ofainion-till again 
they tarmoniouaiy called a coUeague, who "was sup- 
plying the pulpit at the time of his death. 

In DeoemlbiBi', 1835^ Mrs. Hallock — formerly Miss 
Margaret Allen, Of Ghilmaffc,. Martha^ Vineyard—^ 
who for forti/-tkree years "liad been a tme helpirteet > 
in his toils and responsibilities, was removed by death, 
aged seveHtyifive ; having l?een permitted, a few weeks 
previous, once more to greet her long-absent son, who . 
was -called to this country to procure founts of type, ' 
and make other arrangements for the mission press. 
The period when the ravages of years -must close .h,er 



SKETCH OF HIS LIFE. 321 

usefulness was fast appraaohiiig, when, as she was 
knitting in the family circle, her hands ceased to 
ipoye, and a paralysis m ahout two weeks gently 
removed her to the "bfetter country,'^ which, from the 
age of about sixteen, in a life of. daily communion 
with" Grbd, she had been anticipating with uniform 
confidence in her Redeemerj and even wilii humble 
bdldnes? and Exultation. Not a tear bede'wed the 
cheek, of her bereaved- husband. He was, calm and 
steadfast, recognizing the hand of God, and praising'- 
him for all hejiad done for and by-her. Of this scene, 
and of his own last sickness^ his son residing with him " 
has emphatically said, "'Whoever saw him once, saw 
him always." Of the. aid his companion afforded 
him in the Christian course, Jie said to a son before 
her death, that he never- -was desirous of spiritual 
converse when her heart seemed unpj:epared„ or she 
diverted thQ theme ; and few came under their roof 
without. hearing sornething from both, having a direct 
and immediate bearing on the great salvation. The 
iate Rev. Seth Williston relates, that early in their 
married life, he called with a young, clergyman, and 
as the. wife was' preparing refreshmeptsv Mr. Hallock 
said to them, " Brethren, I wish you would walk into 
the- other room;" adding, as they entered, "Mrs. Hal- 
lock, loves to hiear religious conversation. She- must 
be here, and I want y'ou should sit here." It 'is a 
striking fact, that not only his brother and seven sis- • 
ters, but his wife's three brothers and six sisters, 
were till consistent, evangelical Christians ; seventeen 
of them labored to rear their o*7ri households for God ; 
14* 



322 MOSES HA-LLOCK. 

and several of them were, active andjUSefill to ad- 
vanced yeaTs. ^The transfer of his "wife to the world 
.ahove rendered the passage more direct and less dreary 
to him who, like so many ciphers oftEe aged in sim- 
ilar oircTimstahces, was soon to follow. 

A-hout three weeks before his death, jthe Rey. 
WiUiam Richards arrived with his family from the , 
Sandwich- Islands, at the house -of his father, a ven- 
erable deacon of the church of fourscore . years,^ and 
then entirely blind. As the paslor and his colleague 
dect sat conversing with them, the missionary called 
to him a native of the islands who had accompanied 
Bm, and presenting him to the aged pastor, said, 
"This is my teacher/' The boy's eyes sparkled as 
he "gazed on his patriarchal and furrowed counte- 
nance; and he soon said in Hawaiian, "Day most 
gone — sun most down-r— most supper-time." As they 
were aboutto separate, the pastor was desired to close 
the interview- by prayer. He proposed to eaidi of the 
others to- pray ; and then, after a paijse and a few 
inquiries as to the particular circumstances calling 
for thanksgiving and silpplication,. offered, says the 
missionary, "one of the most. heavenly" prayers in 
which, it was ever my privilege to join, contrasting 
the scene, with inimita'ble scriptural simplicity, , 
with that of Joseph presenting his sons to the aged 
Jacob." -■ ' , ' 

On Tuesday, July 11, six- days before his.death, 
he preached the funeral-sermon of a meitiber of bis 
churdh of about his own age, from those emphatic 
words pf the apostle, " I am in a strait betwixt two, 



SKETCH 0? HIS LIFE. ^ 323 

having a desire to depart and to be with Christ, 
which is far Jbetter." ^ . '^ 

0n, Wediiesday he walked three miles, making 
pEtstoral visits ", and on Thursday morning worked for 
some hours in the gardeii. About noon he seemed 
to have tak^ri cold, and having some fevferwas per- 
suaded to take his hed, to which he had always !great 
reluctanee dliring the day,- but which he kept mainly 
till Saturday niorning, when, expressing his unwill- 
ingness to waste His hours, he rose and spent a large 
pa:rt of iKe day in his favorite study of the .Bible. 
On Sabbath he was again more feeble, perhaps in 
part from over-exertion the preceding dayj but on 
Monday riiorning secured the setting apart of a piece 
of groTxnd as a gift from himself for a parsonage, which, 
the ocongregation'were proposing to 6reot. . Towards 
evening his colleague elect had a delightful and spii- 
itual conversation with him, which was elosfed with 
grayer. To the inquiry if he ever regretted having 
entered, the ministry, he^ replied, "I have been an nn- 
failhfdl, unprofitable servant, yet I am thankful that 
I was led to enter the Christian ministry '/^ "and when 
the colleagiie spoke .of his long-continued usefydness, 
he said, ."From ali I have done, and all my sins and 
short-cpmii)g's, I wish to fly to Christ. I am nothing; 
Christ is all." These were his last words. At a 
quarter before ninOj while he seemed to be sleeping, 
it was found that, he had ceased to ireath^. Such 
only was the "dying' strife" of one who, like his 
"lamented brother, always looked upon death with -a 
solemnity, not to say dread, which indeed well bor 



324 . -MOSES HA-LLOCK'. 

came their vieWs of the deoeitfulness of sin and the 
importance of tlie change, hut others have anticipated 
theiif own rremoval from time with greater confidence 
and triumph. His work here was done ; and in snch 
gentle* accents did the Saviour say, *' Come up hith- 
er — ^be with me, where I am." 

The usefuhiess of this servant of Christ was not 
from aiiy hrilliant performances, hut from a uniform 
godly influence, ahoays'ncculnulating, and character- 
ized hy kindness, sincerity, frankness, meekness^ and 
a deep and heartfelt interest in the welfare of all. 

If there is one trait in which, more than in others, 
the young preacher might covet his' falling mantle, it 
is his. intimate acquaintance with the word of God, 
The proportion erf time" and thought which he gave to 
the inspired Volume, oompared^with all- <rfhet hooks,, 
was .uncommonly large ; and the. steadfastness and 
sweetness of his reliance on its truths as from GoS, 
can perhaps he obtained in no Other wa,y. " If -I were 
as sure of reaching heaven^'' said he to a neighboring 
minister,-" as I am of the truth and inspiration- of this 
volume, I should desire no greater certainty."'' " I 
have consulted your pastor on this text," said Rev. 
Mr. Jennings "in his pulpit, which- he some time .sup- 
plied, "I always g-o to him for the statute}' It was 
with much teliiotance thdt, in his latter years, he 
substituted for the copy -of the Bible with Canne's 
notes, which he had . long tised, one ,of largeir type. 
The son from whom he had received it visiting him, 
and meeting him in the' morning pondering its sacred 
pages, "This," said" he, "is an invaluable present; 



SKETCH OP H-IS.LIFE, 325 

■I had rather part with your mother than with, this 
book." M the son Was ^Ibout to depart^ and the 
family to engage in prayer, "I will read you," said 
he, "the psakn that I read to your uncle Jeremiah, 
■when on his, "way to his mission in Vermont, and 
which he said often comforted him : " The Lord hear 
thee- in the day of trouhle ; the name of the Grod of 
Jacob defend thee ; send thee help from the sanctuary, 
and strengthen thee out of Zion," etc. | Psa. 20. He 
accompanied the son twenty miles, assisted in his 
puhlie and solemn consecration to the gospel ministry, 
himself givmg iiie chirge ; and then sentMim on his 
Way to his responsible duties, bidding .hini his last -fare- 
well oh earth- with the prayer, " Send thee help from 
the. sanctuary, and strengthen thee out -of Zion."' 

His colleague elect says, "I visited him daiitf, 
aod seldom entered his room when he had not the 
Bible. Art my first. interview, I was forcibly reminded 
of Pharaoh's introductioh to the- patriarch Jacob, and 
the probable .grounds of his inquiryj,*How old art 
thoja?' His conyersatioii was^ generally on subjects 
conqeeted with the congregation, or on the doctrines 
of grace, the perfectioBis of God, the divinity of Christ, 
the depravity of rrian, the .work of the Holy Spirit in 
regeneration and sahctification, and the glories of 
heaven. His. repiarks" were so clear, sound, and rich, 
thai my' stay was fiDequently protracted for hours. If 
all tiis valuable"s^i2/mg"S.could-be collected, they wouldj 
I doubt not, fill.a volume with what would- feed the 
souk and strengthen the confidence of believers." » 

Truth demands it to be added, that the draughts 



326* MOSES HALLOCK. 

he so long richly and prayerfully drew from the foun- 
tain of-G-bd's Word, ojilysuhstafntiated his faith in the 
great system of the doctrines of the. Reformation afs 
explained hy E dwards and the "Wesjteninster Assenfbly j 
nor did more recent agitations in the churches at, all 
diminish his sense of their preciousness^ or lead him 
to distrust the course humbly pursued in previous 
years for the promotion- of revivals of ireligion. 

In. connection with his familistrity with the Bible, 
he' was led to the exercise of habitual confidentse in 
Godj prayer for. the teaching of his Spirit, and a 
watchful observance of the indications of his provi- 
dence. Being awoke from sleep by an earth^quake, 
he answered ,the inquiry of a, parishioner' on the fol- . 
lowing day, by saying that his first impression was, 
"the safety of trusting in- One who could so easily 
shake, lie world." On one occasion, lodging with a 
student for the ministry, as they retired he said wittl 
solfemnity^ "For several years I have^been enabled to 
commit" myself to sleep with no distressihg anxiety in 
which world I should awake." To another he saidj 
"J would not bfe in an unconverted state one moment 
for ".worlds." . As he was visiting Jiis jjeople when 
there were indications of the presence of the Spirit, 
one of them says, "His only message was, 'I have 
come to see whether you are preparing for eternity.'^' 
From the same inspired pages he darew unfailing, 
lessons oi practical wisdom in his inteicourse with 
_ mankind. . Among these was that; where conscience 
did not interpose, of ^' yielding to conquer ;" h© 
thought it better, by yielding a little to a wayward 



SKETCH OR HIS LIFE. 327 

individual, to- retain his friendship and access to his 
feoul, than, by resentment orvrbtaliation to forfeit both. 
He was CMefiil to "owe nd man any thing;" and 
such was his punctuality in fulfilling engagements, 
that it i? doubted whether an instance can be recalled 
in fori y-five years in which his people waited fot him 
to appear in his place after thje appointed hour. He 
would not "oppress the hireling in his wages ;" and 
instead of saying, "It is naught," and afterwards 
"Tboasting," he often quoted the maxim of a man of 
wealth, who said he obtained it by "buying dear and 
selling chee^," "by industry- and economy and the 
wise managenient of his concerns. 

He was "careful to' entertain strangers," and into 
his own bosom came the blessingpf " the Uberal soul." 
Having given two .of his sons a 6ollegia,te education, 
and a third being about to enter, one, who was in a 
theological seminary in 1821, wrote him' for. some 
credentials in reference' to receiving aid from a be- 
nevolent society. " Letters.frora you," was the reply, 
"are alvrays welcome; but your present request for 
' predentials ' will not be so readily granted. Chil- 
dren should not beg bread, so long as their parents 
have enough. It is now nearly six years- since I 
entered you and G^ — at Williams college. . I had 
given you to the Lord, !(dA I believed he wotdd sup- 
pcMrt you. He so wondferfnUy prospered us, ^at all 
your expenses were paid in good season, and without 
the least perplexity. ' The barrel of nieal wasted hot, 
neither did the cruse of oU faU.' His kindness has 
been still continued. Beg of the Lord continually, 



328 MOSES HALLOGK. ' 

but ask not of man till you are suffering irom want. 
If your name is already given as a beneficiary, take 
the first convenient opportunity tb Tiave it erased." 

He ruled well his own household, who "rise 
up and call, him.tlessed.". While His government 
was thorough, without andue severity', he was to his 
children perhaps the most familiar earthly, fir lend i . 
pairting with them, as duty called, without ^omplaini^ 
whether for absence in our^own or a foreign land, but 
•bearing them steadily on his-heai^t and in his prayers 
from day to:day. He gave each of his four sons in- 
struction in the languages in earlier life, with a view 
to their obtaining a public education, should they be 
thus inplined, and should other providential indica- 
tions favor it; but ^resolved '^ never to drive a son to 
college." From the first he led his children to-con^ 
sidfer their interests and those of their parents as 
identified. He never said my house or my horse; but 
ours; and as soon as the older sons were able to talj^, 
and think, he bega^i to consult ihem as to. his plans 
for cultivating his little farhij etc., leading them to 
think and plan for themselves as if aU depended on 
their own wisdom and forethought. They "ate not 
the, bread of idleness;" but in their toils had his pa- 
ternal sympathy, which always ran in the direction 
of persuading' them to diminish tiie toil whibh their 
common interest induced thera to pursue, and ex- 
horting them, to shorten J;he wearisome day. He 
trained them, to temperance by storing their minds 
with facts, and motives by which they -v^ere induced 
voluntarily to abstain ; and habituated thera to liber- 



SKElCH OF HIS LIFE 329 

ality by allowing no' contfiliution to pass in wliich aU 
did not bear a part. Nothing was secured from any 
of his family by locks. If, Tjefore the temperance 
movement commenced, into which he very eajly 
threw all his -influence, the house contained ardent 
spirits-, it was placed a little out of the way, but 
stiU accessible to every child; and his money was 
always where they could place their hand upon it, with 
no 'command to ab^aiii from either, but the perfect 
understanding that they were sacred from their touch. 
It is a curious fact, indeed, that his house stood for 
an age unlocked, even when all left it to attend pub- 
lic worship; and that for the last twenty or thirty 
years of the life of himself and his comp^-nion, no lock 
and key whatever were retained in use. 

All his iiiflueriee in^he dofnes'tie circle was sancti- 
fied and sealed by the delightful seasons oi family wor- 
ship, the exercises of which were usually short;' con- 
sisting of a portion from the, Bible, often with comments, 
singing as occasion permitted, ^nd a prayfer always de- 
devotiorial and spiritual, in which the particular circum- 
stances of the passing day or liout, arid of each member 
of the household, were remembered, and all committed 
to the kind and holy keeping of a covenant' Grpd. At 
the close of the Sabbath, his children were for many 
years taiught ij^rom the catechism, chiefly by their moUi- 
er; and on these and similar occasions he freqojently 
.ma,de kind, practical remarks, which rarely assumed 
the fotm of a direct appeal, but were richly laden with 
divine instrruotiori and' incentives to early piety. 

These seasons were > of especial interest at the 



330 ■ MOSES HAHOCK. 

time of-the annual viait of his beloved only brotlier, 
the Rev. Jeremiab Halloclj, on the first Sabbath of 
September, in reference to which he once Said, that 
August was to him the most happy, and October the 
most gloomy month of the year. In these visits his 
brother was for many years acoompanifed by their 
godly father, Their spiritual cdnversatibn, their com- 
ments on the «vents of Providence as bearing on the 
interests of Zion, interwoven with illustrations aad 
anecdotes, and their deep and^ tender concern, for the 
eternal welfare of all, gave unceasing interest even to 
the ohild, and left the inevitable impression that they 
lived and moved "quite on the verge t)f heaven;" 
while their prayers s^med a barrier between an of- 
fended Grod and the rising race. Judge what must have 
been the feelings of an unconverted son; when, care- 
lessly breaking into a chamber upon the men of God, 
he found them -bowed upon their knees before Him, 
and the floor wet with their tears, probably poured out 
with their wrestling cries for his own salvation. 

It 'may be said of the subject 6f this brief sketch, 
that his influence, with very small abatement, was 
'all good; it was ever noiselessly exerted to prevent 
alienation and strife ; he waxed stronger and stronger ', 
and tUl his death, witnessed a large cbhgre^ga1;ion &if 
old and young filling the sanctuary from Sabbath to 
Sabb2.th. Who can but hope that rich, blessings are 
still in store for them ! - - 

On the second day after his death, a funeral-ser- 
mon was preached by the. Rev., Dr. Theophilus Pack- 
ard, of Shelburne'; and on -the Sabbath following, 



SKETCH OF HIS LIFE. 331 

another, by Jiis colleague elect, Rev. Mr. Goodsell, 
to crowded audiences. 

Of the hereaved church, one only who was a mem- 
ber at the time of his installation, survived him, the 
venerable Deacon James Richards. As the face of 
the aged, pastor was uncovered, that the afflicted 
people might in turn approach and take their final 
leave until ihe resurrection, the aged deacon, now 
entirely blind, was led to the coffin, placed his hand 
gently on the "forehead of him with whom he had for 
forty^ve years shared ihe burden and heat of the gos- 
pel day, and stood, pouring out a flood Of tears — ^tUl, 
jfeonstrained to retire, h6:turped~away, saying," Fare- 
'wellfnr time.;" and the congregation moved slowly, to 
deposit in the lonely grave the body of him who had 
assisted in laying liiere the parents or other kindred of 
aimbst aU^-of more than, an entire generation — and 
whose heart had bled witb. theirs jn aU, their sorrows. 
" It will not be questioned," said-Rev. Mr. Groodsell 
in, his sermon, "that this town is principally indebted, 
under Gfcod, to his labors for its present harmony and 
prosperity. He.was what Paul told Timothy a bishop 
ought to,be:he was sober; of good behavior; given 
to hospitaility; apt to teaich. He was of good report, 
at home ^.nd abroad. He was an Example of believ- 
ers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in 
faith, in plirity. He gave attendance to reading, to 
exhortation,- to^ doctrine. He mediiafed on these 
things. He was nliglity in . the Scripture^. His 
faniiUarity-with the Bible, it would seem, was almost 
without a parallel. This "often rendered^ meditation 



332 MOSES HALLOCK. , ' 

a feast to his own soul-; and it was this, in aohneotion 
with his piety, that so eminently qualified him for 
administering" consolation to others. 

" His theology was that of the B0le. l!his was 
the hook he studied, and, over which her prayed to the 
end of life. He ardently loved what are comijionly 
termed the doctrines of grace. These were the theme 
of his meditations day after day. It was in preach- 
ing these that Grod hlessed him— =-that sinners were 
converted, saints edified, and the ehurch received its 
additions from year to year, 

"The harmony .existing between, him and his 
people was never hroken. Ifearafter year there has 
hpen friendship and" qobperation. 

" To the Church at large he has been of eminent 
service, especially in the number of young men whose 
education he aided, and. who are now employed in 
useful spheres in this and foreigii lands. 

" But why dwell on .the fruits of his faithfulftess t 
It was not on his services in the churph of Christ 
thathis hope of heayei^ was founded. He said, in- 
deed, on his dying bed, that he did not f egret haying 
devoted his life to the ministry;, that he had 'fought 
not as one that beateth the air;' but he^"S3,id also,. 
'I want the righteousness of Christ.'' When I said 
to him,"' You have no fear,' he replied, ,'No; all is 
Icfve.' His departure was peaceful, 'as a shock of 
corn Cometh in in his season.' Grently ceasing to. 
breathe, he fel^ asleep in Jesus, forty-five years and 
six days from iihe time qf his installation^ and in the 
seventy-eighth, yeftr of his age.'! > 



CORRESPONDENCE. 333 

HI'S. MFE AND CHARACTER AS 'DRAWN FROM 
HIS PRIVATE CORRESPONDENCE. 

It will' be. perceived that the date of the following 
letter is four months previous to "the second Sahbath 
in October, 1798," recorded, in the memoir of the Rev.- 
Jeremiah HaUock, as the beginning, in Canfon, of 
the great revivals about the commencement of th6 
present century/ 

^0 hK brother, Ref. Jeremiah Hallocb, of Wesfefiimsbury, now Canton, Coim. 
"Plainfield, Sabbath. Evening, June"3, 1798. 

«.' My very dear Brother — ^Although somewhat 
fatigued with the labors of the day, -I am unwilling 
to miss the present opportunity to write to you; es- 
pecially as the tidings' I am aljout to convey are so 
glorious. • rt has been my favored lotto see several 
awakenings before, but the present displays of divine 
, power and grace in Plainfield far exceed, in my opin- 
_. ion, what I ever before saw. In this little place there 
are at least fifty persons hopefully born of Grod within 
a .few months. And besides -these, several persons 
appear tq hav6 obtained clear and comfortable evi- 
dence of their good estate, who, till these happy days, 
\f ere in gireat doubt. The churfehr seems to be greatly 
quickened, and there" is a prospect of a good addition 
being made to it soon. There are so many demon- 
strative proofe that the- work is the work of God, that 
next to none pretend to gainsay it. I believe . there 
is not a man in the town that "openly opposes. • - 

" The instances of renewing grace are to appear- 
ance mostly among the young, though not- whofly 
confined to them. None have joined the church yet, 



334 MOSES HALLOCK. 

but twenty-four sta.h(l propounded. .Several of these . 
appeared to be Christians before tiie awakenijagj^but 
dared not make a public profession till now. , [Twen- 
ty-two have told their experience in the nifeeting- 
house-r-seventeen last Friday,' and five to-day — ^before 
a-icrowded and sdemn assembly. They will probably 
■ be received on the first Sabbath of July, and sit down 
with the church at the Lord's table ; and I expect 
tiiat'.a number more wHl offet themselves before that 
time. 

" There are two young men whose conviction has 
been unusually long and clear, who have received 
comfort within these few weeks. At some times they 
almost appjQared-in despair. I heard one of them Say, 
with- trembling "limbs, '. Oh, the eternity of misery 
that is before me!'* For a considerable tirne before 
they hopefuUy submitted to the' divine and sovereign 
vt'ill, they saw and confessed the enmity of their 
bearts to God, and how just b.e would- be in sending 
them to everlasting punishment. They told me that 
they felt most obstinately opposed to the way! of H& 
by Jesus Christ, and vvfere it not that they believed 
ip election they should be in despair. These two are 
men of bright natural parts, and considerable reading, 
and bid fair to be pillars in the church some future 
day. T^eir countenances are expressive of that peace 
of G-od which passeth all understanding. These, with 
most of the -others who have told their experience, 

* The young mau -who uttered these -words -was douhtless 
Jephthah Pool,' who became a hea-srenly-tninded, fa,ithful, and '' 
Bdocessful minister of Christ: ■ 



CORRESPONDENCE. 335 

spoke of terrible opposition of heart to God, and clear' 
views of his -justice, before regeneration, and hpw 
captivated and- charmed they afterwards were both 
with the divine jastioe and mercy. Let G-od have 
aH the glory. 

^'- Do come and see us^ as soon ag is convenient. 
May we eyer be. engaged in the service of God, who 
hath done such great things for us. 

" From your brother ^ 

\ ■' " MOSES HALLOCK." 

To Eben'ezer Suell, Esq^., of Chmmington, who had piesented him sixty young 
' appte-trees. ' ' ' 

"PlajnfjelC, July 4, 1799.' 

" Dear Sir — The apple-trees arrived safely. I 
received, them with gratitude; and set them out with 
soine more care than if they had been purchased with 
my money. I can think of nothing of the same value 
which would have been so acceptable to me. The 
groupd was ready to receive them ; but I should not 
have bought any, for it seemed" to me imprudent to 
iicrease my debts. Mayl ever, ■«dth deep humility, 
ascribe the supply of my wants to' the divine care. 

" In one of your Irind letters, dated May 8, 1797, 
you inquire thusy^ ' Watchman, what of the night ? 
Is it not the latter part? How long, -think, ere the 
day wiU break, and the shadows flee away?' 

" Though I stand in the place of a watchman on 
Jerusalem's walls, yet I am unworthy of the name. 
I am too much like an unfaithful sentinel^who gets 
asleep upon, his post;, and how can I tell the time 
of night ? But if a sentry ih this -predicament should 



336 MOS.ES HALLOQ-K. . 

be surprised by the cry, ' What of th& ni^ht:?' though 
through his dulness he has not kep* ^he time, yet if 
hs see the day-star, a^dhear the birds sing,, he can 
answer that the mornings is near. * * * 

" I hope, sir, tliat the limbs of these trees wiQ 
hereafter bend to meet the innocent hand of some 
millennial people: Did I know this, it would put a 
tenfold value on them. I am willing to plant for 
them to eat. When I think of the happiness of the 
mUiennium, rny soul as it were runs forward 'to an- 
ticipate the joy. But though it tarry, rny dear brother," 
let lis wait for it, for it will surely come; 

" Mrs, Hallock unites with me in our affectionate 
regards to you, your companion, and son Ebenezer, 
who brought, the trees. Your kind .and generous 
presents have contributed to our comfort ; we Consider 
them not only as expressions of friendship to us, but 
what is infinitely more, to the ministry. May^ a 
gracious Grod accept your offerings, and verify in .you 
his word, ' The liberal soul deviseth liberal thiijgs, 
■and by liberal things shall he stand.' 

"I am, dear sir, your much obliged, though very 
unworthy friend, 

. " MOSES HALLOCK." 

To his brother, Rev. Jeremiah Hallock. 

" P-LiiNpiELD, January 1, 1808. 

" My very dhae Brother: — ^I'have the happiness 
to inform" you that an awake^ng has begun in the 
eastern p^rt of this place. He that appeared to 
Joshua as Captaip of the Lord's host has come. Do 
read the two last verses of the fifth chapter of Joshua. 



CORRESPONDENCE. 337 

Some seem to feel as that solemnized man did when 
hfe fell on his face, and loosed his shoes. Christians 
have wonderfully waked up, and I hope some few 
persons are lately horn again. that We could praise 
the Lord of victory. Pray for us, and 'come over 
and Jielp us ' as soon as you can." 

Uuder another date, he says, "I attempted, -to 
preach yesterday from Psalm 68 ^3: 'But let the 
righteous be glad, let them rejoice before God ;" yea, 
let theni exceedingly rejoice.' My object was to show 
why. 1-. Because of the excellency of his nature ; 
2. His making. them righteous ; 2. His care of them; 
4. The beauty he puis upon them, ' wings of a dove ;' 
4. His distinguishing them from the wicked in many 
respects ; 6. Becaiis'e he seeks his own glory -in aU he 
does; 7. His. saving them at last." .^ 

r To.hu«lde5t Son, who was aboat to commence teaming a school^. 

" PtAiNFiELD, Novembet 30, 1810. 

" For the jegulation of ydur school, let your rules 
be few, plain, arid reasonable. Seldom, if ever, 
threaten. Chide but little. Magnify no crimed Gall 
no conduct a crime" which is done through ignoraifce. 
Punish not for every crime; punish rarely; and in 
. punishing be merciful^ for you need merCy. Never ' 
get angry in your school.' Let the good behavior of 
the scholars, their progress in learning, and their real 
benefit,! and nbt your wagesj be your care. Their 
parents expect you vdll be faithful. Look to"the foot 
of a class as well as the head. Animate the despond- 
ing, and skilfully keep down the self-conceited. Be 
Strictly impartial. Be cheerful, but not vain. Make 
H Hop . 1 5 



■338 M-OSES HAiLOCK. 

the . scholars' studies pleSisant to^hem. " Let si^bjee^ 
tion be their. pleasure. Keep seasonable hours; Re- 
member that the secret of-goveruihg well is to govern 
"without pains. Diligently and prayerfully look to 
the morals and religious interests of the scholars, and 
your own. Treat your employers well. Backbite 
not. Intermeddle with no disputes among the people. 
Realize the ^eatness of your undertaking, and your 
accountability to Gfod -and .man ; and may the Lord, 
in his wonderful condescension and merpy, guide you 
to discretion and teach you," ^ ,^ 

To his btother, KeT.^eTeiniah^allock. 
,- ► ^^ 

" Plaimfielb, April :25, 1814. 

* "Very, DEAE. Brother and Sister — An awakenr 
ing appears to have begun here. One of my^scholars," 
(the late Rev. Professor Hovey',J " a step-son of Elisha 
Billings, Esq.,,of Conway, was hopefully born again 
three weeks ago. He is an unusually promising 
youth. . Since his hopeful conversion, a number of 
my,, family, diildren and scholars, have become; 
thoughtful, especially Willie ■SI and Martha. A coh- 
siderable number of- the neighbors, mpstly youth, g,re 
deeply, impressed. Our meetings ate frequent, crowd- 
ed, and solemn. There has been no Confusion, but 
every mark of the true work' of Grod. 3Po him be all 

.the glory. . The sense I have of my own insuffioieAcy 
is inexpressible. JPray for me, that I may be humble 
a,nd know what to do. ' I also entreat your prayers 
fpr my family and people, that we may all be pre- 
pared for the spiritual blessings we need. We ex- 
ceedingly long to see you, especially at this time."- 



CORKJiSPONLENGE. . 339 

The, fruits of this work of the Spirit seem to haVe 
been chiefly gathered' in his own fainily and neighhor- 
hood. Bis eldest son, William A., of -whom he speaks, 
then at the age of twenty,- helieving that he had no 
preparation of heart for the ministry, had declined 
study, and was working on the farm ; and though for 
some Weeks, distressed for his sins and distance from 
God, he fasted and prayed, searched the Scriptures, 
and sought reUgitfus -counsel, he gained no satisfac- 
tory evidence that he had Been born Eigain ; yet the 
impressions then made on his mind were the evident 
means of leading - him to resume study, with the 
trembling hope that the mercy of Grod might ^yet 
reach him, and render his advantages the me&,ns, not 
of injury, but of good to himself and others. 

His second child, and only daughter, Martha, 
•then eightieen, of whom he also speaks, was led io - 
see the alienation and even , bitter opposition of her 
heart to Grod, and weiit to the bedside of her father and 
mother at night to -tell them what peace and joy she 
had found in her. Saviour and Redeemer.' That peace 
and joy brightened the family citcle-, and charaoter- 
' ized her life ■fill its close. May 22, 1852. Ser voice 
and her pen she me'ekly employed in doing good. 
She was active in the Sabbath-school and Bible-class, 
aiding benevolent objects, circulating the Bible and 
religious- hooks and.- periodicals, seeking- opportunkies 
and means of usefiilness, sympathizing with her par- 
ents in their prayfers and efibrts, especially for tljie 
salvation of her absent brothers ; and when, called to 
struggle vdth disease and pain^ which showed that 



-340 Mosi:s halIock. ' 

her loved woA on earth was closed, she suffered "withr 
out a murmur, and waited the bidding of her Saviour 
to his immediate presence.. She conversed and wrote 
of her departure with joyful trusfin Him ; and wheli 
all earthly arrangements were completed, even to 
giving" over her spectacles . to a friend, she said, 
"Nothing hut the soul now;" and of her suffering, 
"It is all right — none too- much pain>" "When her 
consciousness was almost gone, her brother visited 
her, and attempting to get from Tier one more recog^ 
nition, found that one "only name" remained dear. 
" Sister Martha, how do you do?'' No reply. "Aie 
you ill pain ?" No reply. " Can I do ;ariy thing for 
you?" No reply. " Do you love the Saviour?" .^'0, 
yes!" "^ Is the Saviour precious to you ?" Calmly 
and sweetly, "Yes, very precious." This daughter and 
the second son, Leavitf, who. some years after united 
with, the church, resided with their parents till the 
, parents' death, -and hence no letters fronv their father 
to either of them appear in these pages. The 'two 
other children of the family were G-erard, who, at the 
da.te of- the above letter, was fourteen, and Homan, 
who was twelve^ ' ■ ' 

Tq his sons, William' A. and Gerard, in Williams College. • 

" Plajnfieldj Oct. 24, 1815. , 

" Dear Sons — Your grandfather Hallocfc is. dead. 
He was seized with the distressing strangury, and 
died on the fifth day, Saturday, October ^1, a,ged 8p. 
I held his, to me, venerable head in my hands, and 
a^Bfinst'my breast when he died.* May you, my dear 



CORRESPONDENOE. 341 

children, become followers of them who have 'lived 
and died in Jesus^' " . v ^ 

About a year previous he had proposed to his aged 
and godly father and mother to spend the remaindci 
pf their days , under his own roof, where he and his 
family- might ;piinister to their necessities. His 
father's -self-distrusting reply was in the following 
words: 

"&osHEtf, Noveinbeivl7i 1814. 

" M.Y DEAR SoN' AND Daughter — I l^ank you for 
your kind offer concerning our going to your house ; 
but, my son, when I consider the trouble it wiU make 
you and yours, I shall feel better at heme isrith a 
crust of rye bread and lean beef, than I can at your 
table with all the rarities you can! set on it, I am 
an pliman ; and if I caimot get. region, I must bid 
an eternal farewell to all happiness here and hereaf= 
ter: If I had as much religion "as. Jonah had iii the 
whale's belly, I would, not give it away for all the 
kingdoms of ttiis world. 

-'* Our love to yon aU. From 

" WILLIAM HALLOCK."* • 

* William Hallock, father of- Jeremiah and Moses, prepared 
• a wxrtten statement. of his ancestry, from -which -the following 

- is partly drawn. He' believed that his ancestors were pions 

- and evangelipal; that his great-grandfather,, from England or 
Wules, Was one Of the -earliest inhabitants df Long Island, and 
settled -at '' Halloisk's Neck;" and he knew none of the name 
•yf ho were not connections of this family. 

Hi-s grandfather Peter had three sons : Peter, who brought 
up a large family at Southold; Willianr, who was lost at sea; 
and Noah, (the ancestor of Jeremiah and Moses,) who was born 
ini696j married Bethiah_Youngs,.arid settled at Blue Point, in 



342 .MOSES HALLOCK. 

' ' ^ ^ Tojiis Sons in College. 

"Plainfiei-I", MarolilS, 1^16. 

'"My d&ar So^is- — My heart glo^v's-with desire .for 
your good ; and I have, much' to eacourage me to give 
you advice. A price is put into yoUr hands to: get 
wisdonif human and ditine, and much will he ex- 

Brgokhaven. , " He seemed to have great understanding'of th'e 
Scriptures, and talked, mueh. of the latter-day glory. ' He and 
his wife wei-e strict observers of the Sab hath ;" and in the desti- 
tution of J)reaohing> he often on that day condueted social wor- 
ship in his' own house. " A -young man of the name, eontempd-i 
rary with th<se Sons, joined the seciety.df Friends; ,and brought 
up alarge family. . ■ _ ■ ,. 

. Noah Hallock, born 1696, had three sons : 1) Noah, torn 
1728, the father of Rev. N«j.h Hallock, who was pastor thirty- 

jthreiyyears of the church at." The Old Matt's," and died 1 81 8, 
aged sixty, and of Hehdriok, Peter, , Thomas, and Deacon 
Philip Halloek; (2) William", >om 1730, father of Jeremiah 
and Moses ^ (3) Josiah, born 1732] father of Josiah; Jonathan,, 
and Sally ;. all of whom lived on Long Island. 
^ William Hallock, borii 1730, lived at " Fire-Place," iiivBrook- 
haveuj about half a.mile south of." Car4iian's," on the 'western' 
bank of the river, near its entrance into the .jgr^St South Bay 
of the island. Here investing most of his property in a coast- 
ing vessel; he went out in her, 'vrheii she was, run into by the 
British ship " SnoW-," and instantly sunk ; .his life, and that of 
his cabin-boy being saved by springing aboard the ship, 'with- 
out even his hat. He ■was landed at Baltimore, dfetained by 

. siekness, and for some weeks supposed to be lost. This ^disas- 
ter Occasioned his removal to Goshen, Mass. Of- his nine 
children, Jereijiiah and Moses, Polly, who married- Alpheus 
Patse, Alice, who married Dan Case, and Betljiah, •yvho-niar- 
ried Stephen Hosford, were born in Brookhaven ; Abigail, who 
married Rev. Joel -Chapin, Martha, who married Daniel Per- 
kins, Esther, who married Rev. Josiah Hayden,. and Mercy, 
who died at about the age of twenty-six, were born in Goshen. 



CORRESrONDENCE. 343 

pected from you. Be thankftil, diligent, ^nd humble. 
The knowledge, not of books, but of the true God, 
through Jesus Chi-ist, saves the soul. Your mother 
and I remember you both in bur prayerg. "We fi^el 
interested in your sdholarship and- in your character ; 
but we forget these,' to thipk of your immortal part. 
Read the fcst seven verses of 1 Corinthians l3. The 
' Lord work that charity in each of you."' 

To his elde^ Sou in College 

" PlaiSfield, April 29, 181,6. 

"Your oon4ition : in- respect to spiritual concisrns, 
excites in me the tenderest sympathy. The interest 
you feel and express in religion cknnot fail -to awaken 
in me desires that you may possess it. God. sees 
your heart, and he can make you see it; and he can 
make you -feci that you must have a new heart, or 
you cannot live. He can make you feel that your 
salvation depends, not on seeing others under concern, 
not on_ seeing young converts, nor on any external 
means, but op the m,ere self-moving mercy of God. 
Bewilhngthat the infinitely'kind Spirit should show 
you the worst of your case. If. you had a deadly sore, 
you would let a kind physician probe it to the bot- 
tom, though it might cause you much -pain. Your 
interested mother has informed you of things here. 
This is. the work of the invisible and wonder-working 
God^ To him be all the glory." 

Again he says, "Death will soon dispossess you- 
of all the things of time, and you 'dare not look be- 
yond its bound.' The question, 'What -shall 1 do?' 



344 M-.OSES HALLOCJC.- 

is aU-importan±. The answer is, Go liumbly tcr Jt- 
sus. He is mighty to save. Neglect him no longer/ 
for he is the help. your soul needs. He' is read^^fej 
make you eternally rich, if you \srill receive his gifts. 
May you and your beloved brother seek_^rs.t the king- 
dom of Grod and his righteoiisness." 

To th^ 'same. ^ « 

"Pi-AiMF-iEi,D,JFeb. 22, 1819. 

Having acknovirledged the receipt of a letter, oi 
v?hich he says, " 1 am glad I have a child vrho pre- 
fers little somethings to great nothings ;" and having 
spoken of existing revivals of religion, with a prayer 
that the college niight ."share largely in these divine 
felessing%" he adds, '- 

" I am affected with your condition. It is now 
an awful crisis with you. Your colle^ate course is 
.drawing towards a close. And if yptt hve, you.wHL 
soon be involved in the pressing carps of .Ufe., Thesie 
Wiii have a direct teildenoy ta cause you to forget the 
concerns, of your spiritual state. Now is the accepted 
time. Another day's delay may 'decide your state for 
ever. Spiritual showfers are falling on one city and 
another. ' Christians in some, .places are awake. And 
I doubt not, that not only three "^ — ^himsel^ wife, and 
daughter — "but^a considerable number, have a par- 
ticular desire for yoiir salvatioh in their daily prayers. 
I feel more than usual freedgm ta address you on this 

momentous subject. 0, W- , let nothing divert. 

your mind from it., Qr I equally love^^ and for his 

salvation T equally long and pray. Christ commands' 



.COUBESPONDENCE. 345 

liini and y=oti to come liato hinj,.aiid he will give you 
rest; How reasonable !" 

To his-Sons in tJollege. . 

"PLAiNtiELD, April 13, J819. 

• " My dear Sons — I have had no direct- informa-, 
tioh from Wiiliamstown for some time. I long,- and 
<iread to hear. My earnest inquiry is not coneerning 
•pecuniary-, matters, ^literary progress, appointments 
for commencement, etc., hut whether your souls 
prosper. G-od in lus^kind providence has placed you, 
my beloved sons, where you have precious religious 
privileges', especially at the present .time. - You not 
only hear the gospel preached in its clearness, but 
you see the effects of God's saving power before your 
eyes'. Far be it from me to be designedly the occa- 
sion of unnecessary alarm to any, especially to you ; " 
yet permit me to ask whether, to human view, the 
taost: probable time of your obtaining an interest in 
Christ, if you are ever to be so blessed, is_ not now 
passing-^itway? If so, How Gritio'al your situation! 
Your case gives me 'much tender concern. The Lord 
teach you your ' sinful state, cause you to feel your 
sins,, and your obligation -to repent and ^believe- in' 
Christ.,^ The God of all grace and power divest you 
of every vain excuse for neglecting duty; and cause 
ydu to discern what saving religion is, and give you 
hearts to rejoice in it. Depend not. on even the best 
exterior. You cannot be saved without a change of 
.heart. The nature of things is against it. The 
word of Grod is against it 
. " Your mother joins with me." 
. 15* 



34Q. MOSES HALLOCK. 

Again, after saying that the old piroverh, " If .u 
man gets his name up, he mEty.lie ahed till noon;" is 
a bad one, for " it is much more difficult to preserve 
a good name than to get one — ^more diiScult oontinui 
ally to hold a stone -when raised, than at first to lift 
it from Hi-e ground ;", and describing the diverging 
history of two students who,-graduate in equal stand- 
ing,' but one of whom becomes negligent and reckless, 
and is despised, while the other by worth and pprse- 
verance becomes useful and esteemed, he adds, 

" These re-marks, my sons, I consider, as preserva- 
tive, rather than restorative. Whq can tell what a, 
young man will do or bei ? . The right way is narrow, 
and yawning pfeoipioeg . are near both its sides. A 
vagrant step may lead- to ruin. Therefore, *L.et 
thine -eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look 
straight before thee. - Ponde* the path of thy feet, 
and let all thy ways be^stablished. Turn not to the' 
right hand, nor to the left.' ,Look daily and earnestly 
to Grod through Christ to keep you,- to direct you in 
the way of your duty, and to save your souls. You 
awe him yourselves,, anid all you have. He has doiie 
much for you ; and he is infihitely worthy! Foiget 
liim Ttiot ; make not the tremendous mistake pf living 
to yourselves, and not 'to Him who gave his life for 
our sins. Let' not th^ kindnesses of Christ be the 
only ones you refuse to acknowledge!. ■ - 

" Youi aflfectionate father, 

"kOSES HALEOOK." 

■ ,- " • " , / ■ 

Of the many grateful acknowledgments -which he 
received from those whom he hstd instructed, and en- 



CORRESPONDENCE.. 347 

Douraged in their education far public usefulness, 
was the-foUoTsring from Rev, James Richards, one of 
the pioneers ia Ameriean foreign missions, who; died 
in Ceylon in 1822. : He was a child of liie pastor's 
care, and joined his -church in 1805, at the age of 
twenty-one. In, 1808 we find him in "Williams col- 
lege, a class-mate of Samuel'J-. Mills, and, that these 
were two of the. five then privately cojise.crating them- 
selves pfersonally to foreign inissions, and of the de- 
voted circle of whom the Rev. Dr. G-riffin says, they 
usied to retire for prayer "to the meadow on the hank 
of the Hoosao ; and there, under the haystacks, those 
young EHjahs 'prayed into existence the embryo of 
American missions." He went ' with- Mills to the 
semtaary at Andover ; and in June,~1810, they, with 
the- late Dr. Judson of Burmah, and Messrs.' Nott, 
Newell, and Gordon Hall,- agreed in publicly offering 
themselves to the G-eneral Association, of Massachu- 
setts as foreign _jmssionaries, provided any institution 
could be found to support them — rthe.nam^s.of Rich- 
ards and Hall being witl^eld "from iiie paper pre^ 
sented, lest so many as s«a;. names "should embarrass 
^and defeat the measure contemplated." In February, 
1812, J«dson, TN'ott, N-ewell, Hall, arid, Rice sailed 
as th^ first foreign missionaries from this., country; 
and in the next mission-ship, October, 1S15, Riohards 
sailed for Ceylon, with Rev. Messrs. Poor, "Warren, 
and'Bardwell. Following his example, and imbibing 
his spirit,' in 1822^ his younger brother- Rev. "WiUiam 
Richards sailed, for the Sandwich Islands, where, he 
labored with ^eat usefulness till his death in 1847. 



348 MOSES HALLOOK. 

" Bajticotta, Ceylon, Sept. 6, 181&, 
" Rev. and very dear Sir — ^I have long had, it 
in contemplation^ to wiite you. I wish to a,oknow- 
ledge my otligationsTio my former tutor, my spiritual 
father, instruotOT, and guide. It has. always given 
me pleasure to reflect upon. the part which you tqofe 
in liiy instruction, and upon the encouragement which 
you gave .me_^to pursue my studies.- The truths of 
•^le gospel which you were enahled to deliver from 
the pulpit have often refreshed my .soul, and I trust 
that the same will, be my support in^a dying hour. 
Sappy are those- ministeSpi who are so directed by the 
Spirit of Gpdjras to preach those doctrines which will 
bear a death-bed examination, and wUl giy^ a death- 
be4 support. May the Lord continue to bless you 
more and. more, by opening the hearts of your Jiear^s , 
to receive the gospel, and by bringing them all to the 
saving knowledge of the' truth." 

. Proceeding to give his own histery in the missiojd, 
especially the most unexpected prostration of his firm 
and vigorous hiealth, and appealing- for reinforcements 
pf devoted men, he adds,- - . ' . ■ 

" I expect ^oon to, die^ I am not sorry that I have 
done, all I could for the heathen, lliough that hias been 
very little. It is now eleven years since I resolved,' 
by ihe grace of God, to Spend my life among the 
hpathen- That resolution has never been changed,- 
but has grown stronger and-stipnger; and it is a 
great part of my present affliction, that I cannot 
preach the gospel to the heathen around me. I s?e 
them perishing for lack of knowledge, Do encourage 



CORRESPONDENCE. 349 

your pious students to come to Jaffna, and engage in 
tke blessed work of preaching to pagans. Yes, it is 
a, blessed work. "" Since T have had death staring me 
in the face, I have had much religious enjoyment. 
To. contemplate the perfections of Grod,. the atonement 
of Christ, and the joys of heaven, has. giyen me un- 
.speakable satisfaction. 

" I send my Christian salutations and best regards 
to Mrs. Hallock, and to. the church of Christ in Plain- 
field. Please to accept this token of jespect from 
your dying friend, 

, . : ■■ , " JAMES RICHARDS." 

To hiB eldest Son i^i the Theological Seminary, Andover. ; 

* ' "Plajkfield, Deo! 22, .1819. 

"My very dear and dutiful Son-^I rejoice to 
see that you are not inattentive to the chief end of 
life, to what most of all concerns you and us. . The ' 
more you understandingly attend to the concerns of 
your soui, the more impratant and real they will ap- 
pear. I thank the Lord for putting you in a situa- 
•iion so favorable for serious reflection. You need not 
be informed that you must answer . at the bar of 
Christ for thie inapiovem'ent you make of your disljbi- 
guished privileges. I hope and pray that the words 

in Isaiah may not be verified in rny dear ^ ,: 

* Let favor be shown to the wicked, yefwill he not 
learn righteousness; in the land of uprightness will, 
he deal ufljustly, and will Jiot behold the majesty of 
the Lord.' I daily feel concerned that I. have been 
so unfaithful to the souls of my children. I'may yet, 
and soon, hear it asked by one'and aiiother of them 



350' MOSES HALLOCK. 

in hell, 'Why did you not warn me more of this, and 
- pray more fervently for my salvation ?' Lord, for- 
give my lamentahle, deficiencies, and pirevent terrible 
consequences. 

" Your unworthy father, 

' "MOSES HALLOCK." 

To^he same. 
^ ' ■ "Plainfield, Jan. 22,r 182a 

" Your iast letter, stating so particulariy the ex- 
ercises of youj ovFn mind, and your sense of the im- 

. pbrtance of now attending to the duties of religion 
and the concernsof your soul,' afiords me much satis- 
faction. ' Now,' saith 1;he voice of inspiration, ' is' 
the accepted time.' The psalmist said, 'I made 
haste, and. delayed not to keep thy commandrheirts.' 

^ It is altogether tinscriptural and irrational to neglect 
present duty from an expectation of heibg better 
prepared to perform it at some future time. To do 
so is to yield to the, inclination of the carnal heairt;, 
for ever devising means to 'still conscience, while 
G-od, and the soiilj and every thing precious, are neg- 
lected. ■ . 

?'lf you thinli it to be your duty to unite with 
the visible church of ^rist, you -may by delayidg it 
do wrong, and provoke the Lord to leave you to more 
darknessr^md doubt. My son, if you feel a desire to 
do service to Chyist, never let the fear that you do not 
love him keep you back from duty. If you love the 
Lord because he is what he is ; if you love his service, 
and abhor evefy. feeling and thought that is. contrary 
to him ; if you love the Saviour, and feel the need of 



CORRESPONDENCE. 351 

his blood to cleanse you from your sins of heart and 
life ; if you love his children, nt)t only the learned 
and refined, but the ignwant and unpolished, because 
they bear his image ; if you feel satisfied with the way 
of salvation by Christ, and. humbly commit yourself 
to his teaching, guidance, and disposal, you may 
claim an humble right to the name and privileges 
of ChristianSi If you have 'the fruits>Qf the Spirit,' 
it is riot essential that' you should «be able to.teH the 
time when you were born again: these prove the 
second birth as really as your existence proves the 
first. I think of you every morning and every day, 
arid pray the Lord to teach you his holy will. 
" Your affectionate father, 

"MOSES HALLOCK." ' 

The mother adds her concurring testimony on the 
momentous subject : 

" If you can by faith commit your soul to God, 
he will accept it, and you are his for ever. IS you do 
from the heart -accept of ehiist «,s your all-sufficient 
Saviour, he is your friend and portion. If you go to 
the liirone .of grace as an humble, penitent beggar, 
sensible of your entire dependence on God, your utter 
unworthiness of the least of all his mercies, and the 
infinite ribl^titttis you are under to love him and to 
live to him for ever, you need not be afraid to venture 
your eternal all in his hands, or to trust in him as 
your all-sufficient good. Do youieel that it is suit- 
able that God should govern the universe acsoording to 
his sovereign pleasure ; that he cannot do the least 
injustice to any of his oreatu/es ; liiat he is infinitely 



352 MOSES-HALLDO.K. 

righteous in all t\ia,i he does ? then go on your way 
rejoicing, bless tke Lord for all his mereies, strive to 
get near the throne of grace, and- to render to Gkid 
that filial otedienoe which Jiis most precious com- 
. mand's require; In all your, ways acknowledge him, 
and he. will direct your, steps.. . 

"TOUR AFFECTIONATE ttOTHEE." 
To the same, irqjn his f'-ather. \ 

s"My dear Soi^— You have publicly devoted your-'- 
self to Christ and his service. In this act you. liave 
implicitly .renounced all sinful pleasure for -ever. 
This, to the carnal heart, is a great saorifiiie ; but in 
the view of the new man, or rather the new naturcj. 
it is' like resolving for ever to , keep away fi-om ser- 
pents, and adders. ' . 

" I fear -I shall never sufficiently acknowledge the 
goodness and merjoy of Grod, .manifested m exciting 
your attention to the concerns of religion. ' I rejeic© 
that you have put your hand io' the plough, and, hope 
you will never look back. " The. sense you express of 
the sin and pollutiou of your heart, and your depend- 
ence on the atoning blood of .Christ, is. very satisfap- 
tory to me. If . you truly, lament that the forenoon of 
your life has-been spent in. doing "nothing for Christ, 
you wUl frorn this time take heed that the afternoon 
is not wasted too," ) 

About this' date he writes,. " Through the T^^on- 
derfii^ forbearance of God, I have just entered upon 
piy seventh ten years ; and I earnestly advise you. to 
be ever watchful and prayerful, humble and conde- 
scending, circumspect and exemplary." 



CORRESPONDENCE, 353 

*Io the same on a Tisit at Martha's Vineya/d i 

"You are hq-w on the little isUndthat gave birth 
to your mother. Martha's Vineyard has seen days 
of prosperity. It has been adorned with devout and 
discerning ministers, and flourishing cliurches. There 
a long successioEL of pious- Mayhe\7s wore the sandy 
road from ChabacLuidiok to &ayhead, and from north 
to i§outh, to preach Christ to the' rndians. "Peace- to 
their memory. - ,If any ,of iny children die on the 
Vineyard, let thern be laid in the same ground whidi . 
contains the remains of those followers of Jesus," 

■, To his son G , Preceptor in Anlhefst Academy. 

" PLAiitFiEL-D, Jan. 25,-1820. 

. " My dear Son-*— I view your situation as tare- 
mcHdpusly critical ; and what excites my apprehen- 
sions-is a fear that you do not know the Lord. If 
you die without an interest in Jesus, from what 
hopes and heights and prospects must you fall. All 
in which you now rejoice will be the occasiori of ag- 
gravating your woe." .0, be hilmble and holy, and 
ail will turn "to your eternal advantage.' Come to 
the inviting find lovely Saviour, and he will love and 
bless you ; and if by some misstep you should sHp 
from- your present eminence, and sink in the world's 
esteem — a thing not very improbable in this. state of 
ohangeU-you will have a merciful . Saviour to hear 
your mournings, to forgive your foUies, and heal your 

broken heart. that you, arid. W. and M-^— 

and L and H — -, and youi' imperfect parents, 



3^4 ' MOSES 'HALLOCk.- 

"were all in Christ, walking in the pleasant path to 
eternal IJfe. , 

' "Youi^ affectionate. fiatherj 

"'-■■" MOSES HALLOCK," 
** ' To the same. 

~ ' '' Plainfield, Jaai-i'l, Itel. 

"My much-beloved -Son — The' Lord has distin- 
guished you with "his favor. It would take yo'ii all 
the new ye9,f to recount the mercies of the past year. 
Your employrjient has been pleasant stad honorahle. 
Your opportunities for improverfient in science and 
religibuS^ knowledge have heen great. -How can yoij 
rendet sufficient praise to .your God and Saviour, If 

I should he uskedj How can G- spend this new 

year 'better than the last ? I would answer, By turn- 
ing, his attention iliore constantly and earnestly to the 
concerns .of his soul; hy inquiring- -prayejftilly. and' 

_ impartially whether he is minding, not his own things, 
hut ,the, things of J^esus Christ, Thoiigh this work 
may he painful to him, let him. not -recoil from it. 

' The man whoisd-eterred from examining his accounts 
by fear of di^agreeaUe feelings, must expect to be a 
bankrupt." . ' - • 

Tg'the same, at AndoTQjr. 

" Plainpibld, Marolj. 7, 1822. 

" My attachment, to you, iny dear son, is stronger 
than I can:express. Many pr.ayers.are daily offered 
for yoil. If you are destitute of true religion, you 
haye yet acquired nothing but what, you must part 
with: in all- your studies and atjquisitions, you have' 
laid up nothing that will be permanent. 'Whether 



OOERESPONDENCE. 355 

there be prophecies, they shall fail ; whether there he 
tongi^es, they shsfll cease; whether there be. know- 
ledge, it. shall v^ish afway.' There is a good part 
^hioh can never be taken away — ^this is .holy lov6. 

"'Charity never faHeth ;' even dea;th increases its ex- 

. cellenoe and, vigor. • - 

' J ".I seem to hear yon say, < O that I possessed it !' 
"With the.tenderness and affection of a father, I would 
press-upon you" the importance of refleotiug on your 

•-Spiritual state.. Jlealize the criminality and daiiger 
of 'being an unbelieving sjnner. If you turn to "the 
Lord, he wfll have mejrcy on you** - You prize the 
privilege of having mercy offered you through Christ : 
you woBld view yoursialf in an awfol^-conditipn, if 
no mercy were offered you ; but this must be your 
everlasting condition if' you die in sin. This thought 
makes death terrible, to the dying sinner ! To human 
view, you will never see another time so peculiarly 
favorable to the commencement of a refigious life as 
the present. Come to Christ as he invites you, and 
^n will be. huihble and happy." 

To.his eldest Son, at -Andover. - 

. " Plainfie'ld, March 14, 1822. 

" My dear .Son— ^The account you give respecting^ 

Gr ^ is in'describably interesting. 'We all thank 

yoii '^for it. This makes us pray. ,1 first read it alone ; 
then to yoTir mother and M— — and h^ — - ; and 
then retired -to my little chamber. 

"When a beloved member of a family -is sick, 
and they are afraid he will die, they watch- every. 



356 MOSES HALLOO.K. 

sympioiii, and the Least favorable _appiearance affords 
encouragement. _So we are looking on our dear 

G- .; and we suffer ourselves to take a little en- 

oouiagement from what you have written. The God 
of 'all grace give him repentance and humility and 
holy faith, that the result of what nqw appears may 
not be a revival" before irrecorerable. death. Tell him 

and Mr, B , if you think. -proper, 'that, not only 

their -.Christian friejids on earth, but all heavenj are 
locking on them, and are ready to rejoice and give, 
new praises to God, if Jheyor either of ttem should- 
yield themselVes^'Eo- Christ. Let thejn come to their 
Saviour, and so not disappoint, but gladden all holy 
beiigs.^ Write about them sooti. 

" Your affectionate- father^. 

• "MOSES, HALLOCK." 

A few weeks later he says,v " C— — and P — '■, — ," 



{two students with him,) "liave, within a few^weeks, 
obtained a'hope." Both these youths became faithful 
ministers^ — one in the '.Protestant Episcopal church, 
the other in the Presbyterian church at the West. , 
Again he records the temporal mercies G-od had 
graciously bestowed : 

■" " You aoknowlfedgfr- yoiir ebUgations of grartitude , 
to- God for giving your mother and me" to. you. We 
acknowledge our obligations to the sarnie, unfailing 
source of all our enjoyments, ^for giving you and our 
other children to us. We rejoice that you have bean 
carried through seven ye&.rs in. college and the semi- 
nary, and that all the .expenses have been borne, and 



CORa£SPONDENCE. 357 

both you and we are free from debt. When you and 

Gr. -^ entered^ college, I spoke to a man to lend me 

six hundred . doUars from tim^ to time as I should 
need it But,through the care of a bountiful Provi- 
dence^ Ihq,veiad nd- need, to borrow a dollar. This 
is far, far beyond what I could have rationally hoped. 
Let gratitude arid humihty, and pity to the poor, ever 
be prominait traits in our character. 

- "I tell you this, that you may join me in grate- 
fally acknowledging a kind Providence, who hath, 
enabled us, notwithstanding the smallness of our. re- 
sources, and the large amounts that have been needed, 
to ansvror without the least difficulty every call. The 
hand of Grod has been sp visible, that it woiild be very 
sinful not to notice It. " One circumstance that has 
seemed solemn and interesting to me is, that often 
when I have with ease obtained what money Was 
neededj^ I have not seen how leould then have ob- 
tained a single dollar more. The Lord knoweth the 
circumstaaices of- every careature ;' and if we trust in 
him he will make our strength as our day. is. Yea, 
he will nof only provide bountifully for us in this life, • 
but thfough Jesus Christ he will comrnit to us the 
true riches. .When we -think of God, and when we 
pray to hini, we should ever regard him as a God of 
boundless- goodness, and as a God who Relights to 
make his. creatures happy;" , : 

To his'son H , in Amherst 'College. 

' , - . - ~ . ■ - " Plainf-ield, March 28, 1823. 

' ' ' • - . . 

" My dear SoN^-Youf situation is awfully criti- 
cal. Go(^inhiS amazing condescension ,~ is once more 



358 , MOSES HALLQCK. 

exciting your„attention to .the concerns of your pre- 
cious soul. ' Your anxiety for your own state is proof- 
of this. Yoji ought immediately to submit to the 
diviiie requirements^ Your righteousness is filthy 
rags. The loi%er. you remain in sin, the harder you ' 
become;' and the multitude pf your sins increases. 
Alas', you owe already ten thousand talents^ and have 
nothing to pay. As a poor beggar, fall at the feet of 
the Saviour and plead for mercy. , No longer harden 
-your heart. -The sinnWs cause is infiiiitely unrea- 
sonable, and he.4ias no power to support.- it. How 
solemn the divinei expostulation with siimers, ' Turn 
ye, for why will ye die ?' Can -you disobey .this call ? 
WiU my H— ' — - die father than -turji? 

" The great question, -whether you will be saved 
or lost, Will probably be soon decided. ' To-day if' 
you wUl hear his voice, harden hat yotti: heart.! Ex- 
cuses for rei6aining impenitent have no weight. They 
arfr the offspring of a wielded heart: I cheerfully 
leave you to the nferey of Grod. He can do you no 
injustice. But he and all heaven would jejoioe to 
see you become a humble peniteiit. The Saviour. 
IS ready to, receive you; :'Ther« is salvation in none 
other. " .Show your gratitude for his "infinite atone- 
ment by receiving 'it. 

" J greatly rejoice to hear of the revival in Am- 
herst institution. It is a very pleasing circumstance 
that you are ttiere. If you and your beloved room- 
mate sl^ould come to Christ, you would ' be happy 
indeed.. If you -desire the 'fervent prayers and exer- 
tibns of others^or you, you must feel deeply interested 



OOREESPONTjENCE. 359 

yourselves. How insupportable the thought, that you 
two may yet be mutual tormentors of each other in hell. 

"Remember me afifeotionately to P and, 

C . May -their prayers, and the prayers of 

many others for you, be heard< Tell Austin Rich- 
ards" (who became a' faithful minister) "and D. 

P , that' their Plaiofield friends, especially their 

parents,' and. your motiier and I, shall wait with-much 
tender anxiety to hear of their conversion to Christ.-, 

"Your letter is,, of aU you ever sent, the most 
interesting. Your mother and I will not cease to 
pray for you. How could we but pray for one we 
love so dearly, especially when you request our pray- 
ers for a ' son who is on ihe borders of hell.' 

',' Our love to all, that have been members of this 
family. I hope they will all improve their present 
prebious opportunity to seek the Lord while he may be 
found, and call upon him while he is nSar. The most 
profound.human science is of no Worth, when compared 
with what the smallest Christian knows of Christ. ' 
" Youi affectionate father, 

'SMOSES .HALLbCK." -^ 
^ To a Son then instructing'a select Bohool in Salem; Massafihasetts. 

" Plainfield, May 3, 1823. 

" My very' dear Son — It gives me much pleasure 
to learn that you, choose and have .valuable friends. 
<He that walketh with wise men shall be wise.' 
May' the compalny and counsel of the Rev. Mr. Cor- 
nelius,' and other highly ifespected friends, be for your 
benefit as to your temporal, and especially your 
spiritual concerns. 



360' MOSES HALLOCTC. 

". if you were renewed by the Spirit of Grod, your 
outward conduct would be, it is probable, ig many 
respects as it is now ; but I hope you will never feel 
safe and easy with'respeot to yourself,' till the love of 
Grod is shed abroad in youi: heart. What you; gay of 
prayer I approve. If any individual has. a spirit of 
prayer, though no othejr may join with hinij he has 
reason to hope Ms prayer will &.vaiL Wp must pray, 
yet not depenid oil prayer, -but on Grod. My dear 

Gr , if I could, say any thing that would be for' 

your good, it w:Quld be my delight tp*spea^k. Your 
age is more favorable to commence -a life of religion, 
than it will be hereafter. Revivals are prevalent. 
Christ is ready to receive you. Come to him and live. 

"I am delighted to firtd that yon feel an interest 
in the spiritual good of your brother H — —■ that 
hp might share in the good work which -he is per- , 
initted to see at Amherst. You and he are remem- 
bered by your parents, especially of late, oftener liian 
we take' bur food. 

" W rejoices that you adhere so decidedly to 

the all-important doctrine of the Trimfy. - "What are 
the riches of Saleni compared with Christ ? 
"Your affectionate, father, , 

"MOSES HALLOGKr." ' 

In a subsequent letter he Says, " Your brother 
Homan is decided thsit his health will 'not bear a 
sedentary life, and has written nie to request his dis- 
mission from college. Believing that it is not the 
design of Froyidence thp.t he should acquisea liberal 
education, / submit." 



COHRESPONDENCE. 361 

On the occasion of the annual Thanksgiving, De- 
cemter 2, 1824, all the family, consisting of the 
parents, four sons, and one daughter, met for the last 
time on that festive occasion, _so full of tender recol- 
lections to the descendants of the Pilgrims ; and the 
day was closed hy each one "giving a reason of the 
hope that was in him," or relating the dealings of 
Grod with him in a spiritual view. 

To kis youngest Spn, in a Printing' Office at Andover. 

Plai.nfield, May 3Q, 1825. 

"My dear Son Homan — ^Your letter is truly re- 
freshing. I rejoice that you have some humbling 
sense of your mournful deficiencies in the service of 
Christ. -Selfishness is the very essence of sin ;- and to 
see ourselves filled with it, with hearts to mourn on 
account of it, gives reason to hope that we may he 
walking in the light of the Lord. Our carnal pride 
must he suhdued, or we must fall under its weight 
for ever. Christ can deliver us from ' the body of this .' 
death.' Let us watch and pray continually." . 

To the sanu:, on his proposing to become a -Missionary Printer on the Mediterranean. 

"Plainfield, April 24, 1826. 

" My very dear Son — I long ago gave you and 
all my children to the Lord. As pleasant, therefore, 
as their company is to me, I would not detain one of 
them with me, nor in America, nor even in the world, 
contrary to the holy will of God. I wa;nt nothing to 
reconcile me to my beloved sons or daughters going 
anywhere, or being in any circumstances or employ- 
ment, but a clear conviction of a providential call. 

Hallock. 1" 



315a .MOSES HAIxLOOK. 

Since you have teen learning to print, I have "fre- 
quently thought whether you would he called to 
instruct hy the press in some foreign land. I feel 
satisfied of your call in providence to go to Malta td 
assist Rev. Mr. Temple ; and I most cordially hid you 
and all dear faithful missionaries God-speed. May 
many, not only of the present generation, hut in ages 
to come, be saved through ,your instrumentahty. 
Remember that the eye, not only of the Christian 
world, but of your Saviour, will be upon you. May 
you so improve the talents he has given you, as that 
you may obtain, what I crave above all things, his 
approbation." 

To Ehe same. 

" Plainfield, Aug. 3, IS26. 

" My very dear Son — I think of you and pray 
for you daily. But my prayers are so imperfect, that 
if Grod should grant no blessings either to you, or 
me, or any one else in answer to them, I should have 
no reason to complain. This thought, though hum- 
bling, shall never discourage the attempt to perform 
so plain a duty. We are directed to- ' pray without 
ceasing.' 

"Your ujidertalcing to give instruction hy the 
press to millions of ignorant eternity-bound souls is 
immensely important. May every publication that 
shall be issued by your hands be not only free, from 
mistakes, but purely evangelical. Gospel truths, not 
the inventions and traditions of men, wUl finally be 
blessed to the conversion of the world. And let the 
work of delivering your tracts for distribution be ac- 



CORRESPONDENCE. 363 

companied with effectual, fervent prayer that they 
may, through the Holy Spirit, reach the heart. 

" Your voyage will prohahly give you opportunity 
for much useful study. Undique foyites, undique 
caelum," (on every side the isea, on every side the 
sky) — "death everywhere hut in the vessel, and de- 
struction for fallen man everywhere hut in Christ. 
The Lord keep thee. 

' " Your affectionate father, 

" MOSES HALLOCK." 
To the same, at his departure. \ 

"PLAINFIEtD, Oct. 5, 1826. 

" Trust in Christ. There is enough in him to in- 
spire confidence. He is everywhere. I implore his 
hlessing upon you. You will have his sun and his 
moon in Malta ; may you have his presence. How 
wonderful his providence, that has raised you to your 
present prospects. The Lord make you instrumental 
of teaching many the way of life through Christ. I 
heUeve the interest of Christ and of souls calls you to 
go. Et nunc vale; miamantissime fili, vale — (And 
now ferewell, my loving son, farewell.^ " 
" Your father, 

"MOSES HALLOCK." 

The mdther^ adds to the atove, 

"Your fareweir letter and likeness we highly 
value, and shall endeavor carefully to preserve till 
time with us shall he no more. I hope that you may 
he greatly useful in the vineyard of the Lord ; that 
many souls may be brought into Christ's kingdom 
through your instrumentality; and that we shall be 



364 MOSBS HALLOCK. 

cheerfully resigned to all the allotments of divine 
Providence respecting you. Cease not to watch and 
pra:y, to love your Bible and your Saviour. Trust in 
the Lord at all times, and endeavor daily to commit 
your soul and all your concerns into his vrise and 
faithful hand, that you may be preserved safely to 
his heavenly kingdom. I hope you vdll ever be en- 
abled to go to Grod, as your covenant God and Fa- 
ther ; to stand with your loins girt about, arid your 
lamp trimmed and burning, as one who is waiting 
for the coming of our Lord." 

To Ms son William A., Secretary of the American Tract Society, and Gerard, one 
of the Editors of the New York Obserrer.- 

" Plainfield, Deo. 36, 1826. 

" My Sons — The hope that you are in the place 
and employment where duty calls, and are made in- 
struments in the hand of G-bd of great and extensive 
good, affords me. much satisfaction. God's goodness 
to you may well affect all our hearts. How you hap- 
pened to go to college, and -to be industrious and 
economical there, and distinguished as scholars, and 
how you happened to employ yourselves as you 'did 
after you left college, and how yea happened to be 
placed where you now are — I cannot tell. The only 
way to solve these niysteries is to acknowledge an 
overruling Providence in them all.- Your life, healthy 
reason, perseverance, and success, are from the Lotd. 
He has directed your every step. He hath guided you 
to disc-etion, and taught you. Let us give him all the 
pmise. You are raised to be chosen companions of 
the best and most useful class of men in our favored 



COERESPONDENCE. 365 

land : humbly and thankfully acknowledge the un- 
seen hand of Him who raiseth up the poor from the 
dustj and hath set you, not among princes, but among 
people far better, the pillars of the church. Your 
employments, too, are pecuUarly eligible. Your tract 
and your paper are to the needy soul what bread is 
to the hungry ; and when the labors of distinguished 
statesmen are forgotten, you may be remembered in 
eternity. The blessing of many ready to perish will 
come upon you. My sons, thus nourished and brought 
up as children, wUl not, cannot rebel against their 
divine Benefactor. 

" I rejoice that, ' after eleven years' wandering,' 
you are settled together in your ' own hired house.' 
Your house is, I trust, a house of prayer. Let the 
dear little son hear you pray ; though he should ex- 
press his joy to have prayer over, it may be of im- 
mense benefit to him. 

" I lately went into the forest where W- — ^ and 
I gathered the dry wood for the winter. I went to 
the brook where we drank, and the tree that had 
fallen over it on which we sat and ate our cold dinner 
together, and acknowledged Grod. 

" "We all remember you most affectionately. 

" mOSES HALLOCK." 
To the same. - i 

" Plainfield, April 22, 1827. 

" Behoved Sons— One of you, in a kind letter, 

lately said : ' I wish very much to have little W- 

see his grandpa and grandma, and to have them see , 
him. I should like to have him also see his aunt, and 



366 MOSES HAIjLOCK.. 

his uncle L . His uncle Homan, alas, lie will 

perhaps' never see. , It makes even my heart ache to 
have a brother thus separated from us hy the broad 
Atlantie, with so serious a prospect that we shall 
never see him more.' These are tender thoughts, 
I know. But a thousand consoling things are con- 
nected with his removal from us. We hope he wiU 
be faithful and successful. There is, in my -view, 
reason to think that the Lord called him thus; to go 
over the sea. 

" It has long delighted me to see what interest 
my children take in each other. Each child is, as it 
were, a parent to all tfie rest. I hope anc^ trust this 
mutual love will continue. It is very pleasant. It is 
useful. It is honorable; May we all, parents and 
children,: love the Lord. It ssems to me there is 
enough in Christ to make us all happy. All that is 
wanting is a holy relish for vrhat is provided for the 
believer. My doubts whether I have this essential 
preparation for usefulness and happiness must soon 
be solved. Your great-grandfather died before your 
grandfather, and your grandfather before your father : 
I hope this regular travel of our generation into eter- 
nity will not beinterrupted. According to this course, 
I go next. It may be said, with respect to my con- 
tinuance on earth, ' The day goeth away, for the 
shadows of the evening are stretched out.' 

" I hope soon to see, what I have never yet seen, 
a daughter-in-law and a grandson. 

_ ." Yours, most affeotionatelyj 

"MOSES HALLOCK." > 



GuaR-KSPOABENCE. 367 

Again he says, a few months later, 

"I recently had the pleasure of an interview with 
Rev. Mr. Baldwin of New York, wl;io thinks you are 
lahorious and,useM. I could only reply, ' He raiseth 
up the poor &oni the dust.' Frorii^the disasters of 
your venerable grandfather, sixty years ago, seems to 
have arisen whatever his sons and his grandsons 
attained to. But for this kind providence I see not 
why we should not have remained on the south side 
of Long Island, depending on what we could get from 
the water and from the sand of the heach for a liveli- 
hood. Let us most cordially eind gratefully adore the 
kind, unerring hand of Providence, who always hrings 
good" out of evil. 

" In my morning walks I now miss the company 

of little W. H . His pleasant noises charmed 

me more than the singing of the birds. May he, too, 
know the Lord." 

To his Son, it Malta. 

"■PLAINPIELD, June 25, 1827. 

"Dear and much-bei,oved Son — Your deliverance 
from the perils of the voyage calls for more gratitude 
and praise than our poor = Jonah ' hearts are willing 
to render. 

" The present year is, in many places, remark- 
able for revivals of religion. The hopeful converts 
within a few months in the county of Berkshire are 
at least fifteen hundred. A good work is going on 
in Cummington and Worthington, and it is begun 
among us. Several have lately obtained a hope, and 



368 MOSES HALLOCK. 

perHaps twenty are under serious impressions. The 
kingdom of the Redeemer is advancing. Help jt on- 
ward, my dear son. It is destined to fill the earth. 
This kingdom is to break down all opposition, and 
overthrow all errors, and possess the world alone. 
Dan. 2 : 34,-35. Malta will yet be covered with the 
redeemed; ; and all the shores of the Mediterranean ; 
and all the habitable parts of the earth. Rev. 7 : '9. 
Keep the press going. 

" Your very affectionate father, 

"MOSES HALLOOK.." 

Four months later he writes, 

" The revival extends over much the greatest part 
of the town. It is a still and precious work. Twenty 
or more will probably be admitted to the church the 
first Sabbath in November. We have abundant cause 
to speak of the mercies of God towards us. His paths 
drop fatness. No year since I lived in Plainfield seems 
to me to have been so distinguished with temporal 
and spiritual mercies." 

In this work of grace in 1827 and 1828, in which 
he secured the assistance for some weeks of a pas- 
tor then without a charge, he had the happiness of 
receiving sixty-six persons, who gave evidence of 
saving conversion. 

To his son G , in New Tork^ 

"Plainpiei,b, March 30, 1828. 

" My very dear Son — ^Your paper, (the Observer,) 
it seems to me, becomes more and more interesting 
and useful. When I think that all my absent sons 



CORRESPONDENCE. 369 

are called in providence to such employments as tend 
to advance the Redeemer's kingdom, my obligation 
to give thanks to God, and t.o praise his condescend- 
ing mercy, rises before me. I consider the Observer 
and the tracts as orthodox publications. They are 
vehicles which carry the truth far and wide. May the 
Lord inspire your hearts with a holy love of the pre- 
cious truths you publish. I pray that you and E , 

and your Uttle son, may all find special mercy. 

"I feel cordially thankful to the brethren in New 
Jersey, who proposed the day of fasting and prayer 
for the conversion, of the world. How momentous 
the object ! Where is there a saint or sinner on earth 
not interested in it ? As our annual 'fast was to com© 
the next week, I proposed to the people to meet in the 
afternoon only ; but all I spoke to chose to meet both 
parts of the day. Both meetings were solemn and 
interesting, and , we felt that we needed more time. 
Some women walked nearly two miles to attend, 
though the travelling was very bad. 

" Our state proclamations are cold things. A 
minister might as weU, for matter of edifying and 
warming the hearts of his people, hold before them a 
ball of snow, as a men-pleasing. Unitarian proclama- 
tion; but the one from New Jersey was from the 
heart, and to the heart. "Why should we not prayfor 
the conversion of the world, when probably tens of 
thousands of our poor race fall into everlasting de- 
struction each passing day? It is to pray for no more 
than what Grod has revealed shall sooner or later be. 

Psalm 22 : 27." 

16* 



370 MOSES HALLOCK. 

To his Son in the Mediteiranean. 

' It seems that his son, who was engaged in the 
missionary work abroad, wrote both to his father and 
mother, begging them to answer the inquiry, "What 
are the feehngs with which you are passing toward 
the country from which none return ?" 

To this question the father, April 22, 1828, at the 
close of a letter pertaining chiefly to the circumstances 
and responsibilities of the son, gives a characteristic 
reply only in the following words : . 

"Your care for our eternal ' condition, and ours 
for yours, are mutual. I wish I could give a better 
account of myself. I hope, with, some sense of my 
unworthiness, I can make the prayer of the publican, 
' God be merciful to me a sinner..'' " 

To the same question the mother, who seemed to 
have more of the joi/& of pardoned sin, to whom death 
had lost its terrors, and who had a word on her tongue 
to speak to the careless sinner, or the anxious inquirer, 
or iihe ripened Christian, whenever the occasion and 
propriety admitted it, gives alsO- a reply not less 
characteristic : 

" The time of my probation appears to me draw- 
ing to a close ; yet I have no gloomy apprehensions 
as tc'the time or the manner of my dep9,rture, but 
would choose that it should be as a God of infinite 
perfection sees fit to order it. My hope and confi- 
dence in my precious Redeemer are unshaken. I 
daily go to him as my almighty Father and Friend, 
and trilst that' his grace will be sufficient for me at 
all times. ' I wiU say of the Lord, He is my refuge 



CO.RRKSPONDENCE. 371 

and my fortress, my G-od ; in him will I trust.' 
With regard to my ' letting go of my hold on the con- 
cerns of this world,' although I contiuue to lahor dili- 
gently with my hands, yet I think my affections 
mainly centre in Grod. His word and worship are 
far more precious to me than any of the perishing 
things of earth. I seldom wake ia the morning with- 
out having my thoughts on Grod, and they are fre- 
quently rising to him when on my ted, while- rising, 
and entering on the business of the day. Precious 
lines of Scripture, of pious authors, and hymns" — of 
which she had, large stores in her memory, 9,nd from 
which she drew liberally for the early bejiefit of her 
children— "frequently flccur to my mind through the 
day. I find it good to go up to the house of the Lord, 
to serve him there with reverence and godly fear. I 
trust it is in my heart to say, ' come, let us worship 
and bow down; let us kneel before the Lord our 
Maker ; for He is our G-od, and we are the people of 
his pasture, and the sheep of his hand.' The precious 
little prayers which are scattered through the Bible, 
and other portions of the sacred word; I hope are 
daily food for my soul. But yet, my son, sins and 
follies run through my -wjiole life ; and I need 
that pardomng mercy should be extended to me 
every day that, I live, through the infinite atone- 
inent of the blessed Redeemer : and should I ever 
reach those blessed mansions which Christ has pre- 
pared for all that love him, to free, rich grace alone 
must be all the praise. My heart responds and says. 
Amen, * praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his 



372 MOSES HALLOCK. 

wonderful wo^ks to the children of men.' You daily- 
have an interest in my afFectionate reihemtiance. 
May you always enjoy the sensible presence of God, 
he greatly useful in his vineyard, guided in the path 
of duty, and prepared for all iiiat is before you in 
time and eternity, through the precious Immanuel." 

It was pleasjant to another absent son, returning to 
visit hi? parents and lodging in an apartment adjoin- 
ing theirs, as he awoke at early dawn, to hear them 
speaking to each other of theii: own unworthiness, of 
the abundant mercies received, of the riches of the 
grace of God, and their renewed obligations to live 
to his glory, as familiarly as if such had been the 
themes of their daily Christian communion for forty 
years. 

' F .To tlie same, from his father. 

"Plaimfield, October, 1828. 

" There is reason to hope that less ardent spirits 
are drunk in the land. Respectable people do not 
provide it for company. Mihtary officers- are leaving 
off the pernicious practice of ' treating.' It is hoped 
also, that more regard is paid to the Sabbath than in 
past years. Sabbath-schools likewise prosper. These 
things are encouraging, and tend to inspire the hope 
that the latter-day glory is near ; especially when we 
consider how many benevolent societies are operating 
successfully to extend the knowledge and kingdom of 
the Redeemer." 

At the same date he writes to his son G— — in 
New York : 



COEHESPONDENCE. 373 

" It delights me to hear of the check upon intem- 
perance. Hqw can you serve the Lord and promote 
the good of man better, than to employ a part of your 
paper in communicating such information relatiye to 
this subject as shall tend to fix in the public mind the 
ruin occasioned by this sin? Why should the fair 
character of these states be lowered and lost by the 
vices charged on abandoned Ephraim, Isa. 28 : 7, 8, 
' They also have erred through wine, and through 
strong drink are out of the way. The priest and the 
prophet have erred through strong drink ; they are 
swaUowed up of wine, they are out of the way through 
strong drink ; they err in vision, they stumble in judg- 
ment. For all tables are full of vomit and filthiness, 
so that there is no place clean.' The present refor- 
mation seems to me not so much the result of human 
effort, as the effects of the Holy Spirit kindly suggest- 
iiig to people- all around, that they must not destroy 
themselves by this shameful practice. The move- 
ment seems to be simultaneous. 

" I thanli you for the honor you have done me in 
my somewhat advanced years, in your donation of 
two hundred doUars to aid the important work of the 
American Bible Society, and that you did not forget 
dear Homan in a land of strangers. The Rev. Mr. 
Temple of Malta has visited us, and brings favorable 
intelligence. The interview was very pleasant." 

To his son G , in New York. 

" Pi^AiNFiELD, May 4, 1829. 

" My very dear Son — I walk my study about an 
hour each -morning ; and that hour never passes with- 



374 ..MOSES HALLOCX. 

out thinking of you and my other beloved absent sons. 
You are the only one of the five children who do not 
profess to be in Christ. In this respect you are alone. 
If yoti have no part nor lot in the Saviour, and should 
die afar from him, the precious truths you have so 
often, and uniformly and nobly defended, and which 
have edified and delighted thousands, will finally be 
no comfort to you. You will see the doctrines of the 
cross finally prevail, you will see Satan chained a 
thousand years, and the meek inheriting the earth 
during that long and happy period ; you will see the 
bodies of the saints raised in glory ; -you will see that 
Jesus is the Lord ; you will be present at the judg- 
ment, and have enlarged views of eternity; but none 
of these things will a.iford you the least consolation. 
The very things which will cause behevers to rejoice 
will, on this gloomy supposition, be tp you a source 
of unhappiness and- terror. The thought that this 
may be the lot of him I so ardently love, excites in 
me sensations of sadness which I cannot describe. 

" When the millennium is in its full glory, you 
and I shall be in eternity. If then, on my speaking 
to you of the change which shall have taken place on 
the gkbe of our nativity — how that, fi"om being a 
world lying in wickedness^ it is -covered with the > 
redeemed, all honoring their God and SaAdour, and 
dehghting themselves in the abundance of peace; 
Popery and Mahometanism and Rationalism, and all 
the religions of human device abandoned for ever — 
you should answer that the change only heightened 
your anguish and despair, it seems now that my heart 



COERKSPONDENCE. 375 

would ache. My G saddened at the sight of 

Jerusalem's peace — saddened to see the proud tongue 
of ,the errorist silenced for ever, and the earth filled 
with the glory of Grod T I run forward in my own 
imagination, and hope to be so changed as to he in- 
capable of grief ; but with my present feelings, if I 
might make the choice, and the wUl of God were so, 
I would choose my own annihilation rather than that 
G — '• — should be lost. The God of infinite mercy 
prqyent it. God, wilt thou make him and his 
companion holy. Dispose them to use their endow- 
ments, and aU their influence, to advance thy cause. 
Bless them and their labors, and make them all bless- 
ings in time and eternity. Amen." 

To the sa-me. 

" Plainfield, November 9, 1829. 

" My very dear Son — Your ' Boston Telegraph,' 
and since that, the Observer, have afforded me much 
instruction and pleasure, and I am truly thankful for 
them. I have more periodical works than- 1 can read. 
The Holy. Bible is my book. 

"W , in a late letter, expresses some solici- 
tude as to the comfort of his parents in their declining 
years ; but we are well provided for. 

" The first year after your parents were married, 
I supposed we were. seeing our happiest days.' But 
this was a cherished error. The children bhe Lord 
gave us were, one after another, a source of much 
additional enjoymeut, especially when we began to 
see tokens of some genius and future enterprise. 
This animated the parents to make every reasonable 



376 MOSES HALLGOK., 

sacrifice to prepare them for fature usefulness. The 
living buds stimulated and nerved the arm to culti- 
vate the little trees, hoping on some future day to see 
welcome fruit, as the expectation of Manoah and his 
wife was raised concerning Samsoil, when the Spirit 
of the Lord hegan to move him at times in the camp 
of Dan. May all our grandchildren be as great a 
source of comfort to their parents as our children 
have been to us." 

To his son at Malta he. writes, "The thoughts 
you suggest, as to the Lord's kindness to us as a 
family, ought to excite the warmest gratitude. To 
all he has done, may he add humble, grateful, and, 
obedient hearts." 

In the same letter he says, " In respect to your 
visiting us, I had much rather not see you 'till the 
heavens be no more,' than that you should leave 
Malta, if duty call you to remain there. This would 
be too much like Jonah, who fled from the presence 
of the Lord, and .was, in your sea, swallowed by a 
whale." 

For many years, as above intimated, he had had 
the settled purpose that, when he should enter his 
seventieth year, however able, he might feel to fulfil 
the duties of the ministry, he would, lest he should 
retain the office in advanced life at the sacrifice of 
the best interests of his people, request them to unite 
with him in the settlement of a colleague. This 
proposition he publicly made to his congregation in 
March, 1829 ; and as he feared that paying the sala- 
ry of two pastors might be felt to be a burden, he 



COERESPONDEKCE. 377 

fully relinquished his own salary from and after the 
time the colleague should be installed. His devoted 
and united people, of whom he had heen for thirty- 
S3ven years the first ^nd only pastor, were not in haste 
for a change, and delayed accepting his proposal for 
two years, wTien, in March, 1831, the Rev. David 
Kimball was installed his cdleague. In his charge to 
the pastor elect, he says, 

" Almost forty years I have been the minister of 
this people ; but it has been in weakness and in fear, 
and in much trembling. I leave to you principally 
the weighty, solemn "trust. The church, from a very 
small beginning, has become considerably numerous : 
these you -will be careful to feed ; they are Christ's 
sheep and lambs. I also leave to your trembling care 
them that are dead in sin. I have often thought of 
them, and prayed for them, and addressed them ; but 
cannot persuade them to be reconciled to G-od. You will 
never pray nor preach without remembering them. 
Let it be your heart's desire and prayer to Grod that 
they may be saved. One reason why I was willing 
to retire from preaching to impenitent men in this 
congregation was, that truths from other lips might 
have more impression than from mine. I hope J shall 
.see, through the instrumentality of your labors, as I 
have seen by other means, scores of sinners converted 
to God. 

' " ' Preach the word,'' and not the religion of proud 
reason, or man's device.. Tell your poor fellow-sin- 
ners what (rofi? saith of the human heart, of Christ, 
of his atonement, of death, of the resurrection, and 



378 MOSES HALLOCKri 

of the judgment-day. Tell them what God says of 
eternity, and of the different states of the righteous 
and the wicked in that awfiil world," 

To his son G , in New York. 

"Plainfield, April 15, 1831. 

"The information, ' Some hundreds will be added 
to the churches in New York city the next Sahtath,' 
is warming to the heart. Truly the Lord is huilding 
up Zion. We will ' pray for the peace of Jerusalem.' 
' They shall prosper that love her.' I wait to hear of 
the convef sion of one ahsent friend and another ; hut 
if such expectation should not he realized, I hope to 
he resigned. Though every one ought to repent and 
believe, God is not bound to give these holy aflFeotions 
to any sinner." 

, Again he says, Sept. 16, " The awakening among 
us advances slowly. A very general solemnity ap- 
pears in our meetings, and there have been some 
more than twenty instances -of hopeful conversion. 

" If you, my beloved children, should live and 
die neglecting the great salvation, you will miss of a 
great reward, and receive greater punishment than 
sinners in general. that I could hear of the con- 
version of you both. • My mind would be relieved from 
a daily concern, a heavy burden. Let each make the 
interesting inquiry, 'What are my feelings towards 
, (rod ? Is he lovely in my sight ? Do I see himiio be 
just in his disposal of his creatures? Is bis word my 
delightj and does this world, with all its riohjes, 
honors, and pleasures, appear to me as nothingj com- 



COKRESrONDEKCE. 379 

pared with a heait to serve Christ, and an interest in 
his love ? Do I show, ty. forsaking sin, that I am a 
true penitent? Does Christ appear to me ' the chief- 
est among ten thousand, and altogether lovely?' 

"God seems to he more accessible to mankind 
than ever before. I believe there is not a town around- 
us but is visited by the special influence of his Spirit 
, in a greater or less degree. Seek the Lord while. he 
may be found. Let each take the whole blame of sin, 
and justify God. Then the awful controversy ceases." 

To his Children in New York. 

" PlaJnfiejcd, April 5, 1832. 

" My much-beloved Sons and Daughters — You 
have much to do ; and 1 hope you are as useful as 
you are industrious. Be willing to wear out for 
Christ. Let not your toils and cares cause you to 
forget him, and your obligations to be his for ever, 
I hope you are all favored with orthodox preaching. 

I think the religious scheme of is founded in error. 

All the silver and gold in the world would not make 
me willing that you . should have been brought up 
under such preaching." 
■ . Again, August 8, referring to the illness of two of 

them, he says, " I bless God for G 's recovery. 

His death would ha^re been a heavier grief to us than, 
any we were ever called to mourn. "We want to hear 

the result of E 's sickness. , If she should die, 

New York and Plainfield would to me be spread with 
gloom. It would be so especially, if she should not 
leave, good evidence of having a part or lot in Christ. 



380 MOSES HALLOCK. 

Eliza lost ! the thought would he insupportahle. 
Neither of you professes a hope in Christ ; yet you 
respect religion, and in youi judgment are convinced 
you must have it or he ruined. The state of such 
persoiis of all others most excites the sympathy of 
Christians." 

•His dear EUza, soon after his death, hecame a 
happy, consistent memher of the church of Christ. 

Two months later he writes to his sons, " I highly 
approve of your remaining ia the city, and attending 
each to his respective .business during the prevalence 
of cholera. ' I trust you were hoth very useful in that 
gloomy season." 

In Septemher, 1833, he speaks of his labors in a 
destitute par,t of Windsor, adjoining. Plainfield, where 
he did much to strengthen a weak congregaition : 
" I continue to spend the Sahhath with them," he 
says. " Their little meeting-house goes on well. It 
will, I'^trust, he fit for use in a montii or two." 

To bis Children on the Mediterranean, the nussion being about to be removed' from 
Malta to Smyrna. 

" Plainfield, Deo. 20, 1833. 

" My dear Son and Daughter — It gives me ihuch 
pleasure to think of the place you "fill in the vineyard 
of Christ. I would give thanks to God daily, that 
your lot is to spread the knowledge of salvation. 
You win probably he each instrumental of saving 
many souls. The books you publish may be blessed 
to thousands who were perishing for lack of vision. 
I hope you wiU yet hear in heaven, from the lips of 
such redeemed ones, ascriptions of praise to Him who 



CORRESPONDENCE. 381 

is Head over all things tathe church, for sending you 
to Malta and Smyrna. How encouraging to think of 
being allowed to do something for the advancement 
of that cause for which Christ died. 

"Remember me very affectionately to the Rev. 
Mr. Temple. We shall never forget his kind visit at 
Plainfield. If He who hath appointed the bounds of 
our habitation, call you far beyond Malta, I submit. 
If I am never to see you in this world, I submit; and 
this is not hard, so loi^ as I hope you are useful, 
though I think to spend even one hour with you would 
be a greater luxury than I ever experienced from an 
interview with friends." 

A few days later he writes, " Your mother and I 
are very comfortable and content. We lack nothing 
but religion ; and but one of us lacks that." 



To a Son in New York. 



" Plainfield, Aug. 28, 1834. 

" My very dear G After a night of anx- 
iety, king Darius said to Daniel, ' Is thy God whom 
thou servest able to deliver thee from the lions?' 
You live in the midst of temptations, dangers, and 
death. When I think of the bad examples before you 
in your city, and the thousand temptations to do 
wrong, and how many have been dying around 
you," (by cholera,) "I am ready to exclaim in the 
language of gratitude, ' Is thy God able to deliver 
thee' from the lions?' Your life and health and un- 
blemished character, and numberless other blessings, 
aro still continued ; may you, like Daniel, ssrve Gcd 



382 MOSES HALLOCX. 

continually; and as your refinement would nevei 
allow you to treat the kindness of an earthly bene- 
factor with ingratitude, see that you are not ungrate- 
ful to God." 

To another eon, he says, April 20, 1835, " Let- 
ters and tracts received of late from New York have 
been very interesting. G 's prosperity almost ter- 
rifies me. He has made some noble donations. If 
these have been offered in faith, as AbeJ offered his 
sacrifices, the Lord will have respectto them." 

To- his Son in Smyrna, on the death of an infant Daughter. 

" PLAiHFIELif, March 16, 1835. 

" My much-beloved Son and Daughter — Your full 
letter we have read several times with the deepest 

interest, and your brother W has put .the most 

of it into the New York Observer, and has signed it 
Particeps. He writes, after the birth of a daughter 
in January, that the wounds which the death of his 
little daughter and son made in the hearts of their 
father and mother still bleed. 

" "What shall I say of your httle Martha ? From 
your description, I believe she was a very lovely child. 
My attachment to her is such that, if I were in 
Smyrna, I should go to the little cypress-tree and 
the "grave it shades. The scene you -passed must 
have been peculiarly tender ; but the cup is mingled 
with great mercy. I think there is much reason to 
believe that your little daughter is with her Saviour, 
experiencing the amazing blessings of his atoning 
blood, removed far away from this polluted and pol- 



OORUESPONDENCE. 383 

luting world. I trast also that God has been near to 
you in your affliction, and enlarged your minds hy 
spiritual discoveries, so that you caii say, ' It is good 
for us that we have teen afflicted.' 

To his Children in New York. 

"Plainfield, Sept. 17, 1835. 

" My dearly beloved Sons and Daughters — 
Within a few months your mother and I have seen 
all our sons and daughters, except your brother Ho- 
man's wife in Smyrna. This marks the year. It is 
a. kind of new epoch,, which we shall remembef so 
long as we yet live. As Jacob revived when he saw 
the wagons, and as Paul thanked God and took 
courage when he saw the brethren at Appii Forum, 
so we rejoiced, especially to see Homan, whom we 
never much expected to see. Those around us were 
moved like the people of Bethlehem at the coming of 
jjf aomi. These things I hope we all consider as bless- 
ings which call aloud for very thankful acknowledg- 
ment to G-od. 

"A kind Providence has placed you in stations of 
responsibility; and in respect to abiMty and success 
in your various employments, it may be said of you 
as of the tribes of Israel, when the Lord brought them 
out of Egypt, there is not one feeble person among 
you." 

To his three absent Sons. 

" Plainfield, Dec. 30, 183.5. 

" My dear Sons and Daughters — Yesterday about 
half-past eleven your mother died. But it seemed 



384 MOSES HALIiOCK. 

more like quiet sleep than death. A fortnight ago 
to-day she suddenly became speechless and helpless. 
Martha and I laid her on the bed. Dr. Shaw came 
very soon, and said it was a shock of paralysis. He 
visited her daily, and Mrs. Arnold Streeter and Mrs. 
Salem Streeter Idndly assisted day and night in the 
care of her till she died. She had her reason almost 
or quite tUl the last. 

" She appeared to descend the valley of the 
shadow of death vidthout fear. / never heard her 
express^ any fear of death. When about fifteen 
years of age, she Was among a large circle of sisters, 
brothers, and cousins, gay and sprightly.' At this 
age she became thoughtful, and after about a year 
found peace. It was her lot to sit, for a considerable 
part of her youth, under preaching which excluded 
the distinguishing doctrines of the 'gospel; but the 
Spirit of the Lord taught her to trust in mere sover- 
eign grace. I think, from her subsequent life, that 
this divine work upon her mind was very powerful. 
She was generally serious, sometimes cheerful, never 
vain. 

" There were many things in her life highly wor- 
thy of imitation. She followed the counsel of Paul 
to Titus: ' In all things showing thyself a pattern of 
good' works; in doctrine showing uncorruptness, grav- 
ity, sincerity.' She was blessed with skill to speak 
* a word in season ' to every one with whom she was 
conversant. Very many were favored with her. pious 
counsel, especially her sons and daughter. She was 
neat, and all her things were so in their place that 



CORRESPONDENCE. 385 

she had to spend no time to find what she wished 
to use. 

" She was kind to the poor.. Solomon, in describ- 
ing ' a virtuous woman,' Proverhs 31, desorihes her. 
That good old religion remains the same. It is ever 
new. 'She stretched out her hand to the needy.' 
Her table, spread forty thousand^ times, while it bore 
every mark of economy, always supplied the wants 
of those around it. ' She looked well to the ways of 
- her household, and ate not the bread of idleness. 
Her children,' who, in great measure through her 
pious care as an instrument in Christ's hand, are 
what they are, ' arise up and call her blessed ; her 
husband also, and he praiseth her.' 

" Her body was conveyed to the meeting-house 
the day after her death, and the Eev. Mr. Jennings 
preached an appropriate discourse from Job 7 : 9, 10. 
I hope her sympathizing daughters wiU avoid her 
defects and imitate her amiable virtues. 

" My sons and daughters, as you loved' your 
mother, and esteemed her company, will you not, by 
obedient faith in Christ, seek a part and lot with her 
in heaven ? 

" Your affectionate father, 

'-MOSES HALLOCK." 

A few days later he writes to his daughter in 
Smyrna, " The death of my companion calls aloud on 
me to be also ready. We were nearly of the same age, 
almost seventy-six. I believe no day passed, espec- 
ially in later years, in which she did not make to me 
some serious observations concerning Christian duties." 

BaUock. 17 



386 MOSES HALLOCK. 

Her mind seemed inclined to holy devotion; If I do 
not repent and believe and serve the Lord, I shall he 
more guilty, and consequently miserahle, than if I 
had never seen her." 

He wrote for her tomhstone the simple testimony, 
" She sat at Jesus' feet and heard his word."* 

To his Cllildreii in New York. 

" PliAiNFiELD, January 22, 1836. 

"My very dear Sons and Daughters — In writ- 
ing -to your brother Roman's wife in Smyrna, I 
called her my pilgrim daughter, a term which com- 
ports well with my present feelings. May we all, by 
a holy walk with God, profess ourselves to be ' stran- 
gers and pilgrims on the earth.' 

"I concluded, when your mother was sick, that 
if she should live it would be for the best, and if she 
should die it would be for the best. "We ought always 
to put such confidence in God as to knew, ;when an 
evfent takes place, that it is best it should be so; I 
do not feel very lonesome. The loss of rny valuable, 
companionable companion is not haK the trouble to 
me that my vwn state is. I need the power'of relig- 
ion more than company, or any earthly good. 
" With love and gratitude, your father, 

"MOSES HALLOCK." 

* Margaret Allen was torn at Chilmark, Martha's Vine- 
yard, March 22, 1760. Her father was Rohert Allen, her 
mother Desire Norton. Sh^ was a descendant of the worthy 
and pious Rev. Willjam Homes, and a niece of Rev. Zechariah 
Mayhew, the last of the five veherahle missionaries of that 
name to the Indians, who married her father's sister. 



CORRESPONDENCE. 387 

To a Son in New York, 

" Plaimfield, April 22, 1836. 

" What can we spend a few thoughts upon more 
profitably, than on Christ as the head of the true 
chii/rch . He is the centre of their views, affections, and 
hopes. This is true of each individual of this holy king"- 
dom. Each memher of this spiritual family looks to 
Christ. Enoch and Seth and Noah, vnth all their be- 
lieving cotemporaries ; all the patriarchs, prophets, and 
apostles, with their pious cotemporaries ; and all true 
Christians who have hved since the days of Christ, 
or who shall hve — all true Christians collected from 
the fallen race — aU are looking, or will look to Jesus. 
All the members of this kingdom have some saving 
acquaintance with their King ; and it is the joy of 
their hearts that he will reign for ever. They wUl 
look to Christ as the desire of their souls, and most 
cordially rejoice in his government, saying, ' To Him 
bp glory and dominion for ever and ever.' 

"What could we wish to the sinner better than 
that he should become a member of this kingdom ? 

What could you and her mother wish for httle H - 

J more than that she should become a subject of 

this happy, everlasting kingdom ? that myself, my 
children, and grandchildren may become subjects of 
this holy King of peace." 

To his Son G , in New York. 

" Plainfield, July 2, 1836. 

" My very dear Son — Your letter has afforded 
me peculiar satisfaction. I rejoice that your mind is 



388 MOSES HALLOCK. 

not ' corrupted from the simplicity that is in- Cftirist.' 
It is pleasant to hear you say, ' I have ho hope hut 

in him.' May you and E and. myself, all hound 

to an eternal; state, ever .clearly see that Christ has 
most just iclaims to the supreme affections of our 
hearts,, purely to withhold them from him 'wrongs 
boli ourselves and him. If you are not in the way 
of nfe, you know in what the difficulty lies : not in 
ignorance of the truth, hut in want of love to it. 

"You speak of your case and E 's as singu- 
larly alike, and say, ' The prospect now is, that, 
gazing as it were upon heaven's brightness, and 
charmed with its glory, purity,- and hlespedness, we 
shall yet fail of that transformation of spirit which 
will fit us to he partakers of it — ^that hoUness with- 
out which no man shall see the Lord.' If I now 
knew that you and E ' would fail of the grace of 
hfe, it seems to me I should almost die. It would 
he more grievous a thousand-fold than the death of 
your mother. But if you are indeed charmed with 
heaven's glory, purity, and hlessedness, is not this 
love of hohness ? is not this the result of the trans- 
formation of the Spirit? But it is hetter to he a 
Christian and think you are not, though this is had, 
than to think you are and be deceived. How won- 
derful would he the display of grace, if your parents, 
and their children and grandoMldren, should all be 
saved. 

" "What you say of your children is perfectly con- 
sonant to my feelings — 'We have no ambition for 
th^m equal io that of seeing them take some humble 



CORRESEONDENCE. 389 

part in aiding forward the triumphs of Christ's king- 
dom.' Surely this is what true benevolence would 
wish, rather than that thiey should reign as princes 
in the earth." 



INSCRIPTION ON HIS TOMBSTONE IN PLAINEIELD. 

"The Rev. Moses Hallook: horn in Brookhaven, 
Long Island, Feb. 16, 1760 ; reared by godly parents 
ia Goshen,, Mass.; graduated at Yale College 1788 ; 
ordained and installed first pastor of the church 
in Plainfield, July 11, 1792 ; ministered to a confid- 
ing and united people forty -five years; died July 
-17, 1837, aged 77. At seventy, he requested a col- 
league, having received to the church three hundred 
and fifty-eight members. He had instructed three 
hundred and fotir pupils, of whom fifty became min- 
isters, seven missionaries. A man of patriarchal sim- 
plicity, integrity, sincerity, kindness; without an 
enemy. He loved, studied, preached, exemplified 
the Bible, and gloried in the C;:oss." 



PUBLieATlONS 

OF THE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 



THJ3 RELIGIOUS (6r PASTOR'S) LIBRARY, 24 vols. 12mo., price $10, 
oontEiinmg 10,83L pages, with steel portraits, embracing practical and 'experime:dtal 
works, of Flavel, Baxter, Owen, Bunyan, Hopkins, Edwards, Venn, and "Willison ; 
works on the evidences of ChriBtiani|;y by Paley, Gregory, and Spring ; the memoirs 
of Milnor, "feummerfield, Mrs. Graham, and Mrs. Smith, and D'Anbign6'a History 
of the Refolination. 

THE YOUTH'S LIBRARY, 70 vols. 18mo., prfce $10, containing 9,630 pages, 
elegantly printed, with 225 highly finished engravings, erabraoing Hannah More's 
Cheap Repository in eight vcdumes, the " Peep of Say " series, and as rich a collec- 
tion of juvenile books as exists in the same compass. 

THE BVANGELIGAL FAMILY LIBRARY,J5 vols. TSmo., price S5 50, em-- 
bracing a choice selection of the most spiritual authors. It has been a blessing to 
thousands of families. A continuation of this library in uniform binding, in 21 vols., 
price $7 50, will be sought by those who have the first 15 volumes. 

THE SET OF ENGLISH PUBLICATIONS, nearly 200 volumes, is sold for 
$50. 

TRACTS AND CHILDREN'S TRACTS, singly, bound, or in.packets, for con- 
venient sale by merchants and traders, many of them beautifully illustrated — ^ia 
English, German, French, Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, Dutch, Danish, Swedish, 
and "Welsh. 

PUBLICATIONS. IN FOREIGN LANGUAGES in rich variety, including 
more than 50 volumes in German. 

THE FAMILY TESTAMENT WITH NOTES, Instructions, and Maps, will 
be welcomed as a brief and comprehensive comment for use in family worship, in 
the Sabbath-school, aAd in the closet. Price 60 cents. 

THE AMERICAN MESSENj3ER,amonthJynewspaperissued by the Society, 
is the most widely circulated journal, secular or religions, in the world. It goes to 
200,000 families. >cSingle subscribers, 25 cents a year; six copies for $1 ; twenty 
copies for $3 ; forty copies for $5. 

THE MESSENGER IN GERMAN, (Amerikanischer Botschafter,) is edited 
■with much ability, and should be put into the hands of every German fajnily. Cir- 
culation 25,000 ]£onthly. Same terms. 

"THE CHILD'S PAPER" is a beautiful little newspaper for the yonng, with 
fine paper, elegant engravings, and valuable reading matter. Its circulation is nearly 
as large as that of the Messenger. Terms, ten copies to one address, in advance, $1 ; 
sixty copies, $5 ; one hundred copies, $8. 

All the publications of the Society are selected with scrupulous care; they are 
replete with soul-saving truth ; are printed on good paper in dear type, and at such 
prices that the Society may neither sustain loss nor make a profit by its sales. The 
conscientious parent may feel secure in placing them, in the^hands of his child ; and 
whoever would learn the way of salvation through Christ and the influences of the 
Spirit, will find in these works the plain, pltactioal instructions drawn &om the nn- 
erring standjtrd of the word of God. 



Cornell University Library 
BX 7260.H19Y17 



The godly pastor.Lif e of The Rev. Jeremi 




3 1924 011 511 197 



^ ^Jf 



•>' ^n I- 



£5^A i' 



