
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use. remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at http : / /books . google . com/ 



Ecumenical 
Missionary Conference 

NEW YORK, 1900 



REPORT OF THE^CUMENICAL CONFERENCE ON 

FOREIGN MINIONS, HELD IN CARNEGIE 

HALL AND NEIGHBORING 

CHURCHES, APRIL 21 

TO MAY 1 



in two volumes 
Vol. IL 



FIRST EDITION, TWENTY-FIVE THOUSAND 



Nbw VoiK 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY 

LOMDON 

RftLIGIOUS TKACT SOCIBTY 



&f^ 






ComilOHT jeino 
By Ambkicai* Txact Soci&tv 



Dr-baiX 



Contents of Vol. IL 

Pact rv. The Missionaky Work. 

PAGE. 

XXIV.— The Bible Gitek to the Nations 7 

The Church and Bible Translation — Beginning of Modern Bible 
Work — Difficulties in Translation — Experience in Bible Translation — 
Bible Distribution and Missions — Summary of Bible Work. 

XXV. — LnZBATURE AS AN EVANGELISTIC AGENCY 37 

Need of Helps to Understanding the Bible — Office of Christian Lit- 
erature iu Evangelization-^What Has Been Done — Practical Sugges- 
tions for the Future. 

XXVI.-^Plea tor Christian Literature 63 

The Power of Books — Books for Children — Appeals from Mission- 
aries—What the Press Could Do. 

XXVII. — Personal Presentation of the Gospel 85 

Manner of Presenting the Gospel — General Work for Women — Per- 
sonal Dealings With Inquirers — The Evangelist's Qualities. 

XXVIII. —Education as an Evangelistic Agency 112 

Place of Education — The Teacher as an Evangelist — Primary 
Schools and Kindergartens — Training-schools and Colleges — Higher 
Education of Women — Principles of College Management. 

XXIX. — Industrial Education 147 

Industrial Training as a Character Builder — Industrial Training- 
schools in Various Fields — Industrial Training in Asia a Burning 
Question To-day. 

XXX. — Ideas for Missionary Teachers 168 

Necessity for Training in Teaching — Controlling Ideas in School 
Curricula — Relation of Expression to Impression — Will-training. 

XXXI.— Medical Missions 188 

The Physican as an Evangelist — Qualifications of the Medical Mis- 
sionary — Hospital and Dispensary — Training of Native Assistants- 
Training Other Natives in Medicine. 

XXXII. — General Philanthropy of Missions 230 

Evangelistic Influence of Philanthropy— Work for the Famine- 
stricken— For Orphans— For Child-widows— For the Blind— For 
Lepera. 

iii 



IV COM TENTS 

CKAPm. rAGB. 

XXXIII.— Permanent Results in Native Wotkkrs 251 

Relations of Native Workers to the Missionary— Training and De- 
velopment — Colporteurs and Bible-women. 

XXXIV. — Feruaneht Results in Native Chusches 273 

Organization — Administration— Discipline — Special Evils — Polyg- 
amy. 

XXXV.— SELF-suproKT OF Native Churches 389 

The Principle — A Self-sustaining, Self-nourishing, Self-propagating 
Church — The Situation as to Self-support in the Various Fields — 
Methods of Application of the Principle — ^Various Aspects of the Sub- 
ject 

XXXVL— The Irresistible Plea for Advahcx 335 

Proofs of God's Favor and Blessing— Outlook for the Coming Cen- 
tury—The Gaims of the Hour. 

Address to the Chitrch 348 

Appendix 331 

Programme 353 

Organization 378 

Boards and Societies 385 

Members 395 

Statistical Summary 419 

Bibliography 435 

Index 463 



PART IV 
THE MISSIONARY WORK 



CHAPTER XXIV 
THE BIBLE GIVEN TO THE NATIONS 

Tbe Charcb and Bible Translation— Beginning of Modern Bible Work- 
Difficulties In Tmnslation — Experience In Bible Tranilation — Bible 
DisiribuUon and Missions — Sommary of Bible Work. 



Tbc Church and the Translatloa and Dlitributlaa of the Bifalc 

Re\'. Canon W. J. Kdmonds, B.U., lirittsh and Foreign Bible 
SocKty, Exeter, England* 

It is not yet adequately realized throughout the churches that the 
translation of the Scriptures into the language of the people amongst 
whom the religion of our Lord took root was the first solicitude of 
the apostolic churches, and, almost without exception, remained the 
policy of the Church to the sixteenth cenlury. This is ecimienical if 
an>thing is. and yet it needs to be reaffirmed and co-ordinated and 
made to be the common policy of us all. We want Christian converts 
to have the help of Bibles. We want them to look into thai achromatic 
mirror in which, without refraction or distortion, they may see Jesus. 
We don't want them to have the distraction of rival Bibles, nor the 
disadvantage of eccentric Bibles, nor the darkness of unlearned Bibles. 
We want them to have the best that the best men can give them. 
We want to kindle in the churches the ambition that will keep men 
from sleeping, till in every land and language there is some promise 
that before long there will be such a translation of the Word of God 
that we can look comfortably into each others' faces as we give it 
to the converts, and say. " Here is your spiritual history. This is the 
will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you." 

The voice of this Ecumenical Conference will, I am sure, be as 
that oi one man in laying this burden upon the missionary heart and 
the missionary mind of the churches. Whatever is the share of other 
lands, America, and Germany, and Gieat Britain are clearly put in 
trust of the gospel. They must translate and Ihcy must distribute it. 

To give to men the message of God on lips touched with a live 
coal from the altar of God is the first Irue greeting of the ideal mis- 
sionary as he lays the foundation of a living church; to hand to his 
people God's written revelation, plain, permanent, perfect, as far as 
anything partly human can attain to be perfect, is when his other 
work is over, his ideal farewell. 

There are on the roll of distinguished missionaries, ancient and 
modern, the names of illustrious laborers, who, in a single lifetime, 
have so begun and so ended their work. There arc instances in the 

' Cvoegie Hall, April 34. 



I 



TBC BICLE GIVEN TO THIf NATlONfl 




work of the early Church as well as in the modern Church where the 
best of books was tlic first of books, where the very alphabet was 
constructed for the purpose of translating the Uible into the people's 
language and g^iving a new force and interpretation to the name 
which our Lord gives to Himself when he calls Himself the Alpha 
and Omega, the beginning and the ending, the first and the last, and 
so reveals Himself as the creator of literature as much as He is the 
creator of the world. 

This great duty which, alike in Great Britain and in America, is 
specially committed to the chief Bible Societies, can not be viewed to 
advantage except an effort be made to realize its place in the great 
scheme by which the Holy Church throughout all the world has ac- 
knowledged God. I do not conceive it to be my duty here to-day to 
describe exclusively the work of that institution, the mother of so 
many vigorous children, one of whose representatives I have the 
honor to be. 

We are here to-day viewing and reviewing the work of many 
laborers in many lands, but there is a unity in tt all. Our sympathies 
are quick and lively for what our own eyes have seen and our own 
hands have handled in some special comer of the great field. Ameri- 
can and Scottish societies there are, not unfruitful or obscure, who 
share with the British and Foreign Bible Society that part of the 
white man's burden which is Involved in the <iuty of I)eanng forth 
the good seed of the kingdom of God. I shall deal with it to-day as 
one work, one task, mighty in operation, the surest, the safest of all 
the agencies by which a living Church performs the duty laid upon 
it, when, as a sower, it goes forth to sow. 

We in this Conference are watching the coming down from God 
out of heaven, Ihe City of God, we are not for the moment merely 
walking through the council-rooms or the well-stored bookrooms of 
the stateliest of Bible Houses, yours or ours. 

I have noticed for some years a process at work by which the 
lessons of Church history, which have been too much what is called 
in some maps " unexplored territory," are becoming every year more 
familiar to us upon whom the ends of the ages have come; and, 
what is more, and I trust is also better, there is an approximation 
on the two sides of tlic Atlantic, in the temper in which Church his- 
tory is viewed, toward a common understanding of its lessons. 

■' Church histories," says the Bishop of New York in his introduc- 
tion to a racy account of the Sub-Apostolic Age, by Dr. Lucius 
Waterman. " have been hitherto of chief if not of exclusive interest to 
scholars, But if our age has brought nothing else with it, it has 
brought an instinct of historical inquiry which has, happily, largely 
freed itself from partisan or ecclesiastical bias, and which has learned 
to read and to tell the story of the Christian centuries in a larger 
spirit and with a more candid utterance." This witness is true, and 
the work of Bible Societies has everything to gain from it. It struck 
mc as a pleasant thing a few weeks ago, when, in the course of a 
conversation I had with a distingiiished professor of ecclesiastical 
history, and reference was made to an article in the well-known 
Dictionary of Christian Biography, the writer's initials were P. S. 



ttt£ CHURCH AKO BtSLC TRA2JSLATI0N 



I need not say they stood for Philip Schaff, and the address he gave 
was the Bible House, New York. He was under the roof of the 
Bible 5x)ciety, at any rate, if not an agent of it. Rut this much is 
certain, Church history teaches no earlier and no clearer lesson than 
this, viz. : that a living Church holds fast and holds forth the Word 
of Life; and that its chief security for holding it fast is fidelity in 
holding it forth. 

It is one of the signs of the good hand of God upon us, that there 
tis not only a revival of zeal in the work of missions, but there is also 
floured out upon the churches an increasing desire to know what 
our earliest predecessors did when they went forth in obedience tO 
our Lord's command to make disciples of all nations. 

It is a striking thing that Bible work, the work, that is, of trans- 
lating and disseminating the Scriptures, begins where missions to 
the heathen begin ; its starting point is Anlioch. 

Listen to Saint Chrysostom. the most illustrious name after the 
apostolic age in that great missionary city where many were illus- 
trious, as he comments upon St. John : " The doctrine of St. John 
did not in such sort (as the philosophers did) vanish away; but the 
Syrians, Egyptians, Indians, Persians, Ethiopians, and infinite other 
nations, being barbarous people, translated it into their (mother) 
'tongue, and have learned to be (true) philosophers." And King 
James's translators, who quote this in their " Address to the Reader," 
add a similar passage from Theodoret, " next to St. Chrysostom both 
for antiquity and learning. His words be these : ' Every country 
that is under the sun is full of these words, and the Hebrew tongue 
is turned not only into the language of the Grecians, but also of the 
Romans, and £g)'ptians, and Persians, and Indians, and Armenians, 
and Scythians, and Sauromatians, and bnefiy into all the languages 
that any nation useth.* " And then, after a detailed account of sim- 
ilar work reaching through much of the Middle Ages and yet far 
from exhaustive, they draw their conclusion, " So that to have the 
Scriptures in the mother tongue is not a quaint conceit lately taken up 
. . . but hath been thought upon, and put in practice of old, even 
from the first times of the conversion of any nation ; no doubt, because 
it was esteemed most profitable to cause faith to grow in men's hearts 
the sooner, and to make them to be able to say with the words of the 
Psalm, ' As we have heard, so we have seen.' " 

I venture to urge that it is of the highest importance to the sound- 
ness of our missionary activity that we should not think of this branch 
of our work as "a quaint conceit lately come up." It is, as King 
James's men say it is, profitable as an instrumentality for " causing 
faith to grow." It is a means, also, when faith has sprung up, for 
" the more confirmation of it," that men may know the certainty of 
those things in which they have been instructed. 

The quotations that I have read to you from St. Chrysostom and 
Theodoret, though somewhat rhetorical (as where the former speaks 
of an " infinite " number of translations having been made, and where 
the latter affirms that the Scriptures have been published " in all the 
^languages that any nation useth ") arc, when all deductions have been 
made, a splendid record of solid achievement. We. however, are 



J 



10 



TBE BIBLE GIVEN TO THE IfATIONS 




dealing to-day not so much with the achievements of translators as 
with the principles upon which the early Oiurch proceeded in her 
missionary work. I am not losing sight of the fact that if a thing 
ought to be done, which in old times was not done, we nmst be bold 
in Christ to create a precedent. The Holy Spirit still abides in the 
Church. The Lord walks still among the candlesticks. But no man 
can thoughtfully watch the tendencies of the times we live in without 
seeing that all round us there is an increasing desire to realize the 
unity of the Church's life, to bring its operations into harmony, and 
to rejoice when fresh studies reveal to us that the instincts which 
prompt us to make known in all lands and languages the very 
Word of God, are but a repetition in us of promptings which 
came to the earliest Christians in their earliest organizations. Men 
will yield homage to principles with such sanctions : methods may 
and do alter. The latest reports of the American liihic Society show 
that in the matter of organization wc niiove with the times. This 
plan or that plan may be tried, adopted, or put aside. liihle Societies 
are mere instruments, but the translation and distribution of the 
Word of God is the duty of the living Church ; it can not be neglected 
without grave consequences. Whatever else was done, or not done, 
this branch of the ministry of truth was never, I repeat the word, 
never neglected in the early Church. 

From whichever of the great missionary centers we start, from 
Antioch, from Alexandria, from Carthage, or from Constantinople, 
the footprints of the translator of the Bible are there, beautiful are 
their feet, and their footprints are not beautiful only, but indelible. 
So strikingly true is this that when Dr. Salmon, one of our ablest 
British divines, was meeting the allegation that the four Gospels were 
a good deal later than apostolic times, he replied with equal logic, 
learning, and wit, " that at the time when it is doubted if our Gospels 
were born, we find their children full grown."* 

Now let us take a single example, the earliest that we can take. 
The greatest but one of the early mission fields was the Syriac-speak- 
ing land that stretched out cast from Antioch. Syriac was for seven 
or eight centuries the chief literary instrument in Western Asia. It 
was the official language of the great kingdom of tlie Seleucidze. The 
cities spoke Greek, the villages Syriac. 

Part of tliis vast district was within the boundaries of the Roman 
Empire, part of it was in the rival Empire of Parlhia, but part of 
it was still independent, or all but indqicndent, and that part in- 
cluded the Oxford of the East, if I may be allowed to sa)' so. the 
city of Edcssa. Edessa has a special interest for American Chris- 
tians, and a pathetic interest for us all. That great unavenged wick- 
edness, the slaughter of the Armenians four years ago, fell heavily 
upon Urfa; no city east of Anliocli has greater claim upon Chris- 
tian sympathy. 

Here, then, in the second century, the question arose and was set- 
tled, viz. : Whether the New Testament was to speak out the one 
truth in whatever language the believers in it .spoke, or whether that 
truth was to be buried in the sacred grave of the one only language 

• IfitrodncCion to Ifae N. T , p. 45. 



THE SYRIAC VERSION 



tt 



in which the Church had received it. And the answer is found in 
every book of authority that deals with the history of the Bible; at 
the head of every hst stands the Syriac version, and the date assierned 
to it is ihc second century. The relations between the church of 
Antioch and the church of Kclessa have recently been investigated 
by two French Roman Catholics, Professors Martin and Tixeront, 
[^opposed in one point indeed, but agreeing in this that the Syriac- 
' speaking church of Edessa is the child of the Greek -speaking church 
of Antioch. The older man differs from the younger in the date of 
the foundation, Professor Martin placing it in ihc first century, and 
his pupil placing it in the second. Mr. Burkilt. one of the most com- 
pclenl of our Cambridge school of sacred linguists, a high authority 
on the Syriac language and literature, has just been calling atten- 
tion to the characteristics of this very Syrian Church and finds it 
distinguished from other contemporary types of Christianity by its 
simplicity, its close touch with Holy Scripture, and its deep moral 
tone and practical seriousness. No church was fuller of the mis- 
sionary spirit. No translation of the Bible, except the Vulgate and 
our own. has had a more distinguished missionary history. It went 
out as far as Ceylon in the sixth century, it went to China in the 
seventh; it was a missionary progress all along the line. Nor was 
its influence confined to the East. Tattan, the most earnest of the 
Syrians in the second century, though looked upon as somewhat 
heretical before he died, a disciple of Justin Martyr, constructed a 
harmony of the four gospels, or rather out of the four gospels con- 
structed a continuous narrative. It had an inunensc circulation. 
It passed from the East to the West. It took a Latin form, as Dr. 
Wace has shown, in the sixth century, and then in the ninth was 
turned into Old Saxon. Under the name of the Heliand it assumed 
the form of poetry, and was a chief instrument in the conversion of 
the Saxons whom the severities of Charles the Great had compelled 
to conform, but whose heart was not won till the Heliand won it. In 
this form, says Dr. Wace, the gospel " lived in the heart of the 
German people." and in due time produced Luther and the German 
Bible, thus binding together the second century and the sixteenth, 
the East and the West. And what makes this matter more personally 
and keenly interesting is that Tatian tells us how his own heart was 
touched and his mind satisfied by the Bible. His faith came by read- 
ing, and his reading was in the Word of God. He had made trial of 
every kind of religious worship, and the result had sickened him. 
" As." he says, " I was earnestly considering this. T came across 
certain barhaVnus writings, older in point of antiquity than the doc- 
trines of the Greeks, and far too divine to be marked by their errors. 
\Vhat persuaded me in these books was the simplicity of the language, 
the inartificial style of the writers, the noble explanation of creation, 
the predictions of the tuture. the excellence of the precepts, and the as- 
sertion of the government of all by One Being r^*' o>M>y ri /*oi'a/)x»«i'. 
My soul being thus taught of God. I understood how the writings of 
the Gentiles leads to cnndt-mnation. but the Sacred Scriptures to free- 
dom from the world's slavery, liberating us from thousands of tyrants, 
and gi^nng us not indeed what we had not received, but what we 



i 




t* THe BIBLE GIVEN TO THE KATIONS 

had once received, but had lost through error." This fragment of 
second century autobiography is not only decisive as evidence of the 
policy of the early Church in the matter of the translation and the 
diflTusion of the Scriptures, but it is in itself and in its far-reaching 
results, an eloquent example of the missionary value of that policy. 
1 have spoken of Antioch and its methods. The same lesson is taught 
when we look at Alexandria, the next in order of apostohc Churches. 
I must not go into detail, but there is no need to do so. Our knowl- 
edge of Egyptian Christianity is rapidly increasing. We know of 
four Coptic versions of the Scriptures, beginning with the second 
century, and I need only remind you of the beautiful anecdote of 
Pontitianus, which St. Augustine gives us in his Confessions, to show 
how influential one of these versions was upon the missionary life 
of Egj-pt. 

There are in India at this moment thousands of thoughtful men 
who are living under very similar conditions to those which existed 
in the second century. Indian missionaries here Co-day, missionaries 
from China and Japan here to-day, the first of them and the last 
especially, meet with the very experiences that Clement of Alex- 
andria niel with, and Panlsenus before him, and Origen after him. 

When we reacli the fourth and fifth centuries we are in the era 
of great Bibles, and nearly every one is the result of missionary work. 
There arc diversities of operation, indeed, but the governing principle 
is always the same. The aim is to translate the Bible into the lan- 
guage of the people, and thus put it into their hands. Sometimes, 
as in the case of the Latin Vulgate, it is one man away in solitude 
like Jerome in Bethlehem who does the work, or in the full activity 
of church life as Miesrob was when he gave the Armenian Church 
their Bihie, and constructed their very alphabet for this purpose. 
Sometimes the missionary impulse is given half unconsciously, as 
when Ulphilas felt the spell of Christianity at Constantinople and 
gave the Gothic people the first of Teutonic Bibles, five hundred years 
in advance of the earliest Anglo-Saxon Gospels. But nowhere is 
there an exception to the rule. It operates wherever there is need; 
and only because of the fact that the German and other invaders of 
the Roman Empire adopted Latin as their sacred tongue was the 
work of translation in the Western Church apparently suspended for 
nearly a thousand years. There is no fallacy more fallacious than 
that the Latin Bible was provided with a view to the protection of 
the Word of God from common use. It was distinctly the reverse. 
What the Syriac Bible was in the East, that the Latin Vulgate was 
in the West. 

I have spoken of one great missionary service which Constantinople 
rendered to Western Christendom. There is another, the effects of 
which continue to this day. There has come, as we know, into the 
front rank of nations, the greatest of all the Slavonic peoples; the 
millions who look up with reverence to the Czar of all the Russias 
owe their Bible lo Con.stantinople. The Bible which is now circu- 
lated amongst them in hundreds of thousands of copies yearly by the 
Society one of whose dclcr^atts I am, is the child of that ninth-cen- 



THE BIBLE IN EARLY EUROPE tj 

lory version, for the sake of which the current Russian alphabet was 
invented by Cyril and Methodius. 

Now that translation of the Bible was sought for by the Slavonic 
princes, and they sought for it distinctly as the supreme authority 
in matters of faith. Evangelists had approached their country, as 
50 often in the mission Pclds to-day, from more than one quart«r. 
The princes were perplexed. '' One teaches after one manner," they 
said, " and one teaches after another." " We do not understand the 
Greek and Latin languages, send us teachers who may translate the 
Sacred Books." And so it came about that the Bible was the first 
of Russian books, as it had aheady been the first of Gothic and the 
first of Armenian books. As a sacred timpire it came, as well as a 
sacred teacher; an end of controversy when once its meaning is 
ascertained, and its sentence delivered. And this was done in the 
darkest century of the dark ages. Such is the value of a true prin- 
ciple, that where it prevails the tendency is always to brin^ about a 
better state of things. Even wh'-n rehgion has stiffened into rigid 
formalism, virtue goes out of the Word of God to reanimate, to 
regenerate, to renew. 

Kow this principle which we have seen to be operative in the life 
of the Church from the first, received fresh illustration when, con- 
spicuously at the Reformation. Teutonic Christianity comes into view 
with the Bible in Its hand. " The primal records of Christianity," 
says Milman, in a striking; passage, " in a narrow compass passed 
into all the vernacuiar languages of the world. Monasticism was 
rejected as alien to the primal religion of the gospel, the family life, 
the life of the Christian family resumed its place as the highest state 
of Christian grace and perfection." * 

The invention of printing in the fifteenth century gave a powerful 
stimulus to the circulation of the Scriptures, and it is due to the truth 
of history to say that there was for a long time no departure from 
the ancient policy of the Church. Indeed, in all the leading coun- 
tries of Europe there was, as it were, *' the appearance of a man's 
hand, and lo ! a roll of a book was therein." t 

Here, for instance, is the testimony of Matthew (or Mat- 
thias) of Janow, who was in Bohemia as Wickliffe was in England, 
only a generation later: " From my youth up, whether on a journey 
or at home, on business or at leisure, never was my Bible out of my 
sight. My soul was. as it were, espoused to it. In every sorrow, 
in every persecution. I ever betook me to my Bible, which walked 
with me as my betrothed. And when I saw others carrying about 
the relics and bones of saints. I. for my part, chose to myself the 
Bible, my elect, my comrade in all life's journey." 

Nearly eighty years were to pass before Europe was to stand at 
the parting of the ways. Twenty editions of the Latin Bible had 
been printed in Germany alone, before Ltither was born, and in the 
year that followed the nailing up of the " Theses " at the door of the 
church at Wittenberg ( Oct. 31 , 1 5 17) . the fourteenth known 
issue of a German Bible took place. All these fourteen issues were 
large folio Bibles, and were not mere reprints, but various transla- 

* IM. ChrinivUtr. Vol. L, p. ■■. t Maitluid'i Duk Age*. 





14 THE BIBLE GIVEN TO THE NATIONS 

lions from the Vulgate. I take these facts from the catalogue of 
the Caxton Exhibition of Bibles of 1857, which catalogue was drawTt 
up by Henry StevcnSj of Vermont. Germany (1466), as we 
have seen, took the lead, bitt Italy (1471) soon followed, then 
France ( 1474), then Bohemia ( 1488). Soon the folio Bibles 
were followed by a quarto, and then " the poor man's Bible," 
the first edition in octavo, a Latin Bible, made its appearance in 1491. 
All these Bibles were produced in open day, they involved no breach 
with the past, they indicated no forward movcmait, but they Bear 
by their numbers and their variety strong evidence of a deepening 
and extending spiritual life. 

A forward step, however, was about to be taken. " Greece," says 
Mr. Goldwin Smith. " arose from the dead with the New Testament 
in her hand." Two eminent men took the manuscripts from her and 
shaped them for other men's use. One was a cardinal, Ximenes, 
the other, Erasmus, narrowly escaped that dignity. Again we have to 
notice that there was no breach with the past. Erasmus's Greek 
Testament was dedicated, with permission, to the Pope. The dale 
of this event should be noticed — it was 1516. 

The Old Testament in Hebrew had been printed as early as 14S8. 
Access to the originals is the primary condition of sound Bible 
work. All Europe over, the true foundation of Bible knowledge was 
now laid. 

It is an exceedingly solemn thing to notice that there was nothing 
formal and ftnal to hinder the work of Bible translation and Bible 
diffusion from being done in every country in Europe, whether of 
Latin or German race, till the Council of Trent took its fatal decision 
in 1546. Then for this high service the one race was taken and 
the other left. Then the policy of the Council bore fruit in the hos- 
tility of the Church, and no man since has been able to count upon 
ofBcial support in tlut great communion, from Pope, or bishop, cr 
parish priest, if he devoted himself to the task of giving the Scrip- 
tures of God freely to the people. There is plain proof that in the 
judgment of the best men in tlie Latin Church, including the present 
Pope, this opposition has gone too far. But it is now too late to 
alter a policy which has three centuries and a half behind it. Tyndale 
and Rogers can not be un-strangled or un-burnt. The history of other 
crimes can not be blotted out. Take Spain, for example. Cardinal 
Ximenes had the start of Erasmus in the matter of the Greek Tes- 
tament. In his Polyglot it was printed in 1514. but not published. 
There were Spaniards who longed to give the Bible to their coun- 
trymen in their own tongue, and the great Cardinal's munificence 
and learning had made it possible, but when, in 1543. Enzina pub- 
lished at Antwerp a version of the New Testament and presented it 
to Charles the Fifth at Brussels, he was thrown into prison for his 
pains; while Liesvclt. who printed a version in the Low Countries 
in 1526. was condemned and beheaded for asserting in one of his 
annotations that " the salvation of mankind proceeds from Christ 
alone." It can not be too distinctly affirmed, nor too often repeated, 
ihat all this sixteenth century opposition to the translation and 
diffusion of the Word of God was an innovation^ a departure from 




BEGINNING OF MODEBN BIDLE WORK 



>s 



I 



Uie course which the missionary church of God had up to then 
almost invariably followed. The Jesuit missions are the first con- 
siderable examples of learned men carrying the gospel message, 
^undantly competent to translate the Bible, but, as far as appears, 
not doing it. 

In the East in the early ages the great missionary church of Syria 
did it, the Franciscans in the Middle Ages did it, but tlic Council of 
Trent, by its decree, stereotyped the Vulgate, and thenceforth the 
Latin Church held the Sword of the Spirit with a paralyzed arm. And 
so it has come about that the work once done by great scholars and 
scholar missionaries, like Ulphilas, or Miesrob, or Jerome, or great 
missionary churches like the Syrian, or the Alexandrian church, or 
by the commanding influence of great Qiristian cities, as when Con- 
stantinople, at the request of the Slavonic princes, helped the Russian 
people to obtain their Bible, or by the new-born energy of a great 
religious movement, as when the Reformation Angel uttered his voice, 
"Ho! every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters"; that work, 
I say, with the sanction upon it of Church authority, of Church his- 
tory, and of scholar saints and scholar martyrs, has come into the 
exclusive charge and custody of the most living branches of the 
Church of God. It is the common task of Christendom, and the 
lowly and the lofty alike are members of this greatest of co-operative 
societies. All missionary work will eventually be tested by the con- 
formity of its results to the Divine model of life and character set 
before us in the Hoty Rook. No missionary is better employed than 
the competent translator. No missionary society has fully risen to 
the ideal, which has not contributed a man or men to this great Pen- 
tecostal revelation of the mind of God to the hearts of His creatures. 

Between us all we reckon over four hundred of these divine voices, 
and none of them is without signification. Each of them bears wit- 
ness to the love that God hath to us, each bears witness also that no 
race or language is now common or unclean. 

We here to-day are of one mind. This great Conference will give 
its sanction to this ancient policy, will approve of the consecration 
to this ser\'ice of the best workmen God gives us. I speak in the 
country nf John Eliot, of Judson, of Ell Smith and Van Dyck and 
Schereschewsky and Hepburn, and I come from the country of 
Carey and Henry Martyn, and Morrison and Milne. This Ecu- 
menical Conference is in its composition, its character, in the scale 
of its operations, a plain proof that the missionary idea is conquering 
the life of the churches. The living churches arc alive to it and by it, 
but let us be jealous for the stability and authority, as welt as for the 
fervor of our work. The Word of God is the mo-st living of all 
God's oracles, the most evangelical of all evangelists, the most trust- 
worthy of all God's messengers. 

Bcgianiog oi Modem Bible Wotk 

Rev. Canon W. J. Edmonds, B.D.. British and Foreign Bible 
Society. Exeter, England * 
Having already drawn attention to the long, past history of Bible 

■ HMiitn Avenac Rcfomed Ctiorcb, iXtf i. 



I 



li THE BIBLE GIVEN TO THE NATIONS 

work, and traced, as far as the limits of the time allowed and the 
limits of my knowledj^e, too, the process in the Church of transla- 
tions of the Bible, down to the time in which the study of this work 
and the care of it passed into the hands of the Christian public at 
large, I now want you to notice when this modern development began, 
as to which I hope we shall increasingly feel that it is cast upon us 
to do. I have for a long time undertaken to say a gcrod word n^.v 
and then for the most abused century in alt the nineteen. The eight- 
eenth century is the century in which the work of modem missions 
begins ; again, it is the century in which Bible work strikingly begins. 

We have not the remotest desire to dethrone Carey from any 
eminence he ever attained to, but he is not the pioneer of this work. 
The honor belongs to the Danes ; the honor belongs to the Germans ; 
the honor belongs only in a way to the English. The man was a 
German: the society was Danish, and ihc place was English. Of all 
the achievements in the mission field, the greatest achievements of the 
Bible translators are in India. At the girdle of the Bible Society 
there hang the Aryan languages — nine great keys. The least of these 
opens the door of truth to 2.000,000 of people, and the largest of 
them opens the door of truth to 90.000,000 of people. There are 
nine such keys hanging at the girdle of the Bible Society to-day. 

Now, the pioneer of this movement was Bartholomew Ziegenbalg. 
He died at the age of thirty-six, and he left behind him a complete 
translation of the New Testament. He left behind him an excellent 
dictionary of the Tamil language, and a very respectable grammar ; 
and then he passed away. 

He came to England, carried there gratis by one of the ships of 
the East India Company, and he returned to India, carried gratis 
by another East Indian Company ship. King George II. helped him 
in every possible way, and the Christian Knowledge Society— which 
was living in England then, as it is still — received him, and 
he made a speech In the Tamil language, and was responded to by 
somebody in Latin. It was a wonderful linguistic performance, and 
justified the patience of the committee and the respect in which they 
held the missionary. He died before the eighteenth century was half 
out, and we had to wait for seventy years before another man ap- 
peared to take up that kind of work, and when that man appeared, 
it was William Carey. 

That is the beginning of modem Bible Society work, and I take 
that Tamil language and Tamil translation of the Bible, and I say, 
if there is one translation in the list more than another which illus- 
trates what Bible Societies can do for missionaries, and what Bible 
Societies can do for the work of their Master, that Tamil transla- 
tion is the very example that I should use; for, when the next man 
came — Fabricius — he didn't think it necessary to put aside Ziegen- 
balg and bring in himself; and, when Fabricius passed away, nobody 
thought it necessary to put either Ziegenbalg or Fabricius aside. 
They built upon the foundation of their predecessors. More mis- 
sionaries and other societies came into the field, but they all aimed 
to improve the work already done on the Tamil Bible. 

So, in that Tamil field— the most fruitful of all the mission fields 



SCOTLAND AND BIBLE DIFFUSION IJ 

of South India — there is one Uiblc acccpled by all the missionaries 
Qi South India and read in all the churches of South India, and if 
a man passes from one part of that field to another, he does not 
pass from one version of the Bible to anoiht-r. He goes and hears the 
same thing next Sunday that he heard last Sunday, and he docs 
ii because of the benign influence which the Bible Societies have 
brought to this task, to make these Scriptures the one version. 

I am glad to have had an opportunity of saying- these things to 
you. I trust the American Society will thrive and prosper, and we 
:WiU endeavor lo live on good terms with it. And now one of two 
things lies open lo us a( this moment : either we arc separately rc- 
l»ponsiblc for the whole of the work everywhere, and then we must 
l^ake the burden of it upon us; or, if there is a division of labor, and 
/e accept the relief, then we are bound to feci toward other people's 
/ork as we do lo our own. It is anrs by sym[Kitliy — by substitution. 
"We. on the other side, arc litjlitening your labors — you are lightening 
our labors. But, if we aid tacli other, we must accept the mutual 
■ sympathy, tlic mutual prayers, and mutual interest each of the other. 



I 

I 



ScotUfld 3Jid Bible Diifusioa, l&tiO-1900. 

VV. J. Si-owAN, l£sQ., Secretary, National Bible Society of Scot- 
land* 

tt was the year of the tercentenary of the Reformation. The home 
churches had just passed ihroiigli a period of spiritual revival, and 
the slumbering enthusiasm of the country began lo stir itself. On 
the 9th of May. i860, the National Hible Society of Scotland was 
instituted " to \mite the friends of Bible circulation in Scotland *' of 
every name and church, with a view " to promote, by every legitimate 
means, the diffusion, both at home and abroad, of the Holy Scrip- 
tures." The new association was ilie outcome of years of patient, 
persevering, and sometimes, as it seemed, of fruitless effort, at the 
heart of which was the late Mr. John Henderson, of Park, a Glasgow 
merchant with an enthusiasm for Christian union to which he de- 
voted ungrudgingly his time, influence, antl wealth, and of which he 
left as his lasting memorial the Evangelical .Alliance ami the National 
Bible Society of Scotland. 

The National Society had already introduced giving for Bible 
work on a new and more worthy scale, and for its first year reported 
an income of £8.000, with a circulation of over 100.000 Scriptures, 
of which 9,248 in foreign countries. In 1899 its income was 
£29.642, and its issues 955,392 Scriptures, bringing up the entire 
income received during these forty years (almost all from Scotland) 
to /574.348. and the number of Scriptures issued to 19,038,357 copies 
or parts, of which 11,621,375 ^'^^^^ '*'-''-'" circulated in foreign lands, 
while the six foreign colfwrteurs have become 540. 

To follow in <Ictail the story of these forty years would turn a 
brief paper into a mere record of statistics. Rather would I seek to 
trace the broad outlines of the providences which allayed old-time 
and local jealousies and provided with the new ability for work 
new opportunity for its exercise, opening doors into continental 

• MadboaATCtnicRrfonncil Church, May i. 



4 





l8 THE BIBLE GIVEN TO THE NATIONS 

countries long hermetically scaled against the entrance of the Word,' 
and bringing the vast populations of the Far East within our reach. 
Into Spain the Society made its way in 1865 in a somewhat remarka- 
ble manner. While yet the Bible was confiscated at every frontier, 
Manuel Matamoros showed us how the Book might be printed in 
Spain itseEf for the use of the faithful souls, who, meeting in secret 
and under feigned names, were feeling their way toward the light. 
In a back room in a back street in the cathedral city of Malaga, at 
a rickety old handpress, with scanty supply of type, a godly printer, 
with his own hands and such help as his wife and boy could render, 
printed at the cost of the Society 3,000 large type New Testaments, 
in the course of seventeen months' labor, during every hour of which 
he stood in danger of arrest and the galleys — a feat which will live 
in history with the achievements of those who counted not Hbert 
or life dear to them for sake of Christ and His gospel. 

By degrees Ihc issue of Scriptures in France, Germany, and Italy 
gfrcw from hundreds to tens of thousands ; and Austria-Hungary, Por- 
tugal, Belgium, Brazil, Pern, were added to our Roman Catholic 
spheres of work. In the wars that have swept across Europe during 
the latter half of the century, opportunity was found for the wider 
diffusion of the Book of peace and reconciliation ; and twice we 
ventured across the Atlantic, supplying. I hope without serious in- 
fringement of the Monroe Doctrine, first 5,000 Bihles to the Southern 
States, and subsequently 13.000 to the American Missionary Society 
for the new!y enfranchised freedmen. ^M 

In 1863 aggressive work was begun in one of the great heather^™ 
nations, when the Rev. Alexander Williamson, subsequently better 
known as Dr. Williamson, the Society's first agent for China, landed 
on the coast of Shantung, a shipwrecked voyager. It was a bold 
step for the young Society to take, though the directors scarcely 
anticipated that before the century c!osc<l it would commit them to 
an additional expenditure of £6,000 per annum. With some hesi- 
tation in 1885 it set up a printing establishment al Hankow, from 
which already millions of Scriptures and other Christian publica- 
tions have issued, while the possession of .such a press enabled it to 
become the publisher and. by his favor, the owner of Dr. Griffith 
John's translations of the Scriptures into Wenli and Xtandarin; trans- 
lations which have been jnit into the hands of tens of thousands of the 
Chinese literati, and been wclcoine<I by readers not only in China 
itself, but from the Straits Settlements to Korea, as presenting the 
message of salvation in a form mare ea.sy lo he understood than 
any that have gone before them. Worthy of notice also is the close 
alliance formed between the Bihle Society and the Centrat China 
Tract Society and the hand of earnest missionaries represented in it, 
which, while doubtless highly beneficial to the Tract Society, has 
greatly enlarged our sphere of influence in China. 

In i8"6 Mr. Robert Lilley (now Dr. Lilley) was transferred to 
Japan. He was the first Bible Society agent to settle in that newly 
opened empire, ami the first to send nut a native Japanese colporteur, 
for whom he devised the significant name home subsequently by his 
successors — " the man who goes about to sell the ?Iolv Book." The 



SCOTLAND AND BIBLE DIFFUSIOM 



19 



I 



I 






total circulation in heathen populations for the pasl year amounted 
in all to considerably over half a million Scriptures. 

In most of the foreign coxmtrits which engage its attention the 
Society finds it more economical and more cfticienl to encourage 
local and native workers than to maintain agents of its own. In 
France it largely aids the Evangelical Society of Geneva, in Belgium 
the Missionary Church of Belgium, while in other continental and 
iwre remote countries individual missionaries or those commissioned 
by the home churches render a service in the superintendence of 
oolporteurs which is of great value to the Society, and at the same 
time helpful to their own special objects. It is only in Giina, and 
lo a very limited extent in Japan, that circumstances appear lu call 
for tlic maintenance of a small staff of European agents; and even 
'here the work of diffusion would be sadly restricted hut for the 
generous eo-nperation of the missionary body in the superintendence 
of native colporteurs. 

It was said recently by a Scottish statesman that while some empires 
depend on their constitution, and others on their armies, the British 
Empire depends on its men. The saying is eminently true of the 
Bible Societies. We have been singularly happy in the agents sent 
cut abroad, and the same may be said of the bulk of our little army 
of native colporteurs. On these men, charged wiih the individual 
presentation of the Book, and the explanation and enforcement of its 
claims, the success of the Society, humanly speaking, depends. Much 
has been said here of circulation, but circulation is not everything, 
and a Bible Society can no more live by its funds or its issues than 
man can live by bread alone. We seek readers rather than buyers; 
souls rather than sales. Whelher in some Proleslant countries where 
but little is made of the Book, or in Roman Catholic populations 
where it is withheld and scarcely known, or among the vast heathen 
peoples of the world, living and dying in ignorance of the Gospel mes- 
sage, the man with the Book must be a man of the Book, with the 
gospel in his heart and on his Hps as well as in his hand: a true 
missionary of the cross, who endures hardship, ignores insidt, and 
plods steadily on his way, in whose satchel may be found not the 
marshal's baton, but the very crown of life, and that not for himself 
alone. It is on the ground of such methods and manner of work, 
as well as of the work itself, that the Bible Societies claim to rank 
in this Ecimicnica! Conference, not only as helpers of all missionary 
societies, but as missionary societies themselves. 

One of the constitutional articles of this Society enforces the im- 
portance of concentrating Bible Society energies, and something has 
been done during these forty years ^or this end in Scotland. Tn 
foreign coimtHcs where native Bible Societies show themselves effi- 
cient and sufficient, the Society is prepared to withdraw from their 
here of influence, as it has just done, at some personal sacrifice, 
in Norway and Sweden. With its greater colleagues, the British 
and Foreign and the American Bible Societies, it studies to live in 
peace and unity, as they do toward it. In Japan and Korea, and 
in the prejiaration of the Standard Version for China, it works in 
ctual union with them. From its comparative poverty and weakness 




90 THE BIBLE GIVEN TO THE NATIONS 

it can not always hope to keep equal step with these coDeagiies, nor 
is it necessary in everj- field in which all three may be at work; 
tbou^ from its mobility and flexibility it occasionally &nds itself 
for a time in advance of heavier bodies. While, however, there is a 
diversity of gifts, there is but one spirit, and the unity of these three 
English-speaking Bible Societies gives hopeful presage of the ulti- 
inate unity which the nations they represent desire should subsist 
unbroken and unshaken among the peoples of our commoa znotber 
tongue. 

UlflBciilliev cB Bnk insihliaB 

Re\'. James Thomas, Secretary, British and Foreign Bible So- 
ciety, London* 

It has passed into a proverb that the Bible is the most translataUe 
of books ; but this does not mean that it can be translated without 
difiiculty. The diflicultj' is great indeed, even when the trandator 
is rendering the originals into his mother tongue. The Hebrew and 
Aramaic of the Old Testament are often perplexing; their fcums are 
archaic, their idioms are Oriental, their allusions frequently uncer- 
tain ; many passages are vague and capable of different interpre- 
tations, while many have alliterations and that play upon words 
which can not possibly be reproduced in translaticm. The Gredc 
of the New Testament is Hebraistic. The Hellenic words were often 
emptied of their old mear.ings before they were employed in their 
new service, and aftem-ard they had to be filled with the fresh and 
enlarged thought of the gospel message. It is no wonder that Luther 
exclaimed, " Good God ! how painful and how laborious it is to 
compel the Hebrew writers to speak German ! " How much harder 
it must be for the modem missionary to make them speak the tongues 
of savage and semi-civilized lands! 

Words are but s)'mbols of thought. It follows, therefore, that 
people have words in their language only for thoughts of their minds. 
Even the thought of God has perished from the minds of some 
peoples — they have, therefore, no word for God. Other peoples have 
but unworthy words for the Divine Being, and no words for sin, 
redemption, justification, sanctification, and other great terms of the 
religious life. But we need not be alarmed. Modem translators must 
do what the writers of the Bible did — uplift, and cleanse, and expand 
the words in use, and sanctify them to this holy service. Dr. Cust 
points out that " The writers of the New Testament must have been 
greatly exercised in their choice from the \-ul,?ar Greek phraseology 
of the day of such words as d/rai}, rurrK rpavr^, nwttro<ppoirvyii, 
in addressing heathen who know no love but lust, who were total 
unbelievers, who were rierce to resent insults, and who considered 
lowliness of heart as cowardice in disguise." But these and many 
other terms used in the Greek Testament have now become charged 
with spiritual force and meaning. Indeed cti'or^ had to be made 
for religious use. for it is not once found in classic Greek. And 
many of the great words in the modem vocabularies of Christian 
lands had to be made for religious use. 

' Matlwon Avcnae Refaraed Chnidi, Hsy t. 



I 



I 



DIFFICULTIES IN BIIILE TRANSLATrON 31 

It has been said that the vocabulary of an Enjjlish peasant does 
not exceed two or three hundred words — except when he is excited — 
Prohably fewer words than these would exhaust the coiiinion speech 
of a savage or half savage race. Hydraulic machines could nut com- 
press the translation of the Scriptures into bounds so narrow. Take 
ihe names of animals, insects, trees, flowers, gems, weights, measures, 
clothing^, and the common things of daily life in Syria. By what lin- 
guistic magic is the scholar to find equivalents for these in the lan- 
j^ages of vast areas of the world ? Fig trees are unknown in Arctic 
regions, and camels in the South Seas, and snow in equatorial zones. 
Before European navigators discovered Ihe islands of Oceanica the 
natives had never seen a quadruped bigger than a rat ; how difficult, 
therefore, to translate the great sentence: " Dehold the Lamt> of God 
which taketh away the sin of the world." Hut in many lands lan- 
guage is not only limited in vocabulary, it is poor in meaning. In 
the Scriptures the word flesh is met with iii various seiises ; but the 
nearest word the translator can 6nd in his new language is /neat. 
He has to translate the word ji«, but can discover no fitter term than 
ihat which means a violation of propriety. For pardon or forgiircness 
!ic has rvi belter word than one which means the clearing of a debt. 
For the great words born again he has nu nearer equivalent than 
that which means the transmigration of the soul. He has to convey 
the idea of holiness to many whose best conception of it is the result 
of bathing in a sacred stream, and the idea of angels to a people 
whose loftiest thought of spiritual being is genii; and of hcaz'cn to 
those who find in carnal pleasure their idea of suprcmest bliss. Added 
lo these are the difficulties connected with the rendering of the names 
for God, for Lord, for Spirit, for ecclesiastical terms, psychological 
terms, ethical term.s, sacrificial terms, ceremonial terms, devotional 
terms. Take a dictionary of ihc Bible, and scan the lists of subjects 
with which it deals, and it will probably he discovered that not one 
word in ten will be found in the vocabularies of barbaric speech. 

In some languages, such as Turkish, Bengali. Singalcse, and other 
tongues, there is a phraseology of deference which has given great 
trouble to the translator. In addressing an inferior one term would 
be used, another to an equal, and a different one from both to a 
superior. In Singalese the simple word " Thou " is To; but 
there are grades of fancy titles from " Your Honour " and " Your 
Worship " and " Your Serene Highness " up to the exalted " Oba- 
IValtansay" with its fulsome adulation. The habits of self-abase- 
ment before a superior, and the assumption of a self-importance in 
speaking lo an inferior have established the use of such pronouns, 
and in accordance therewith corresponding terminations of the verbs, 
conveying a flattering, a respectful, or a contemptuous meaning. 
How difficult to Iran-siatc into these languages the words addressed 
to God in prayer and praise, or the passages of personal appeal from 
God to man. or the words of our Lord to His disciples and their 
response to Him ! 

N'umeratives are occasions of serious stumbling at times. In some 
languages they are very elaborate and complete. Chinese is rich in 
them, for every class of nouti has its nunierative. In Caledonia the 



i 



^ 



THE BIBLE GIVEN TO THE NATIONS 



halibut is placed at the head of all fish, and it has its special ntimera- 
tive. The translator of the Scriptures, not knowing this, employed 
the numerative for halibut in the first edition of the Gospels when 
rciiderinR into the native tongue the words, " Where two or three are 
gathered together in my name there am \ in the midst of thcni," 
conveying the sense that where two or three halibut were found 
there our Lord would be! 

To acejuire the knowledge of an unwritten language without the 
help of granmiar, or dictionary, or teacher, or interpreter, is a task of 
stupendous difficidty. Gradually lo accumulate the native sounds 
for common words requires care as well as patience. It has to be ac- 
complished by the slow process of pointing to object after object, 
and making note of the sounds the native utters. In the hope tlifv may 
be the names you wish to gain, a process full of peril. When English 
people first went to Australia some of them one day, seeing the 
quadruped for which the country is famous take its an^azing spring, 
exclaimed, " What's that? " as if by the remotest chance the natives 
could have understood the question. Uut the reply came leaping from 
the lip. " Kang-garro, Kang-garro." It has beai softened down into 
kangaroo, the name by which the quadruped is known in every natural 
history in Europe and America; but it never was the name of tlie 
animal. " Kang-garro " simply means " We don't tmderiitand you." 

When Darwin visited Terra del Fuego he described the speech of 
the people in the sentence: " Their language is a language of clicks, 
and gnnils, and sc|ucaks, and hiccoiigbs," but such sottnds can not be 
reduced to writing by any European alphabet ; symbols must be made 
lo express them. Tlic dlflPiculties by which the translator is thus beset 
may be abundantly illustrated. In one of the South American lan- 
guages we see a word written " thlg " without a vowel. In Erro- 
mangan the word for " fever" is written tt.rzvx, as if bom of fever 
and delirium! More than forty alphabets and syllabaries, besides 
ideograms, have been employed in representing the soimds of lan- 
guages into which the Scriptures have been translated. 

No man living can tell how many languages are spoken in the 
world. Dr. Cust places the total at about 2,000. Out of these 2,(xx>. 
translations of the Scriptures have been made into 400, leaving 1.600 
yet to be dealt with. It is hopeless lo expect that even half of these 
will ever have the Scriptures translated into them, At the present 
rate of progress it would take centuries to accomplish it. But before 
the end of the next century it is probable that many of Uiese lan- 
guages will cease to be spoken. Yet, when this has been taken into 
account, much will remain to be done; and it will be linguistic and 
spiritual work of the most difficult kind. Vast areas of the world 
are still without a single portion of the Scriptures. 

It there were no new languages to be dealt with, the completion 
of translations in progress, the work of systematic revision, and the 
preparation of the Scriptures for the blind, would present a gigantic 
and costly task. Every translator and every Uible Society will say 
of each version, as Tindalc did of his New Testament: '* Count it 
as a thing not having his full shape . . even as a thing begun 

rather than finished, In time to come (if God have appointed us 



DIFFICULTIES IN BIBLE TRANSLATION 



»3 



tbercunto), we will give It his full sltajH--, ajid put out, if aught be 
added superfluously, and add to, if aught be overseen through negli- 
gence." Finality, even in the case of a single version, is still distant. 
The great difficulty is in finding dniy qualified men to give their 
whole lime to the work. The time has come when missionary Socie- 
ties should willingly place their best scholars at the service of Bible 
Societies, to give themselves wholly to this great task, so that such 
versions as are sorely needing revision may as speedily as possible be 
brought to that pcrfectncss which is so earnestly desired. 

The correlation of the physical forces has taught us that nothing 
in the material kingdom is ever lost. This surely has its counterpart 
in higher realms; and it finds an illustration in the work done by the 
old translators. They labored to give (lie Divine Oracles to people in 
their own tongues. But the Old Te.sUinHnt in the Greek of the 
Se\'enty, and the Bible in Syriac, Coptic, Latin, Ethiopic, Armenian, 
Georgian, and Arabic of the early Christian centuries, arc of invalua- 
ble worth to-day in determining the trustworthiness of the text of 
Scripture, and ilie right interpretation of passages which arc obscure. 
Besides, translations, both ancient and modem, are helpful in the 
preparation of new versions. 

Out of the translations of the Scriptures now existent in living 
tongues, no fewer than 319 have been made in languages which have 
been reduced lo writing for the puqiose iciV/iim the present century. 
\\'hen this is nnce accomplished, literature and education become 
possible amongst the people for whom the translation was made. 
And in thus fixing a language hy translating the Bible into it, the 
language itself undergoes a double process of refinement. The vul- 
garities of degraded life — words of indecency, and cruelty, and horror 
— arc not wanted ; they will therefore be cut off, and will perish by 
a process of elimination, while words not found — words which lift 
the thought lo God. words which link earth to heaven, words of the 
'livinc lift- — these must he made; and the language will he enriched 
by a process of addition. Nor is this all. Language falls into 
debasement and corruption when it expresses only or mainly the 
ideas of things material, or things of the natural man; whereas lan- 
guage itself is uplifted, enlarged, and refined hy being the medium 
of spiritual revelation and of fellowship with God. Who can tell 
the importance and the worth of Bible translation which thus starts so 
many languages upon their literary career hy charging them with the 
sanctifying influences of the great things of the Bible ! 

At the beginning of this century there were about fifty translations 
of the Scriptures in existence, but only thirty-five were in living lan- 
guages, and not the entire Bible in all of these. 

The total number now is over 400. This is verily a great achieve- 
ment. Nor is its greatness measured by the large figures, for many 
of the versions have been revised again and again, and brought to 
such a degree of excellence as leaves little to be desired. It can be 
said that nearly all the great languages of the zvorld have the entire 
Bible translated into them. Defining " a great language " as that 
spoken by ten millions of people or more, perhaps only Tibetan and 
Haussa have to be excluded from the list, anil both of these langiiages 



i 





THE BIBLE GIVEN TO THE NATIONS 

have in them translations of Uie New Testament and parts of the Old. 
In China the fjreat Wenh version is being; used over the eighteen 
provinces, as wel! as in Manchuria and Korea; the Mandarin trans- 
lation is in the vernacular of 200.000,000 of the people. In India, 1 
also, translations are prepared for peoples who count their numbers : 
by many millions. The entire continent of liurope is practically pro- | 
vided for; and whole nations here and there have all the sacred books 
made ready for their use in the lanjfuages commonly understanded of 
the people. Seven-tenths of the human race are believed to have the 
Scriptures translated into their tongues. 

Experience and Bible Tmulatlon 

Rev. Canon W. J. Kpmonds, B.D., British and Foreign Bible 
Society, Exeter, England." 

You will sue that there must be accumulating on both sides of the 
Atlantic in tlic great Bible Houses treasures of experience, of diffi- 
culties already encountered, and of the best ways in which to meet 
them, which must be of htrge advantage to future laborers if those 
results can be made available for them. The time has come when 
our translating work ought to be done upon more scientific principles 
than allowing a mere individual translator to go his own way, un- 
guided by all the gathered experience of the past ; and I not only look 
for this accumulated knowledge to be distributed amongst the laborers 
upon whom the continuation of this work has fallen, but I look to see 
it worked out in a kind of uiiiformlty of opinion as to the best ways 
of expressing divine truth to men. There is no more striking ex- 
ample of a gracious influence upon translators than the use of the 
word '■ Lord; " as we read our New Testament, as wc read a great 
part of the Old Testament in English, and as you watch the chastened 
and refined expressions of cultivated Christian men. you feel that 
there is a growing sensitiveness as to what word sliould be used. 

I was very much struck years ago, in reading Henry Martyn's 
journals — which I have read over and over again — with the sentiment 
which he expresses, which, on the English side, is no truer than it is 
on this side, though the forms of government may be diiTcrent. He 
says: ''The royal books in the Hible have suffered more than any 
other books from want of dignlly in the men who translated them." 
Without adopting that opinion, and only using it as an illustration, 
it will help you to see what I mean. 

If one man gives his way of translating the name of God, and 
another his way, and another yet his way, and discards, or is not 
aware of the process of thought and reverence through which other 
minds have gone, he !.« losing an opportunity of weighing his own 
judgment by the collective judgment uf his predecessors, and, in fact, 
he is sacrificing centuries uf past experience. It is only the Bible 
Societies that can help a man that way, and I trust that all the great 
Bible Societies will more and more compare notes and make them- 
selves into a standing committee of translation to ofTer guidance to 
young translators, and spare the missionaries the mistakes into which 
they are very liable to fall. 

*M«liMn Atcouc Reforined Church, May i. 



EXI-EKICNCE ANU BIBLE TRANSLATION 



«s 



A second remark I Mrould like Cn make is that over against Uie 
difficulties which have been named, there are certain facilities also 
in a Iranslalor's way. Whilst there are difficulties in the names of 
gems, in the high truths of life, or in certam chapters of the Book 
of Revelation which describe the City of God, there are extraordinary 
facilities for the expression of the deepest spiritual truths, bound 
up with the languages of the very simplest of human beings who 
ever spoke at all. 

Let me give you just one illustration of what I mean : The Telugus 
are at a low stage of civilLzation, yet speaking a most beautiful lan- 
guage, however narrow it may be, which will do the very aston- 
ishing work which the translator has come to do. I will take a. 
specimen : 

These people wear very little rlntlnng. Their knowledge of the 
world they live in is extremely limited. One day I was standing at 
the edge of a village, IcokJnj^ through a clearing in the jungle at 
a village a good way off, and i said to a man ; " From this village 
to that one, how far is it; what is the distance?" His answer was; 
" Far." He could not give the distance in leagues or miles, but could 
only say " near " or " far." Tliat was the extent of his geography ; 
his sense of distance. New York lo Fhiladi-lphia, or New York to 
London; a place was "near" or "far." Now, if he were being 
examined for geoj^raphy on our side of tht- wattr — and t understand 
you are stricter here — I need not say that he would not pass. But 
live set his knowledge down as one of the requirements necessary 
'^to a Bible translator in his translation of the message to man. 

Take now the parable of the Prodigal Son : how much geography 
must iis translator know? How much must he communicate to the 
man to whom he wishes lo convey the message that " whoever is 
far away from Ciod may find his way back to God ? " 

Take the man I have spoken of as your companion. Ix>ok at 
him in the scantiness of his clothing, and look at him in the narrow- 
ness of his knowledge, and set yourself down to the task'. " A cer- 
tain man had two sons." 1 think I can promise you that you will 
find in every land^thc smallest land where tliere is a family — words 
that will run to that, at any rate, a father and two sons; "and the 
)-ounger " — you must have a wort! for that ; they distinguish between 
their children — " said to his father. ' Give me the portion of goods 
that falls lo me.' " There is always something that the poorest of 
ihcm ixjssesses. and as there arc in India lawsuits about the smallest 
points of property, you can have a very good idea that the youngest 
knows his share, and the eldest sees to his share, where the family 
system does not prevail. " And he took his journey into a far 
country." Now comes in your geography. " A far country." We 
say a place is near or a place is far. Now. then, has not that man 
in his language provided vou with one of the most essential words that 
you can possibly require in (he revelation of this part of the Divine 
love to men ? '* He took his journey into a far country." And 
when he comes back all the geography that is wanted for that part of 
the process is the word that will translate: "When he was yet a 
great way off, his father ran and fell on his neck and ki.«sed him." 



1 




I 

r 




THE BIBLE GIVEN TO THE NATIONS 

WeH, I undertake to say that there is no language on Ihc face of 
ihc carlh where tlic translator would not sit down iind have a com- 
fortable feeling, if lie will be able to get through the parable of the 
Prodigal Son. Whoever has done that successfully lias translated 
the divine revelation of the Gospel uf the Lord Jesus Qirist. 

Now. let us take a score of such persons, and fomi them into a 
Christian Clmrch. willi years of Christian training, and Hft up their 
lives to spirituality. We can now pass from the region of the sim- 
plicity of the Gospels — as wc arc apt to think — to the region of dif- 
ficulty in the Hpistles. 

1 can do without a good many things that are in the Bible, as a 
translator, or I can sit <lown to cimipare notes with a translator, or I 
can write to the Bible Hmisc in Xt w York, if I am an American 
missionary, or to London, if I am an F.nglish missionary, and ask 
them how they do in such and such cases: if they can enlarge the 
vnrahulary and polish the translation? But I do not want to go to 
anybody for the heart and pith of the business. The missionary 
should stoop to fill the simplest words with the deepest thoughts. 
languages arc not to be measured so many words against so many 
words; and the value of a translation is not to be considered in its 
relative proportion — so many chapters accomplished and so many 
chapters to be accomplished. Divine revelation is a constant succes- 
sion cf liftings of the veil, and what is impossible at a certain stage 
of the language is the entire lifting of tlic veil. 

These points shoulcl be kept in mind when dealing with translators 
of the Scriptures. There are whole Bibles, entire translations of the 
Scriptures. There are many more translations of the New Testa- 
ment part of the Scriptures, and there is still a larger nvmibcr of the 
translations of the four gospels of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Now, I am in no hurry to see these great Gospels become whole 
copies of the New Testament; still less in a hurry to sec the New 
Testament become the entire Bible. As knowledge increases; as the 
missionaries are able to confer with the cultivated and thoughtful 
native flock, then, in the fullness of time comes the compl^^te Bible, 
from its beginning to its end : but. in the meantime, by a divine law, 
the blessing and the joyfulncss of which it is impossible to exagger- 
ate, the meaning of the entire Bible will gather itself for human 
edification into far narrower bounds. I have seen in the early morn- 
ing as the sun rises dewdrops hanging on to every leaf, the sun re- 
flecting in every drop; not always of the same size; some drops were 
smaller, others larger, but there was always someiiow a sense of 
relationship; the larger the drops, the larger the relationship. And 
so it is with the translations of these Scriptures. There is a smaller 
reflection of divine love in one than in the other ; but it is real, and 
so far it is relative to the state which the convert has reached. 

MisioiiAric* as Kbie TraiuUton 

Rev. C. H. Daniels. D.D., Secretary, American Board of Com- 
missioners for Foreign Missions* 
There is no more impressive department of foreign missionary 

*Ceninl Prnbyierbn Church, April n. 



I 



I 



I 

I 



UISSlGNARiES AS BIBLE TRANSLATORS ft? 

work than that which is associated with the dissemination of the 
Christian Scriptures. No triumphs of missionary work can tell such 
thrilling stories as the stories of the circulation of God's Word. 
The great Rihie Societies came into existence coincidently witli lI»o 
great missionary Boards of our churches. In sympathy and in har- 
iDony they have been working, lo, these many years, and the achieve- 
ments are great and will count as great in the kingdom of God in 
the future. 

Looking over the history of one of our missionary Boards, not long 
ago, I found that its missionaries had during the eighty or ninety 
years' history of the Board, taken Iwenly-ninc unwritten languages 
and reduced them to writing, and had given the Rihle in whole or in 
part in every one of those languages, and I felt when I discovered 
those facts that had they been the only achievement of the great 
missionary work of the years, it would have amply and wonderfully 
paid the cost in money and the sacrifice in life and comfort. I was 
ver>- deeply impressed with the story of a young man whom I knew 
quite well. He was once the slave of Joe Davis, the brother of 
Jefferson Davis, president of the Confederacy. He was educated 
at Fiske University, one of the missionary schools at Nashville. He 
took his theology at Oberlin, Ohio. He was appointed a missionary 
under the care of the American Board, and sent to Africa. He found 
a people without an alphabet ; he gave them ours. For six or seven 
long years he struggled with the language, and finally came back 
to this country with a portion of the Word of God translated for 
that people, and our Bible Society gave it to us that the people there 
might read. This was one of the victories of the cross of Christ. 

On one day in April ! went into the compositors' room in the Bible 
House in this city with a company of gentlemen. There was one 
man in our midst who took our attention, a tall man. gray-haired, 
with pallid features. He bad in his hand a piece of paper. I knew 
the letters but I could not speak the words. The compositor quickly 
put those letters in place and rolled off the proofshect. 1 recall how 
carefully that man read that passage, and his wife read it, too. They 
wanted it correct : and hardly was thai work completed when the 
tears were rolling down his cheeks, and he uttered a prayer of thanks- 
giving to Almighty God. He alone was qualified to offer that prayer. 
He had hardly said the " .-Xmen," when some of us lifted the grand 
old doxology; and, having sung il together in that place, we went 
through the building to the pressroom. We went with one of the 
superintendents or foremen, who took us to a press that was silent. 
Then the young lady who had it in charge pulled the lever and 
beltc<l on the power. The great fingers of the press took hold of the 
sheets of paper one after another, and we saw the printing of the last 
form of a Bible. That gray-haired man bad bec]! sent as a mis- 
sionary to one of the Pacific islands.* He found the people without 
an alphabet. He gave them our alphabet. He gave them a grammar; 
he gave them a dictionary: and be gave thtni a Bible, and on that 
morning the last verse of that Bible was put into print. Before the 

'The Rev ITin« nincrham. n.P..who rrducnl the lancna|7c of the Gllberi IsUnda lo 
vr1tfa>|[.aHd mn^Uinl htm] carried thfciii|[h the |<reti the «Bti(c Bible. 



( 




THE BIBLE GIVEN TO THE NATIONS 

day was through, the American Kible Society gave us in bound 
form the whole Bible from beginning to end. Here was another 
illustration of the many victories of this class. 

The Bibk aaa. Fsctor in Mialoiu 

Rev. jAiiES Thomas, Secretary, British and Foreign Bible So- 
ciety, Loniion* 

For reselling the women of Eastern lands, who are wholly beyond 
the reach of male missionaries, the Uritish and Foreign Bible Society 
provides over 550 Bible-women, who not only read the Scriptures 
to their fellow -country women, but teach them to read. An average 
of nearly 32,000 women a week are taught by these agents, and 
about 2,000 women are annually taught tu read sufficiently well to 
be able to read the New Testament for ihcniselvcs. 

Colporteurs, loo, have grown to be an army. They come into con- 
tact with those not reached by the missionary — in their homes, and 
shops, and fields. Every mission field where the natives are a read- 
ing people affords numberless illustrations of colportage work pre- 
paring the way for tlie mission station. Ltt me draw my illustrations 
from China, and from tlic work of the Britisli and Foreign Bible 
Society there. Its coljxjrteurs talk to the people, read to the people, 
invite the people to question tlii-in, and they sell the Scriptures to those 
willing to buy. On the second, or third, or fifth visit tliey find a few 
deeply interested in the truth of the gospel and wishing for further 
instruction. The colporteurs will direct such inquirers to the ncaresi 
mission stations, telling them that if they went or sent there probably 
some one would come to live among tliem to " leach them the way 
of God more perfectly." Mrs. Isabella Kishop. the well-known trav- 
eler and authoress, who has lately relumed from China, addressing 
a great meeting in Kensington, London, said: " I was laid up for six 
weeks at Mukden with a broken arm: and not a day passed but five 
or six villagers came in and asked the missionaries to send Christian 
teachers into their villages. 'I'hcse, it was said, had heard of Chris- 
tianity from the liible Society's colporteurs." The Rev. J. B. Ost, 
of the Church Missionary Society, wrote a short time ago: " Your 
eolpnrteurs are doing a most valuable, as well as a most important 
\vork. and I feel that the society whose agent T am. owes the Bible 
Society a large debt of gratitude for the work of these men. They 
are gospel pioneers in many places, and personally I feci T can not be 
too grateful for their hearty and useful co-operation in the I-ord's 
work." The Rev. F,. F. Knickerbocker (C.I.M.) wrote: "A few weeks 
ago we examined six candidates for baptism, a direct fruit of col- 
portage. At another new place a little band of people have begun 
to gnther for worship each Sunday as the direct result of cotportage." 
The Rev. G. H. Jose wrote; "At Tienhai the colporteurs have 
opened up two new centers for us in the heart of the mountains, 
each distant about fifteen English miles from our nearest station and 
much farther from any other work." " And on some islands close to 
the Tai-Chow coast there are several hundred inquirers meeting reg- 
ularly by themselves for worship, who first heard the gospel from 

* Madison Aveniir RcfrirniPdCIiurch, May r. 




THE BIBLE AS A FACTOR IN MISSIONS 



»9 



your two colporleurs." Such testimony can be mnltiplicd indefinitely. 
Let us sec to it that we worthily estimate the importance of the 
work and deal with it as its worth demands. It is an entail, not a 
possession. It belongs as much to those who come after us as to 
ourselves, and we have no manner of right, by anything that we may 
do or leave undone, to deprive those who come after us of any of 
the benefits which wc can bestow upon it. The dead have their 
right in it and our successors have a just claim upon it. And think- 
ing of both let us be careful thai this sacred trust shall not suffer 
damage at our hands. 

Rev. John Fox, D.D,, Secretary. American Bible Society* 

When the Son of God jjws forth conquering and to conquer, 
followed by His armies, the Bible is by no means impedimenta, bag- 
gage that is to be carried in the rear, but, like the Ark of the Covenant, 
it must lead the way ; for not only is it a standard, but a weapon in Uie 
evangelistic conquest of tlie world. We know that it was profound 
conviction of the absolute authority of l!ic Word of God that has 
led to the formation of the great l?iblc Societies of Christendom. 

Now it has already been rightly said, therefore, lliat the Bible 
Society movement — we may so designate it — is one of the phases of 
the foreign mission movement tn this century. It is true, indeed, 
that at first the Bible Societies were not a foreign mission movement 
at all. 

But they have been drawn into the current of the great foreign 
mission movement, and they certainly constitute one of its mast im- 
portant phases; and they must hold a vital and central relationship 
to the whole foreign missionarj* organization, for to some extent 
they have the rcsijonsible custody of the Scriptures; not that ihey 
have exclusive right in any sense ; not without full recognition that 
the missionaries in the field and the Church at home are thf care- 
takers of these precinu.s treasures, but still in a special sense it may 
be .^aid of the Bible Societies that to them are committed tlic oracles 
of God. 

It is a tremendous responsibility oven to supervise the translation 
and publication of Gull's Wonl. especially in this day. which is the 
age of Bible translation. And when wc consider the work of dis- 
tribution we find that at the present lime a large percentage, certainly 
more than half of the Bibles issued, go into foreign countries and 
arc used directly for carrying on the work of foreign missions. It is 
obvious, therefore, that the special theme now under discussion needs 
the most careful consideration, that this special function in the body 
of Christ be co-ordinated with ulher functions. Now, when we con- 
template the history of these societies, one fact needs to be remem- 
bered: 1"hc Bible Society is the natural and inevitable corollary of 
the Reformation. It was not possible in the medieval period, even 
after the invention of printing. George Borrow, the brilliant English- 
man, whose book, " The Bible in Spain." is a classic in English litcra- 
hire. said that " The Bible Society is one of the few Protestant insti- 
tutions which Rome fears, and for which, therefore, she has any 

* Centnl Preabrtcrlui Cburcb, April 04- 



i 




THE BIBLE GIVEN TO THE NATIONS 

respect." It has the melancholy honor of having l>ccn denounced 
from the papal chair as a pernicious and pestilent institution. Its 
genius and its history are instinct with the spirit of revolt against 
papal usurpation; it has, therefore, had sonic of its largest triumphs 
in Roman Catholic countries. 

1 coutd not get a better illustration of the true relation of Bililc 
translation and circulation to foreign missionary advance than the 
work that is licginning in the Philippine Islands, tn ilhistration of 
the progress of the g-ospel in the PhiHpi>incs let me tell you a little 
story that we have loved to tell : A New York woman had a little 
mission on the wharves here in New York among the Spanish sailors. 
She used to come to our offices oftentimes to get Bibles for them, 
and one day she came and brought with her some Filipino sailors. 
.SiJcaking Spanish iicrself. she took that beautiful verse, " God so 
loved the world tliat He gave His only begotten Son." and she trans- 
l.iied, or rather got those sailors to translate it, tlirough the Spanish 
into the Tagalog. the language of the tribe Aguinaldo has been lead- 
ing or misleading. And then I said to her, " How do you know 
ycur translation is correct? " " Ah." she said, with a woman's quick 
wit. " when I had printed a proof of it, I gave it to another sailor 
and had him translate it back into Spanish, and when it tallied I knew 
my translation was correct." Willi a few other verses she printed 
it on her own press in the Tagalog and Visayan languages, and by 
the hands of Filipino sailors this gospel was carried into the islands 
before the great societies were able to move. 

The Roman Catholic priesthood have had exclusive jurisdiction in 
the Philippine Islands for the last 300 years, and we may not dispute 
that they have done some useful things in spite of the obvious cor- 
ruption of the friars to-day. During those 300 years the priests and 
their colleapies never translated a single Gospel or a single book into 
the language of those tribes. And lo ! the moment their power is 
broken there seems a universal demand for the Book among the pecn 
pte of those islands. 

This illustrates the nature of the work. I could almost indefinitely 
add illu.strations. In Cuba, for instance, for twelve years before the 
Spanish-American War. under the opposition of the officials in large 
measure, and the discouragement and. if it were possible, the perse- 
cution of the priesthood, there were 40.000 copies of God's Word 
circulated before there could be very much organized niisstonary 
labor. In Porto Rico we are just beginning; and now the simple 
problem there is the extensive and rapid circulation of God's Word. 
So we can go down through Latin America. 

Outside of these countries, in which we have a foundation, so to 
speak, in a certain knowledge at least of the rudimentary facts about 
the gospel, there lies that great outside world, the utter pagan, the 
outer pagan circle of nations, where missions have been begun. There 
are at this time, I suppose, not less than eight or ten translations 
and revisions proceeding in various Chinese languages; and what- 
ever conclusion the great occidental nations may make about the 
open door, we can not but hope and believe that God has an open-door 
policy for China, and what He expects from us is an open-Bible 
policy in every language of that great empire. 




THE BIBLE AS A FACl'Olt IN MISSIONS 



31 



There arc great questions that are by no means easy of sctllement 
which perplex the progress of this work ; but He who gave the Word 
will not withhold wisdom to giiidc us in the dispensing of it. The 
preaching of the cross is to them that pcrisli foolishness, and the 
circulation uf tlie Bible often seems like fooHshncss to its friends, 
and still more to the enemies of the cross. The answer to all criti- 
cism is 111 send it forth with freer hand, with a larger radius of 
activity, better translated, and put into the form most suited to 
modern times. 



Rev. E. W. Parker. D.D., Missionary, Methodist Episcopal 
Church, India* 

The Bible Societies having given us translations of the Bible, we 
use colporteurs, supported hy the Bible Societies, in scattering the 
Word of God. A man is chosen hy the Bible Society and sent to 
the missionary for a district over which the missionary has charge. 
The missionary keeps the accounts; he directs the man where to go; 
he takes a careful account of what the man docs, and then makes his 
report to the Bil)lc Society. A single gospel sells for two pice, some 
of them even for one pice. Two pice is less than one cent, so that any 
person can buy a ptirlion of Scripture, and a great many people buy, 
until the Word of the Lord is known among the young people of 
India very generally. 

A few years ago an arrangement was made by the Bible Society to 
put a New Testament into all the Government schools in the North- 
west provinces, I think, at least in the provinces where we were 
especially working. The Government permitted it if the teachers did 
not oljject. These Testaments were left in the Govennnenl school- 
houses or given to the teachers. They took them and put them among 
their other hooks. One of the young teachers, a Mohammedan, a 
very bright fellow, one afternoon was feeling out of sorts. He said 
lie didn't know what to do with himself, and he did not know what the 
matter was. He went to visit another one of the teachers of the 
school, and he told this teacher how he felt. He said, " I wish I had 
something to read or something to do." The teacher brought out the 
New Testament that had been left with him. He said, " Read this; 
this is the Christian's Btb!c; perhaps this will do you some good." 
That young Mohammedan took the New Testament and commenced 
to read. lie got over his dull feeling and read all night. The re- 
sult was that he went to the missionary to inquire more about it, and 
that man stands to-day among the leading preachers of our church 
in Northwest India, converted by the reading of one of the Gospels 
scattered by the Bible Society. 

Another Mohammedan, Rev. Zahur-ul-Hakk, listened to the 
>reaching of the Word, but was convinccfl by reading the New Tes^ 
iment. As he read the New Testament and compared it with his 
Koran, he said. " The Koran tells me that this is true; so if I obey 
my own book I must accept this as true. If I accept this as true, it 
destroys my Koran, for they both can not stand together." He be- 
,camc a sincere inquirer, was thoroughly converted, and has stood for 
ly years as a noble preacher of the gospel of Christ. 

'Ctfltnl Pmbrtci^an Chnrcb. April 14. 



4 




32 THE BIBLE CIVEN TO THE NATIONS 



AnoUier Mohaniniedan. an educalcd man, whose relatives stand to- 
day in very high positions in Government offices, had all hopes and 
promise of succeeding his father In his position. He get hold of a 
Testament and read it. He was able to study this book carefully 
and compare It with the Koran ; and as he studied and compared, 
he. too, became convinced that if the Koran was true, the Testament 
must be true, and they couldn't both be true; ?nd he. too. was thor- 
oughly converted, and his disciples in the Christian Church In India 
number more than 10,000 — the result of scattering' the Word. 

A Hindu merchant, going along with his merchandise, received 
the gift of a Testament in the Hindu language. He took the Testa- 
ment home and conimunced to read it, was struck with il, and night 
after night thai man used to shut himself away from the people so 
that no one about his home or among his friends sliould know that 
he was studying the Teslaineni. One morning 1 was astonished 
when he came to me and told me, " I am convinced it is true ; will 
you baptize me? " 1 said, " No, not now; let lis study it more." He 
studied it more, and finally he was baptized, and he with his family 
became strong members of the C'lmrch of Christ. 

Some Christian laymen offered prizes for boys in Government 
schools or in private seliools who would study portions of the Word 
of God and pass examinations in those portions. Of course, this 
has to be done outside the school, because the Bible can not be studied 
in a Government school. Well, now, scores, hundreds of young men 
from these schools are studying the New Testament and are passing 
these examinations year by year, and in this way the knowledge of 
the Word is being scattered among the young men of India, and 
when we preach the Word they understand us. 1 1 is so much seed 
sown to bring forth good fruit for the redemption of that land. 

The Nincteentli Century to the. Twentieth 

liDWAiin W. Oilman. D.D., Secretary, American Bible Society* 
I. The nineteenth century presents to tlic twentieth printed eopiesof 
the Holy Scri]jlures In about four hnndred Inngiiagcs as a part of 
the equijnnent witli which the wnrk of cvangeli7ation is tn he carried 
on in the years to come. Of these volumes 1 1 1 contain the Old and 
New Testaments entire; gi are New Testaments, and the remainder, 
less comprehensive as yet. indicate both a beginning and progress 
on more extensive lines-t It is estimated thai about one-tenth of 
these had been printed before 1800; the remainder may be taken as 
the product of Christian study and labor In the present century. 
As this enumeration refers only to distinct languages and dialects 
in which some part of the Hibfe has been published, it is important 
to add that In many of these languages there are two or more versions 
of the same book, or elaborate revisions embodying results of modem 
research and scholarship and forming an important part of the con- 
tribution of the present age to its successor. The greatness of this 
achievement becomes more ei,'ident if we note that a large number 

• Madlion Atcquc Refomcd Charcli. Kay i. 

f J. fiordun Wmi'i " Four Hunflrrd Tonffuej," rfwrd Enter. fSw, pnumrratet four hundred 
and six UnifvaRea and dialect* in whlcb Tcnions of Uw Scrtpturca bare been pi^lJihcd by aJl Um 
■odcdea and anenckft at worlt. 



M 



k. 



THE NINETEEN ril CKNTUHV TO THE TWENTIETH 



33 



I 



of these lantjnages have no recorded history or literature, being 
principally nuk- and unwritten, and only in these later years and by 
slow degrees reduced to writing and made available for the expres- 
sion of Christian truth. In the year 3468 Berthold. Archbishop of 
Maycncc. issued a decree prohihititiR the dissemination among the 
people of rehgious wurks in llie vernacular, on the ground that " the 
German language was incapable of expressing the deep truths of 
religion. " What would he liave thought of any attempt to spirit- 
ualize the speech of the Zulu or tlie Wagnnda? 

The reproduction of books by tlu- printing-press did not secure the 
immediate distribution of the Hihie among the nations. Luther's 
translation in German appeared in 1522. but it was two hundred years 
after that before any version of the Bible was ready for the millions 
dwelling in the valleys of the Indus and the Ganges, and still another 
hundred years before any similar work was accomplished for the 
hundreds of millions which swarmed upon the banks of the Hoang- 
Ho and the Yang-tse Kiang. It is some mark of progress then to 
say that the closing century passes on to its successor the Kihie 
complete in one hundred and eleven different tongues, and announces 
that preliminary steps have been taken to supply the Scriptures in 
three hundred more of the living languages of to-day. 

II. The nineteenth century presents to the twentieth a large 
accumulation of material relating to the history of modem ver- 
sions, and to the vast work yet to be accomplished in giving the 
Holy Scriptures to all tribes and people and tongues. The biogra- 
phies of translators, the journals of missionary boards, the annual 
reports of Bible societies, the archives of corresi>ondence extending 
over a century, supply an enormous amount of literature which 
ought to l>e utilized at an early tlay in the interests oi wise economy 
of labor and money, and the avoidance at the outset of mistakes due 
to ignorance and inexperience. The initial cost of making a version 
is loo great to be overlooked by those who are called nn to inaugu- 
rate and superintend it. Not every spoken dialect is worthy of being 
perpetuated by such a hook as the Hible. It is right to give bread 
to the perishing, but is it desirable for a population not exceeding 
250,000 souls, to perpetuate seven diflferent versions of the Scrip- 
tures, with a total circulation of three or four hundred volumes a 
year? 

It is a very interesting mark of progress to register the accession 
of a new version, or some new language, to the list of Bible transla- 
tions, but it is a serious question whether such a production is not 
likely to be still-bom unless some missionary is at hand to use the 
printed textbook as a manual from which to preach and expound 
the gospel of Christ. At the Missionary Conference of 1888. one 
well qualified to speak laid it down as a fundamental principle that 
" no Bible can be permanent that docs not spring out of the actual 
necessities of a living church." The translation of the entire Bible 
from the Hebrew and Greek into a barbarous tongue is the work 
of a lifetime, and few individuals have been able to accomplish it, 
and so it becomes a question of great practical importance whether to 
intrust such work to one or two, or to rely upon the joint labors of 



i 




$4 THE BIBLE (IIVEN TO THK NATIONS 

a commiltee to no one of whom the language is vernacular. It 
indeed be assumed that all work at the outset is tentative and Of 
to the revision of native scholars when such shall have been traiiM 
«p for the service, but meantime the usage of the first version 
come to have its firm hold on Christian thought, and even its ei 
may be almost ineradicable. 

On questions like these light is to be found in the recorded ex-' 
perience of those who have struggled with these intricate problems 
and have left records of their methods and results. 

III. A part of the gift which the nineteenth century passes on to 
the twentieth as a help to the e\"angelization of the world, is a greatly 
improved apparatus for work, accumulated during the past one 
hundred years. The fruits of modem scholarship, so largely devoted 
to linguistic study, are now available for the translator and interpreter 
of the Bible. Ancient versions help to elucidate the meaning of the 
writers. ArchEological investigations, coins, manuscripts, inscrip- 
tions, papyri, lend their aid. Researches in Oriental lands clear up 
doubtful passages. Every new translation is a commentary embody- 
ing the conclusions of a scholar. Then wide ditTusion of discoveries, 
and the free, uninterrtiptcd communication between all civilized 
nations, make the translation of any book of the Bible a very different 
thing from what it was when Judson toiled over his Burmese ver- 
sion, or Bingham and his associates were translating the Scriptures 
into Hawaiian. 

IV. The Christianity of the nineteenth century transmits also its 
profound and abiding conviction that the Bible has come to the earth 
to stay. 

The conscrvarism of Christian thought, so profouiKlly impressive, 
is perhaps in no respect more marked than in the history of Bible 
versions. It is Luther's Bible that, with slight revision, holds its 
own among the Germans after nearly four hundred years. The 
Spanish version of Cassiodoro de Rcina. printed in 1569, with some 
modifications introduced by \"alera in 1602, though confessedly an- 
tiquated and often obscure, is still held in high honor as against 
modern competitors. Tlie authorized English version, prepared under 
the auspices of King James in 161 t, remains "the version in com- 
mon use " among English-speaking people all around the world. In- 
dividual scholars without number have shown how it might be 
bettered by obvious and unqueslioncti improvements. Companies of 
devout and gifted scholars on both sides of the Atlantic, after de- 
voting years to a work of critical revision, challenge the world to 
accept their changes, but the conservatism of the age is shown by the 
unwillingness of the people to have the new supplant the old. It 
is not the Bible societies that have stood in the way. but the pro- 
found attachment of the people to the identical phrases which they 
have heard from infancy and which are wTought into the literature 
of three centuries. Such attachment to a form of soimd words illus- 
trates a deep-seated reverence for the book itself, and is proof of a 
conviction that an inheritance so valuable should not only be trans- 
mitted to our posterity, but imparted as speedily as may be to all 
ihc world. 




THE NINETEENTH CBNTURV TO THK TWENTIETH 



35 



I V. The nineteenth century assures the twentieth of its firm convic- 

that the Bible is to be more than e\*er a factor in the world's life 

a help to the cvangeHzation of the nations, the overthrow of false 

)ns and the building up of the kinjjdom of Christ. 

the early part of the century the attempt was made by some to 

that ■' the circulation of the IJible without the Book of Common 

lycr would do harm." Others expressed the fear that it might 
engender fanaticism. MissinnaritLs in China objected to sending the 

)k among the livalbcn as .simply " casting jjcarls before swine."' 
inch fears find little expression at this day and ihc trend is the other 
way. In some lands even the Roman Calbullcs seem to be yielding. 
and are giving the Scriptures at least to their adherents, printing 
the Bible in Arabic, and |)arts of the New Testament for the Chinese, 
the Japanese, and the Gilbert Islanders. 

One can hardly question the statement that in Christian lands the 
Scriptures are to-day more carL-fully studied than ever before in the 
world's history. 

The contents of the book are more valuable Ihrin the vessel which 
holds them, and the book itself transct-nds in importance and value 
the various s[K'culations of men about them, the interpretations which 
diflferent ages have given them, and all reconstruction of the truth in 
theological systems, and formulas, and creeds. The Bible Society 
platform allows the largest liberty of individual speculation and in- 
quiry, but provides that its adherents agree in their estimate of its 
immeasurable importance to mankind, and the need of encouraging 
its wider circulation in intelligible forms of speech. The angelic song 
which one night floated down from the skies above Rethlcbem coubl 
never be appreciated as a gospel message of peace and good-will in 
Honolulu, or Natal, or Muscat until it was reproduced with the liquid 
Hawaiian sounds, or the Zulu click, or the Arabic guttural — for every 
man in the tongue in which he was born. To help that consummation 
has been part of the aim of the nineteenth century — to disseminate the 
written word in living human tongues, and the duty has not been 
done away by the fact that the Bib(e itself has been subjected to the 
criticism of students and ecclesiastics. Men's changing opinions 
about the contents and structure of the Bible and its various readings 
do not hinder or arrest its power. 

The law and the gospel thus intrusted to the men of the nineteenth 
century, and to those of the twentieth as well, is seed-like in character, 
and will assuredly develop in stem, and foliage, and flower, and fruit, 
in human thought and experience, as men ponder the truth and are 
led by the Holy Spirit to appreciate and understand it. l.'i>on tlie 
departure of the pilgrims from Ley<len, John Robinson laid on them 
his solemn and memorable injunction : " The Lord has more truth 
yet to break forth from His holy Word. ... 1 beseech you, 
remember it, it is an article of your church covenant that you be 
ready to receive whatever truth shall he made known unto you from 
the written word of God." Bishop Butler argued that we are not 
rashly to suppose that we have arrived at the true meaning of the 
entire Bible, " for," he said, " it is not at all incredible that a book 
which has been so long in the possession of mankind should contain 



i 



3« 



THE BIBLE GIVEN TO THE NATIONS 




maBy truths as yet undiscovered ; for all the same phenomena and 
the same faculties of investigation from which such great discov- 
eries in natural knowledge have been made in the present and last 
age, were equally in the possession of mankind several thousand 
years before." Copernicus promulgated a theory of the heavens 
sd far astray and subversive of current belief that in l6l6 it was 
ctimleninctt by a pajial bull. F.vcn to-day, while devout students of 
sacred history arc announcing conclusions at variance with what 
has bpen held before and inherited from the fathers, and throwing 
doubt upon the genuineness and authenticity of accepted texts, they 
give us to understanri that such parts of the several books as they 
(lecm most identical with the original seem to them more than ever 
instinct with life and power. 

Not until the earth shall cease to yield its harvest for the support 
of human life will the Rook cease to he available for the maintenance 
of spiritual life and for the attainment of men's highest welfare. 

VI. Once more, and finally, the nineteenth century lays upon the 
twentieth the injunction to carry on to its completion the work which 
now has only been begun. 

Not to speak of ntimerous languages and dialects which thus far 
have never been enriched with any part of the Holy Scriptures, three 
hundred tmfinished versions of these sacred writings are to be re- 
examined, and if found worthy are to be supplemented by that 
which in each case is lacking. Not one Gospel alnne, but the four 
Gospels; not the four Gospels alone, but the Epistles as well; 
not the New Testament alone, but the things written in the law 
of Moses and in the Prophets and the Psahns, are the property 
of the nations. When our Lord Jesus came back from Paradise 
to Jerusalem and from the companionship of the dead to the dear 
fellowship of His chosen disciples. He brought them no new dis- 
closures from beyond the bourn, but their hearts burned within them 
as He unfolded the Hebrew Scriptures and told them bow ancient 
prophecies were fulfilled in His death and resurrection. What Moses 
and Elijah may have had to say to Him in Hades was of small mo- 
ment, but it was important for them to understand the connection be- 
tween the things which had been told to the fathers through the proph- 
ets and those told in later days by the Son ; and from this we learn that 
the Church of the future must be *' built u]ion the foundation of the 
Apostles and pruphets, Jesus Christ Himself being the chief corner- 
stone, in whnm all the building fitly framed together growclh unto a 
holy teiupk- in the I^rd." The Bible work of the nineteenth century 
is but a beginning, and it would be disastrous to suspend it at the 
paint now reached. On the contrary, let the twentieth century carry 
it on to perfection " that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly 
furnished unto all good works." 




CHAPTER X; 

LITERATURE AS AN EVANGELISTIC AGENCY 

Need of Helps to Undersundlng the Bible— Office of ChrlBttan Llteratore id 
Evangelization— Whal Has Been Done— Practical Suggestions for the 
Future. 



N<cd of Helps to Underttatuliag the Bible 

W. J. Slowan, Esu., Secretary, National Bible Society of Scot- 
land* 

It is ihe purpose of this paper to record certain recent develop- 
ments in the mctliocis of the National Bible Society of Scotland, more 
particularly ( i ) its recognition that other Christian literature has 
its lises in accompanying the Scriptures; and (2) that in certain cir- 
cumstances it is at once lawful and expedient for Bible Societies to 
" publish edilions of the Scriptures with summaries, lieadings, and 
brief explanations." 

The Society dtK-s not propose to add to tlie sacred text comment or 
note of any sectional or sectarian character. Brought face to face 
with Roman Catholic and heathen jMjpnlations, it has been unable to 
withhold from ignorant or prejudiced readers such explanations as 
may serve in the absence of preacher or evangelist to make more clear 
the meaning of the Gospel Message. 

The Edinburgh Bible Society was the first to sanction the sale by 
its colporteurs of otlicr Christian literature along with the Scriptures 
—its only reciiiiremcnt being that such literauirc should Itc wholly 
unsectarian, and that Rible Society funds should not be expended in 
tlie distribution of it. 

But it was not till the National Bible .Society of Scotland began 
work in China that somewhat more was demanded of it, and thai by 
an urgent and united missionary appeal, in which all nationalities and 
churches on the field combined. The Society was told on all hands 
that the Word of God was rarely understood by the ordinary reader. 
and that though printed in their own " cliaracter." it was lo the 
Chinese as one speaking in an unknown tongue. 

When the mi.-isionaries met in general conference at Shanghai in 
1877. they passed two rc;:oUitions. urging Bible Societies (l) lo 
allow the sale of tracts and other religious works along with Bibles 
and Testaments; and (2) to accompany the Holy Scriptures designed 
for circulation in Qiina, with a short preface and brief unsectarian 
notes. In their second resolution the niissionarie.s were in advance 
of all the Bible Societies, and the only response to their commnnicatinn 
was the consent given by this Society to the publication by its agent 

* lUdison Avenue Refonned Ctiufch, April 15. 



1 



A 




38 LITERATURE AS AN EVANGELISTIC AGENCY 




of an edition of the New Testament in Pekinese ^!andari^, with 

cliapter headings and maps. This edition, issued in 1878, became 
the pioneer of the new movement. 

In 1S86, in deference to the reiterated expression of missionary 
opinion, the Board declared its " willingness to consider such anno- 
tations on the Gospel of St. Matthew, or other Gospel, as might be 
furnished by a rep r;:seuta live coumiittee of missionaries, as being 
in ihetr opinion sulTicienl to remove difficulties and misapprehensions 
from the mind of thi: ChiiiesL- reader, and to make plain the gospel 
message." This resolution, however, remained in abeyance for some 
years. In I-'ehrnary, 1892, in a conference between a committee of 
the Board and six China ntissiunaries, all the missionaries present 
were of unc mind that the Bible must be presented in a more intelli- 
gible form, if the great object of the Bible Societies were not to be 
to a considerable extent nullified through the inability of the people, 
from tht'ir isolation an<3 national peculiarities, to understand much of 
ihc sacrt-d text. They did not atteinpl to remove objections lo the 
text itself, hut simply lo make its meaning clear. The result of this 
conference was a new revision of the draft notes and chapter-head- 
ings on the lines thus suggested, which, in the course of a few months, 
was submitted to and unanimously accepted by the Board, 

The draft of annotations on St. Mark's Gospel was first published 
in a tentative edition, and by the end of i893f 70,000 copies had been 

published. 

It only remains to add that in 1899 the Society pitblishcd, at its own 
pres.s in Hankow, the four Gospels and the book of Act-s both in 
Wi'nli and Mandarin, with a brief introduction, chapter-headings, 
map of Palestine, and one colored illustration in each book. These 
five books must still be accepted as a tentative edition, the annotations 
being subject to further revision and possibly condensation ; but 
they serve to indicate the point the Society has reached in its en- 
deavor to meet the appeal from the missionaries of China, and to open 
the Scriptures, so far a? a Bible Society may, to the apprehension of 
the ignorant and non-Christian reader. In all. 668,000 copies of the 
Society's .Annotated Scriptures have now been issued. 

Offkc.oi Qtffitl&a Lhcntufc in EviogeUzatfoo 

Rev. Canon W. J. Edmonos, B.D., British and Foreign Bible 
Society, Exeter* 

I have heard since 1 have been here, from one and another of the 
speakers, expressions indicative of very imperfect sympathy with 
the work of education and with the office of literature in the spread- 
ing of the kingdom of God, and I will say frankly thai I do not 
agree with those opinions. I think myself that it is the will of the 
Almighty to fultill lo the children of men in these days what was 
promised to them in days long gone by ; that they should find that 
every good and every perfect gift is from above and cometh down 
from the Father— not of light, but of ihe lights — the many lights 
which are shining, all with the same clear purpose of leading men to 
Him. If so. there must be a place in missions for education, and 
there must be a p!ace for literature. 

•Ctntial Prtshylerbft Chmrh, April -jj 



I 




THE KXETKR IHKJK 



39 



I 



t 



* 



I 



The city of Exeter is distinguished in one respect. There are 
many larger libraries in Enp^land, and possibly some cathedrals in 
England may have a larger library, but wc beat them all in respect to 
one volume, which, by the character of its contents and by the 
uniqueness of its value, is called everywhere In England the Exeter 
Book. 

When I-atin literature died in Christendoni and there was a great 
literary silence from one end of Europe- to the other, that silence 
of intellectual torpor and death was broken by one still small voice; 
and if you listened to hear whence the new literary voice was coming, 
you would discover that the common race to which we all belong 
was the first to gi%T itself a literature. The first morning- star of 
literature, after nighl had fallen upon the old literature, was in the 
Anglo-Saxon language, and the Exeter Book contains the earliest 
collection of that literattire W'hich there is in Old England. 

Now, if you will look into that literature to see where it borrowed 
from and on what foundation it built itself again, the answer is ex- 
ceedingly satisfactory. The first poem in the Exeter collection is 
a poem founded upon the life of our F^Drct. English literature^ a 
literature now of fourteen hundred years and more in age, is founded 
in a poem in honor of our Lord Jesus. It is called " The Christus." 
It traces the incarnation, the life of our Lord. His death. His 
triumph beyond our ken, Ilis ascension. His supreme authority; 
and. having done that, the English genius breaks out into other 
poetry and into history, and finally falls into playfulness, and the 
l)Ook winds up with eighty or ninety riddles, some of which are 
doing more or less useful duty stilt. 

This is that Exeter Book; but along with that book there came to 
Exeter exactly in the year 1050 a companion hook, a Latin book 
of poetry by the poet Statins. I do not mind telling you that I 
should pass a very bad examination in the poelry. but I know enough 
to know why it was there, and why the first Disbop of Exeter, along 
with that book of English poetry, brought a book of Latin poetry 
written by the poet Statius. The answer to it is full of interest. 
and bears closely upon our present work. Stdtius is a |x>et men- 
tioned in Dante. When Hantc went through those unpleasant and 
unattractive regions which the skill of his genius has made tolerably 
bearable to read about, uncler the charge of the poet Virgil, in one 
of the less undesirable quarters of those mysterious rcgion.t he en- 
muntcred the poet Statius: and the fjueslion wa.s askt-d by Virgil, 
how it was that he became Christian? That is not exactly the way 
in which the question was put. He put it in the dinlect of that day. 
lie said, "What made you follow the fisherman?" "Why," said 
Statius. turning to Virgil, " it was you : it was you that did it. 
Your poetry first made me a poet and the substance of your poetry 
tnade me a Christian," and, (|uoting a bit of V'irgil, a prediction in 
Virgil of the Golden Age, and interpreting it by Christianity, he 
added, " That is what made me a Christian." 

Now, when a good man speaks slightingly of the office of literature 
in the work of bringing in the kingdom of God, I nsk whether in 
the twentieth century we are to be less believing in literature than 




J 



40 



LITEKATUBE AS AN EVANGELISTIC ACENCV 




they were in the tenth and the eleventh, and whether in these days we 
are to fail below the level of the first liishop of Exeter, and to ex- 
clude from our interests and to shut out from the instrumentalities 
which open the way to truth and righteousness and peace, the aid 
that is to be given by literature and by education? 

In the conversion of England such things had their place and 
office, and under the Holy Spirit's guidance they had their large 
success; and that which happened in old time to our forefathers will, 
through our instrumentality, happen elsewhere. 

S'cps Already Taken for Providing; Christtan Literature 

Rkv. RiLHAKi) Lovf-nr. M.A.. Sccrciary, Religious Tract So- 
ciety, London* 

Looked at from what we hold to be the true standpoint, the nine- 
teenth century has been more a century of experiment and appren- 
ticeship than of achievement in missionary enterprise. The great 
victory lies still in the future; the hardest campaigns have but just 
begnin. 

Especially is this true in the department of Christian literature. 
Throughout the century devoted students have been at work; much 
Iioncst labor has been done, much blessing has flowed from this 
labor. Too often, unfortunately, the laborers have been able to spend 
only a fraction of their time, and onEy fragments of their energy, 
in the production of Christian literature. Hence, if we inquire what 
progress in the various mission fields has been made toward sup- 
plying an adequate Christian Itlerature for the growing communi- 
ties of native Christians, especially for the wider circle, who. while 
non-Christian, are being leavened in Christian thought, we are told 
by those best qualified to judge that very little has been done. For 
the most part this duty, whenever possible, has been relegated by the 
great missionary societies to the leading tract and book societies. 

The chief of these, taking Ihem in the order of foundation, are: 
the Society for the Promntion of Christian Knowledge, the Religious 
Tract Society, the British and Foreign Bible Society, the .American 
Bible Society, the American Tract Society, the National Rihie So- 
ciety of Scotland, and the Christian Vemacnlar Ednratinn Society. 
now the Christian Literature Society of India. Other Bible and tract 
Societies in Britain and other lands, less Intluential and not so well 
equipped, have since sprnng up and are doing useful work. 

The Reliifious Tract Society was founded in 1799 " to promote 
the dispersion of Religious tracts, and to develop the evangelical 
doctrines of the Gospel." Step by step throughout the century the 
Society has been led in the providence of God to Ijccome, on the 
one hand, a great publishing house, circulating all classes of Chris- 
tian literature; and on the other, a great Missionary i^iteraturc 
Sijcicty. helping workers in all parts of the great harvest field, and 
willingly assisting all sections of the Evangelical Cliurch. The 
Society very early in the century began work on the continent of 
Europe, and in the South Seas, India and China, issuing literature 
of many kinds: tracts, njagaziiies. books, cards, picture texts. It 



* Madlion Avenue Rcfurmed Churcb, April 30. 




J 



STEPS ALREAJiY TAKEN 



41 



I 






has thus assisted to proclaim the gospel in 233 different lan^ages 
and dialects. In grants of money or of paper for use in various 
mission presses for publications, the Religious Tract Society has 
expended on foreign missionary work done during the century 
■^733-933 ($3,669,935). This means it has contributed more than 
$100 a day to foreign missionarj- work during the whole of its ex- 
istence. 

It is possible here to treat the great subject of what has been 
achieved In the department of Christian Literature only in broadest 
outline. Jndia is a very different mission field from the Congo; 
Giina has little in common with IJiilgaria or Uganda; but the prin- 
ciples now enforced apply erjually to all mission fields. Greenlander 
and Chinaman are alike in this — that the only Christian literatitrt' 
likdy to be effective in enlightening the mind and opening the heart 
is Christian truth clothed in a dress wliicli the reader Instinctively 
recognizes to be familiar. The idea should be expressed in phrase- 
c4ogy and Imagery as close as possible lo his ordinary modes of 
thought and expression. 

VVlien we consider the toil, patience, and ability devoted to Chris- 
tian literature by many workers, much and very good work seems to 
have been done. Rut when we search foi permanent results, this too 
often appears feeble and hard to trace; a fact best explained in re- 
membering the hand-to-mouth way in which so many of the iracts 
and bijoks have been produced. They have been only tlie best that 
the busy worker could produce at the nionienl, pressed by many 
other duties, and yet deeply conscious of the need for such help as 
Christian literature alone can give. Dr. Murdoch told the Bombay 
Conference that his greatest difficulty throughout forty years of 
lalwr in the field, had been to get appropriate manuscripts. Al Ibe 
same conference the Rev. T. S. Johnson, of the Methodist Episcopal 
Mission, Allahabad, said, speaking of books in the Hindi language, 
" How often do men come lo us to know what new publications are 
available, and how disapimiiUcd they are when we can tell them of 
noihing new! CH the men and women wlio use Hintli in their work, 
perhaps not cme in ten ever prepares a book or tract for publication, or 
If they do so at all. they prepare but one or two in a lifetime." 

In a field so wide as that now occupied by modem missions, these 
primitive methods arc far from satisfactory. Whenever we have to 
deal at close quarters with cultured and civilized peoples like the 
Hindus. CTilnese, or Japanese, then the weakness inherent in much of 
the Christian literature available becomes only too evident. Ex- 
clusive of Uible translation, the utmost that can be said for it in 
some of the most Important departments of the field is that a con- 
siderable number of books and tracts have been put with more or 
less success into l!ie native dress, that school books have been pro- 
vided, and that a few newspapers and periodicals are maintained. 
Christian literature in any real sense is practically non-existent. 
This fact Is more evident, perhaps, in India than elsewhere, because 
of the special peculiarities of Hindu I'fe and civilization. Rut it is 
a question which every year becomes growingly important in every 
part of the mission field as scMin as the converts emerge from the 




LITERATURE AS AN EVANGELISTIC AGENCY 

most rudimentary stage. Most of our illustrations arc drawn from 
Imlia, but it must he borne in mind tliat with due aHowance for local 
peculiarities ihcy apply to all parts of the mission fidd. 

The testimony of many competent autliurities is that a higher 
class of work needs to be done, since the majority of the larger works 
appeal solely to native Christian readers, and do nut in tlic slightest 
touch the non-Christian jHj]>uIations of India. Many of tlic works 
now ]:ublislied are translations, and no translation, however excel- 
lent, is capable of affecting deeply a Hindu heart. For English 
literature, dune even more or less idiomatically into one of tlie 
vernacular languages, always loses much of meaning and sugges- 
tiveness. 

My point is th:il such testimony is quite siifficient somewhat to 
shake our confidence in the excellency and the efficiency of some of 
the work which has been done in the past. If such statements do 
not at once win our assent, they ought at least to arrest our attention 
and fasten it upon the need for a thorough consideration of this 
great department of work, and a very careful overhauling of plans 
and methods; and this brings us to the other side of the question: 

What are the imperative needs of the present? I have lime only 
to summarize them. They are : 

1. The great missionary societies should be urged to do what 
they have hitherto appeared cither unwilling or unable to do — to 
make literature a perniaiiient deparlmciit of their work, and be pre- 
pared to appoint and maintain both European missionaries and native 
agents (or the prodviction and publication of adequate Christian 
literature in every field. The Literature Socii'ties possess neither 
the funds nor the men sufficient for these tasks. 

2. Workers in every department of the Christian literature field 
should maintain as their ideal, not the translation uf Cliristian books 
into each vernacular, but the (>ioduclion and publication of books, 
and tracts, and periodicals in harmony with the ideas and environment 
of the ptx)ple among whom the mission is at work. In other words, 
the need is for Christian biwks in all districts red'>Ieiit of tlie soil, 
and written so as to be easily understood of the people and, wherever 
possible, by natives with the assistance and guidance of competent 
missionaries. 

3. There should be strenuous efforts to secure in the great centers 
of missionary enterprise, in short wherever missions have passed 
through their preliminary stages, newspapers or magazines devoted 
to the discussion and exposition of ClirJstian truth. These should be 
Christian periodicals in a very real sense — that is, they sfiould deal 
with the ideas, life, and modes of thouglit. and the different ex- 
periences of the people among whom they arc published. But they 
should be issued under Christian control and used as channels of 
instruction in Christian truth. 

In India I fear it is true at present that the defenders of Hinduism 
arc on the whole much better e(]uippcd in this respect than the ex- 
ponents of Christianity. Publications like those issued in Madras. 
the Vrittauta Patrike. puhliphed in Mysore, and calendars like that 
issued by the Central China Tract Society, are the best examples that 




I 



I 
I 



I 



AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY 43 

occur to rac. And yet these are at tlic best only experimental and 
very humble in their influence. The hi>;her ela&s of Christian papers 
and majj^zines is still to seek in altnosi every mission field. 

Only those acquainted with what has been done, and how it has 
been done, realize fully how large a demand the three requirements 
we deem essential and imperative make upon the men and upon the 
funds of the churches. Uut the very difticully of the task in the 
lifiht of its incalculable possibilities of blcssinjj to myriads who yet 
Halk in darkness, should constrain us all lu say, Uod willing, it shall 
be done ! 

Rev. G. L. Shearer, D.D., Secretary. AmcrUan Tract Society* 

The two tlod-given agencies for propagalJnp the gospel are the 
living voice and the printed page. The liebrew Scriptures came 
through one of the group of nations that first received the gift of 
letters. God. who times all change.'^ in the interest of His kingdom, 
gave us the art of printing just before the Keformation period. The 
press stands next to the ministry, and is indispensable in all mission 
work, at home and abroad. This is the principle on which we rest 
our work in the field of missions. 

A committee representing any mission board abroad petitions for 
the issuing of specific publicalinns, original or translated. The 
American Tract Society provides for this the needed funds, or prints 
the tract or volume on its own presses. Frequently it appropriates a 
lump sum to be u.ied by the committee or mission press according 
to the principles and methods of the Society. Thus a large body of 
literature in many languages is provided. Each publication is im- 
printed or stamped as truth to be received always and everywhere, 
and, as a nde. these publications pass current and are in use by all 
missions. The American Tract Society has issued at its own ex- 
pense, for circulation abroad. 4.966 publications, of which 955 are 
volumes. These figures are. however, below the actual numbers. 
Directly, or through the insiittuions it aids in the foreign field, It has 
printed in 153 languages or dialects. 

A description of Ihesc pubiicallons can not here be given; they 
include tracts, catechisms, primers, commentaries, parts of Scrip- 
ture, and other volumes, such as a Bible diclionary. in Arabic at 
Beirut, in Telugu at Madura, in Chincte. in Spanisli at New York; 
the Peep of Day Series for tlic children of Asia Minor, Syria, and 
Palestine — all living books, containing the old truths in the thought 
of the present day set forth by missionaries and native preachers. 

Many are the testimonies of direct usefulness. Dr. Chamberlain, 
of India, tells of tracts torn Into shreds and strewn throuKb the 
streets at one evangelistic visit, succeeded some years later by a re- 
quest for the gospel teacher, and ilie institution of Christian instruc- 
tion under his own superintendence in the school of the same village. 
Rev. J. E. Gough. of Nellore. tells of a robber hand that had <lefied 
and baffled the police, but having read tracts in llieir fastnesses, they 
were changed by tlie Spirit through this truth, and twelve applied 
tor baptism. Sinnnons, of Canton, tells of a literary gentleman con- 

* MadiMo Arcoue Relonoed CtiOTch. Aiiril }o. 



1 




44 LITEKATURE AS AN h:\'AN(JEI.ISTIC ARENCY 

verted by such issues read secretly in his own home, and coming 
to the mission to profess his failh in Christ. 

Peking reports a dissemination of Christian literature over the 
whole empire in connection with the great annual examinations. The 
North China Tract Society says in a word. " We must have a grow- 
ing Christian literature for a growing Christian Church." 

Nor should we fail to note that from all directions current streams 
bear to us men of many nations, bringing the work of foreign evan- 
gelitation to our ver>- doors. This unique work is laid ui»n us. At 
one of our ports of entry our representative presents the printed 
gospel to arriving immigrants in as many as thirty-three languages, 
averaging for years about i.ooo souls each day. 

The American Tract Society has expended in cash in this foreign 
work, all told, $735,055. and has granted $58,459 in electrotypes, in 
addition to a considerable proportion of its grants of its home publica- 
tions. ^|J 

Rev. E, M. Bliss. D.D., Formerly Agent American Bible So- 
ciety, Constantinople* 

Some centuries ago a band of Tartars coming along the plains of 
Asia Minor, asked the Greeks whom they met where the road they 
were taking led to? Invariably the reply was, " To the city," mean- 
ing Stamboul. 

Constantinople is still the great center from which radiate all the 
roads leading throughout Western Asia — perhaps even to Central 
Asia — and to Southeastern Eurojxf. H you could stand with me up 
in the galleries on the lop of the towers of the city, you would 
realize how they extend far on everj' side. There go up the Bos- 
phonis. with its winding currents, the steamers that carrj' freight 
through the Black Sea. Down through the Hellespont go the other 
steamers carrying the mails and the freight to Eg^^»t, up the Nile, 
and on to Central .\frica. There, again, from this point go others 
to Macedonia and into the ports of Albania. 

There is a Bible House in this center of Constantinople. Well 
do I remember a time when, as I stood at the window and looked 
down upon the street. I saw turbaned Turk after turbaned Turk 
going up and down that street shake his fist at that building. Why? 
Because in the upper stor>' there was a company of men engaged in 
the translation of the Word of God. and they knew it. And they 
knew there was no Porte or Palace that could slop it. Every efFwl 
of diplomacy, every Government dictum aimed at obstructiMi 
had failed, and that Bible was steadily being prci»ared. Edition 
after edition of that Bible has gone out from that press, far beyond 
the expectation of the most sanguine. Not only Bibles have gone 
from that place. There have bwn books of education, teaching the 
chfldren. and older persons as well, the principles of Christian civili- 
ration, of true Christian life. There have been. too. Tracts printed 
with funds fnmished for us most nobly by the great tract Societies 
of England and America, that have sown seeds of eternal life in 
the hearts of many in all the land. And then there has been the news- 

: Reforaicd Cterck, A|«1l jr. 





paper press. Those little papers do not, of course, compare with our 
dailies, and yet I qutslioii whcllier Ihecc is a daily in this city of 
New York that has had greater power tlian some of those missionary 
weeklies that have gone forth among the people of Bulgaria and 
Macedonia. They are scattered through Asia Minor, and through 
Eastern Turkey; they have brought to the people ghmpses of the 
ontsidc world, have brought to them some idea of what God is doing 
for the world, and have kept them in touch with the great Church of 
God in all the earth. 

That Bible House is a center of power whose limit can not be 
measured, and whose ustfulnc-is can never cease until God shall rule 
and the nations in thai land shall bow down before Him. Would that 
it were possible for mc to say to-day that the streams of hifluence 
from that center are increasing! They are nol, sinifjly because the 
Christian churches do not uniUrsland the power w]>ich God has put 
inlo their hands. Tht-rt: h an opportunity such as the Clnirch uf God 
otight to use, and can use and will use when it comes to realize what 
this power is. 

Rev. D. Z. Sheffield, D.D., Prcsiikni Tungcha College. 
China* 

In China it must not be said that a real Christian literature has 
not yet been created. The defect of the literature which has already 
been created in the Chini-se language, to a vtrry great degree is not an 
Imperfection in style. The defect is the partial sacrifice of the 
thought of the original for the sake of the beauty of the Chinese 
language. The large success of Mr. Richard and Mr. Allen, as well 
as the success of a long list of Amerieans and Englishmen engaged 
in literary work, is due to this : that they have stotxl behind their 
native scholars and given the outline of the thought to them and 
allowed the literary finish to come from the Chinaman's own pen. 

At the present time there is an imnsense range of Christian litera- 
ture well dcveluijcd in China. I am beginning to think we take the 
lead, perhaps, of the world in this direction. Wl- have the Bible 
translated into the classical and colloi^uial Mandarin, and into all the 
local dialects; coinnieiitaries, devotional literature, tract literature thai 
goes before the Ilibte. preparing its way and interpreting it; a wide, 
educational literature, such as works on astronomy, on geology, and 
on chemistry, political economy and hooks on mental philosophy from 
the Christian standpoint, and on Christian ethics. 

Such educational literature stands alongside of the general lilera- 
lure which Mr. Richard particularly represents. It is all adapted 
to the general awakening work. 

Dr. Alexander Williamson was the founder of the Society for the 
Propagation of Christian and General Literature in China. He 
passed away a little less than ten years ago, and Mr. Richard, who had 
already shown his talent in this work, has since given it an immense 
development. Mr. Richard's name is the best-known name in China 
among all foreigners, and next to him stands Mr. Allen. Their 
literar>- work is swelling to vast proportions. Our educational and 

* Madiaoo ATtnue Re(onn«d Church, April y>. 



« 



I 





LITERATURE AS AN EVANGELISTIC AOENCV 



Christian literature in China is opoiing the way more and more to 
Western civilizatioti. The power of conservatism is a dead force; 
the power of progress is a living force, and is gathering weight from 
month to month and year to year. 

Rkv. H. W. Hulbert, Cieivhnd. Ohio* 

Lisan el Mala'kat— " The Tongiie of the Angels " — as the Arabs 
style their language, is the sacred language of over two hundred 
millions of our race whose dwellings are spread from the African 
shores of the Atlantic to the far Pacific archipelago of tlie Philip- 
pines, and from the snows of Siberia to the South African Zambezi, 
beyond which Ihe Arabic tonpic has fastened upon a portion of the 
great Bantu race the name " Kafir " — the infidel, 

Of these widely scattered peoples, liaving a common religion and 
more and more a common civilization, less than twenty-five millions 
«se the Arabic in one form or another as a mother tongue. But all 
are under the intlnence of that wondrous Lisan c[ Mala'kat. 

Arabic literature, from first to last, reflects a Mnslim or a pagan 
civilization. Proud, self-confident, domineering, it stands fortli like 
a mighty Gnlialh of this vast Philistine camp to challenge the armies 
of Ihe living God. 

Seventy-eight years ago, exiled from Syria, the Protestant mis- 
sionaries established their first Arabic printing press on the island 
of Malta, transferring in twelve years later (1834) to Beirut, where 
for sixty-six years it has been steadily pouring forth Christian litera- 
ture for this vast field of an Arab civilization. We cati not pretend 
that anything more than a beginning- has been made, but the begin- 
ning has been so solidly made and of so auspicious a character, that 
wc may have a firm faith that this youthful David, with five pebbles 
from the brtxik an<i a great faith in God, will yet succeed. Indeed, 
the first jK-'bblc in his sling — tht; printed Word of God — is already 
piercing the giant's forcheatl. The ripest scholarship accounts it 
one of thi- best of the translations of the Bibli-. Millions of copies 
of it have been sent forth to every section of the Arabic-speaking 
world. Nor has it gone alone. Strange to say. it has provoked into 
existence a Roman Catholic translation of the entire Bible, issued by 
the Jesuit press at Beirut. Kven this Roman Catholic version of 
the lUhle has been providentially used for the winning of many a 
scul to simple gospel faith. 

Next in importance, perhaps, among the pebbles in this modem 
David's wallet, are the careful and thorough statements of the Chris- 
tian faith as embodied in theological treatises in the .Arabic by 
Dr. James S. Dennis, who, for many years, was at the head of the 
Theological Seminary at Fieirnt. Then come the commentaries on 
the New Testament, a hannony of the gospels, the concordance of 
the Arabic Bible, the Bible Dictionary, and " Bible Inlerprctalion/' 
which render important sendee along this same line. 

It also has been the privilege of our missionaries and their collab- 
orators to make a complete restatement of scientific facts through 
the medium of the printed page. 

* Uadison Avenue Reformed Church, April jo. 



I 



I 



CHRISTIAN LITERATURE SOCIETY, INDIA 47 

But the fact tliat, after all is said and done, wc arc at the very be- 
ginning- of a far-reaching <levelopment, is evidenced by the circum- 
stance that so large a proportion of this valuable literary work has 
been done as yet hy foreigners. Under the stimulus of a rising Chris- 
tianity, from native sources shall yet come fiirth the monuments of 
literary power. The names of scvcraS native writers who have 
rendered most vahiable service as heliK*rs nr original workers, make 
ns see surely the dawning of the new <Iay for the Orient. The un- 
resting modem printing presses are turning out pages of Christian 
literature hy the millions each year. From far and near come the 
orders which betoken a growing hunger to know and believe and 
live the truth .is it is in Jesus Christ our Lord. The Lisan el Mala'kat 
— " The Tongne of the Angels " — shall yd find its vindication, as 
more and more it becomes the medium of God's undying truth. 

Rev. Gkorck Patterson, Secretary Christian Literature Society 
for India, London* 

The publications of the Qiristian Literature Society for India 
fall under two heads: School-books and general Christian literature. 

VVc have in ihe various languages 264 school-books on our cata- 
Ic^e, and some of them are so widely used that there is a steady 
annual demand for over 50,000 copies each. We set a high value 
upon this branch of our work. In the first place, we arc sup- 
plying an urgent need of every missionary society that makes edu- 
cation a part of its work. At present our books are used in the 
schools of over forty missionary societies. In the second place, 
we arc enabled through our school-liooks to put what I may call 
the thin edge of the Christian wedge into secular schools in India. 
In the third place, our school-lxioks arc a source of considerable profit 
lo us and thus help us very largely in otlu-r branches of our work. 
When, however, we come to the other branirh of (jur publication work, 
these conditions are reversed. We are dealing there with a literature 
which wc arc more anxious to press upon the people than they are 
to have it, and we must, therefore, sell it for what we can get, or give 
it away. Wc can not expect that what I may call an aggressive 
evangelistic literature will pay its way in India. It does not do 
so in England or America, and in the nature of Ihe case never can. 
Our experience shows that we may barely reckon nn getting back 
OTic-third of ihe total cost fr<im the procee<ls of sale. 

The Christian Literature Society has been in nprration for slightly 
over forty years. " For many years it has published annually, in 
the various languages of India, more books adilrcsscd to the moral 
and spiritual needs of the people than all other societies put to- 
gether." Since iis foundation, the Society has issued In eighteen 
languages 2.6oi publications, averaging 131 pajjes in size, and of 
these. 26.41 7.000 copies have been circulated. For some years the 
oiilpul has continued steadily to increase. And when all allowance 
has been made for Ixx^ks which no cnmmitlec would now reprint, 
it will be found thai there is still in India a large mass of excellent 
Christian literature well worthy to live, and well able to live. 

* IfKdiaoa Aveoue Reformed Oiurcb. April 30. 






48 LITERATURE AS AN EVANGELISTIC AGENCY 



And now a word or two willi reference to the appc:j] for " literary 
niissiniiarics " which lias l)ccn so carncslly made ai tltis ccinfcrcncc. 
Wc can not set a man apart as a writer with iiistriiclions to write, 
and no true litfrary man would accp[)t such a ccimmission. If he 
did. then however great his abilities might he, the majority of his pro- 
ductions, under pressure of these iiLstructions, would he inane and 
worthless. The work of the " Hierary missionary," as I understand 
itf would be rather to organize literary activity, and then to organize 
and supervise book distribution by means of depots, colporteurs, and 
missionaries. 

Rfa'. J. L. Di:ar[ng. D.D., Missionary. American Baalist Mis- 
sionary Union, Japan.* 

The New Testament was put into the hands of the Japanese only 
about twenty-five year's ago. and the Old Testament less than eighteen 
years ago. From that you will understand that the work we are 
doing in Japan is of a much more reccitt character than that which 
has been carried on in China and in India: and yet Japan has been 
making progress in these lines only to be compared with her prog- 
ress along material lines. The Japanese are universally able to read. 
Only a few years ago a new missionary coming to Japan, and be- 
ginning at once in literary work, was criticised for his course. He 
responded that a people as intelhgent as the Japanese could use a 
black missionary as well as a white missionary, and for that reason 
he was going to organise a printing press. Tracts have been given 
away largely and others sold among the people, and we find in the 
bookstalls of Japan religions pnhHcations, Ilihles an<l tracts, and 
other religions literature of various sorts, which are provided for 
those stores which would not themselves put religions literature 
on their shelves on account of the limited demand. Now, every- 
where you go throughout the country you find the I3ible and Chris- 
tian bonks on sale, and purchased largely by tht people. 

The work that the missitmary has ht-en doing was subjected to 
some criticism on the part of the Japanese, but we are glad, how- 
ever, that many of the welt-educated Japanese, who have received 
their education in America and in England, are now engaged in this 
work themselves. They are not translating so much, but are writing 
themselves books which interest the Japanese. To-day we have 
native Japanese who understand the Japanese mind and can provide 
the desired class of literature. Another literature is, however, greatly 
needed for the building up of the Church and the building up of the 
native minister — a work along the line of commentaries, and Bible 
exposition, and Church history. I.^t the hoards at home send out 
men especially adapted to provide a literature for the preachers and 
for the building up and developing of the Church. 

PracllciL SugeestJons oo tiu Production of Quistlaji Litcfaturc 

Rev. I. H. Corkell, D.U.. Missionary, h'rotcstant Episcopal 
Church, U. S. A., Japatt.f 

Newspapers in mission fields, like every other department of Chris- 

■Madiimn Avenue Refomcd Tlmrcb. April jn. 
tChxmber Muiic Hait, April 16. 



PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS ON ITS PRODUCTION 



rian work, must aim to make themselves self-supporting, if they are 
to be a success and a real help to tlie work : and yet perhaps there 
is no dq)artment of the work which is so difficult to manage in 
making it self-supporting as is this part of the work. In some 
countries, of course, where the people are great readers, as, for 
instance, in Japan, the Christian community realizes the need of 
having these Christian newspapers. In other countries where such 
is not the case, there will naturally not be the demand for them ; 
and yet, even where there is a public of Christian people who feel the 
need of having Christian newspapers, it is not an easy matter by 
any means to make them self-supporting. 

One of the items that enters into the support of a paper is the 
advertisements. The question is : Shall these advertisements be put 
in the paper or not ? For my own part I believe that advertisements 
can be used with discretion. I think they should be very carefully 
selected, not only in mission fields, but in every other field. They 
go into a Christian newspaper, and by that means become a source of 
revenue. I can not understand, myself, how a paper could be made 
self-supporting, for many years to come, unless something of thai 
kind were done. They indeed become the chief source of revenue 
during the first years of the paper. It would be unquestionahly a 
necessity to have the papers subsidized for many years to come, if 
that source of revenue is not used. And yet, with careful manage- 
ment and with a reading public, ihey may perhaps be brought to 
self-support more quickly than we imagine. 

One of the great difficulties is in the number of Christian news- 
papers to be supported. There are so many of them, and as a con- 
sequence they have few subscril>ers for each one, and the subscrip- 
tion price, which can not be made large on account of the poverty 
of the Christian community in most of the lands, must be kept down 
to the lowest possible figure. Hence, unless there is something of the 
character of advertisements to which resort can be had, there seems 
to be very little hope indeed of having a paper become a success 
financially, which is not only highly desirable, but absolutely im- 
portant, if it is to become a proper factor in mission work. 

Rev. Hl'bekt W. Brown, Missionary, Presbyterian Church, U. 
S. A., Mexico.* 

I have been connected with our Preshyterian press in Mexico City 
since it was put in cjx-ration, but not with its business management, 
except inilircclly. I shall limit my remarks at this time to a brief 
reference to the handling of our press in Mexico City. The Pres- 
byterian press was set up in Mexico City in 18S4. And the first 
number of our paper, El Faro (The Lighthouse), was printed in 
January, 1885. 

The first problem that confronted us was that of suitable quarters. 
As the plant grew we needed more and more room. For that and 
other causes we have had to move a number of times at considerable 
loss and expense. This has prevented putting this branch of the 
work on as broad and permanent a basis as wc could wish. 

• Chamber Mntlc HkU. April iS. 






so LITER.^TURE AS AN EVANGELISTIC AGENCY 

My experience tcaclics mc that a mission press should be recog- 
nized as a pennaneiit and essential branch ui the propaganda, to be 
developed into ihc highest possible usefulness, and provided for 
accordingly in a large and liberal way. The first step is to own the 
building in which the plant is set up. 

Our second problem was liow lu make the press bear at least a part 
of the cost of its maintenance. Two sources of revenue presented 
ihcmsclvcs, viz.: outside job work and the subscriptions for our 
mission publications, togctlier with advertisements in llie same. 

At one time there was no press in Mexico City that couUl do any 
better work than our press, and few could do as good work. But 
two difficulties presented themselves: First, our principles as a mis- 
sion house would not allow us to do all kinds of printing, such as 
bill posters for bull-fights and lottery tickets. This fact greatly 
limited the sphere of our activity. In the second place, the estab- 
lishment of other publication houses, which took all kinds of work 
and at lower prices, made competition keen and wc were at a dis- 
advantage. \Ve still have some job work, but nothing like as much, 
as in former years. 

The income from subscriptions and advertisements, owinq;^ to lim- 
ited circulation and the low price at which our publications are 
offered, has kept this item too small to meet more than a fraction 
of the total expense. Here, however, is chance for improvement. 

Another problem had to do with the organization and control of 
the printing office. Its business management was at first in the 
hands of a trained printer frnm England. He knew the business 
thoroughly, but perhaps necessarily gave more attention to job work. 
That increased in volume and his salary was considerably increased 
by his share of the profits from eve!7 job taken in. 

The partnership was dissolved in a friendly way, with benefit to 
both, since our former printer has a large establishment of his own, 
while our expenses were reduced. 

The next experiment was to put one of the missionaries in as 
business manager. The work was new to him, but he had business 
instincts, and organized the work on a more economical basis as to 
rents, employees, and payment of subscriptions. Unfortunately, just 
as he was gaining command of the situation, the ill heaUh of his 
family obliged him to leave Mexico. 

The last and third experiment was to elect as business manager 
one of the native pastors, who was also editor of our paper. He 
also developed considerable business aptitude, and showed a com- 
mendable desire to learn the business from the ground up. He has 
run the press as economically as the missionary did, and his salary 
is less. 

These are our three experiments. After the first one had been 
tried, we projjosed to the board to send out a trained printer with 
business instincts, who. feeling a call to do mission work, would be 
content with a moderate salary and turn in all the receipts to the 
board, asking no percentage to himself. Perhaps such men are 
hard to find. At least none could be sent at the time. The M. E. 




PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS OH ITS PRODUCTION 



press has such a man in charge, and it is as fine a field for mission- 
ary labor as could well be desired for one trained to such work. 

In view of all these conditions and difficulties, a possible solution 
of the problem was to get some pubhcation house in Mexico City 
10 do our printing for us. Bids were asked for, but the price given 
was not any lower than the figure at which we were already doing 
our own work, and there were several disadvantages. Moreover. 
once the contract made, and our press actually sold, we would be at 
the mercy of the house doing our work, h was decided to keep our 
plant and thus be independent, and have a better chance to grow and 
do more work. 

Another suggestion was to combine all missionary presses in Mex- 
ico City under joint management. This plan looks feasible, and may 
be capable of realization some day, but as yvt the mission has rot 
deemed it wise to makf any overtures in the matter. The combined 
plant would prolwbly have to print several papers, as organs of the 
different churches, and the lessening of expense would not there- 
fore be as great as at first imagined. A union pa[ier, hymn-book, and 
Sunday-school Lesson Helps would involve similar ideas in doctrine 
and government, which as yet do not exist, and to avoid all con- 
troverted questions would, it was felt, weaken rather than strengthen. 
We now have our alliances, our union tract work, and corrlial co- 
Ql>eration with a committee on comity. Perhaps one press, and one 
paper, and one set of commentaries, etc^ wilt come some day, but that 
day is not yet. 

Our press issues the following periodicals: P.! Faro (The Light- 
house), an eight-page illustrated paper, published twice a month in 
an edition of two thousand numbers : Sunday-school Quarterly, 
leaflet and illustrated cards ; a book supplement to the paper ; tracts, 
reports, programmes, and similar works. Only a few books have 
been printed on our press. The average output is about three million 
pages yearly, or 62.000,000 since the press was started. All this 
reading matter has been widely scattered and helped in the conver- 
sion of many, and opened the way for gospel effort and the organiza- 
tion of churches. It has also helped enlighten the minds of men in 
general, and to create a more tolerant and intelligent public opinion 
on religious matters. 

The cost to our board in United Slates currency is about $2,500 
over and above the receipts from subscriptions and job work, which 
amount to aliout a thousand dollars in gold. I am inclined to draw 
the following conclusions : 

1. It is well to own the building in which the press is located, as 
well as the plant. 

2. The business manager should be a lay-missionar>-. with thorough 
training as a printer and manager, and on a fixed salar>'. 

3. Job work shouhi be taken with caution. The best way to secure 
self-support is by increasing receipts from subscriptions and from 
advertisements in our publications. 

4. Combination of mission presses can be effected only when in- 
dividual mission interests will nol suffer by letting one mission 
practically absorb the work of th** others. 



A 




LITERATURE AS AN EVANCEUSTIC AGENCY 



5. Tile press should be treated as an essentia! part of the propa- 
ganda, and any expense involved in its judicious management be re- 
garded as necessary and justifiable. 

Rev. Thomas Craven, Missionary, Methodist Episcopal 
Church, India* 

In connection with the Methodist Publishing House in Lucknow, 
where I have been for a number of years, my experience has been 
somewhat unique. I was thrust into the press without knowing a 
type; without knowing anything about printing, but simply because 
I happened to be one who was determined to have the work done. 
It was at the time when there was a wonderful revival in Sunday- 
school work, and especially in the line of Sunday-school literature 
and Sunday-school requisites, and these things all requiring to be 
created led to my appointment in that publishing house. There was 
a debt of several hundred dollars; there was just one press and one 
man to set llie type, and it was alt in a hovel, a servant's house. When 
I took my first leave to America in 1884, twelve years after my en- 
trance into the press, I left that press with $30,000 endowment for 
capital. The way it was done is rather novel, and it may be oppor- 
tune if I recite a little incident; 

One day I was visiting a school in Lucknow of which I had charge, 
and in examining the classes, and afterward the teachers, I found 
that the teachers and scholars were at sea as to the meanings of words, 
because the dictionary was incorrect. I made up my mind that there 
must be another dictionary in India. When I asked the committee 
to print the manuscript, they said, " Oh, no, this is a secular book; 
it can not be printed in our press." Well. I happened to have a little 
money and a little credit, and we put them both together, and we 
went to press with an edition of 50,000 copies, 400 pages. That 
edition finally went to 250,000 copies. And the dictionaries that 
were sold furnished us with the means of doing a very large amount 
of mission printing. It has really afforded the means for doing the 
mission print iiig at the Lucknow press lo-day. 

When I first took hold of this work 1 had in mind the creating of 
a Christian literature; and not only to create the Christian literature 
that was needed, but to have a fund that could be relied on. I could 
not rely on the money coming from America. I conld not rely upon 
the job work coming in. When I would ask grant.s from the Bible 
Society for printing the Scriptures, they could not ahvay.s be relied 
on. T would get a dozen good hands in the press, and at the begin- 
ning of the next month I would have to pay them off and let them 
go. because I did not have the money to support them. Hence, it 
occurred to me that there must be something of a remunerative char- 
acter in this press, through which I could keep on the work. Just 
here I want to express our obligations to the London Tract Society. 
We needed Sunday-school literature, and friends, if there is any liter- 
ature that pays in this world, it is Sunday-school literature. I sent 
to my friends over in London for 750.000 pictures. They thought 
I had gone crazy, ordering so many pictures at one time, but it had 

• Cbamber Music Hall, April a6. 



PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS ON ITS rROOUCTION 



53 



to be done. The pictures arrived in due time, and then I got the 
best writer there was in the mission who was available at thai time, 
a woiulerfully gifted man with the pen ; and he sat down for months 
writing lKx>klets adapted to those little pictures, and thus we were 
enabled to put on the market 500,o<X) booklets, and these were fol- 
k)wed by larger sized pictures. Favors were constantly granted us 
by the society in the way of pictures and paper, and we were ma- 
terially helped. 

Now, let me tell you what made me so earnest In this Sunday- 
school matter : One day I went into what I called " my pet Sitnday- 
school " — where all the boys were briglit. I threw down the ]>ictiire 
papers, and I saw, as I took my chair, a number of boys spring 
for them. I said : " Hold on, boys 1 If you are so anxious for the 
new papers, how many of you have the old ones?" Every boy's 
hand went up in response to my challenge. I was surprised, and so 
I said to one, " You go for yours ! " aud to another, " Go for yours ! '* 
Very soon afterward the boys returned breathlessly, and brought 
their papers. Then I said, '* Well, boys, you have certainly cared for 
them, bill bow many of you know what is in them ? " " Ask me, sir ! " 
from all sides greeted ray inquiry. So I asked tliera, and they could 
tell me the contents of a paper even five years old, I was amazed. 
I asked the boys how they had remembered these old papers so well? 
Said one of them: " We didn't have any other papers at home and 
we read this paper going home, and when we got home father said^ 
' You have a new paper ; read it for me.' and I read it to father. 
And by and by mother asked what I got from Sunday-school, and 
I read it to her. The next week visitors came, and they asked one 
after another, ' What is new ? ' and father called me to show them 
my reading, and I read for them all. If 1 have read each of those 
papers once, I have read them thirty times." 

You missionaries can all apply what I have said. Take those 
hundreds of tho\isands of boys all reading their Sunday papers to 
their parents and their friends, and then those old folks gathering 
in companies at night and talking over what they have heard that 
is new. And though it may still be in a very weak condition, yet it 
is the teaching of the Church filtering through the minds of those 
people, and they have their curiosity aroused as to the new religion, 
though they have not got very well-defined ideas about it. 

I say most einphaticany : wherever there is a press, cultivate Sun- 
day-school literature. Make it attractive; just as attractive as you 
possibly can. I have found it in every case to succeed. 

Rev. a. W. RimisaL, D.D., ^fussionary, Methodist Episcopal 
Church, India* 

A vital question connected with mission presses is that of support, 
WTien located in places where they can derive little or no income from 
job work, expenses may in some instances be partially defrayed from 
the sale of tracts or periodicals, but as monthly wages, paper bills. 
and contingencies must be met, presses so located should he endowed 
in order that they may keep on circulating religious literature adapted 

• Cbamber Music H«n. April 9i. 



54 UTERATURE AS AN EVANGELISTIC AGENCY 

to the local wants. As there is urgent need and demand for local 
rctipious periodicals in Christian communities throughout heathan 
lands, such endowments would yield rich results. 

In large cities different conditions ohtain. If mission presses are 
advanlageausly located, they may, if judiciously cunduclcd. not only 
earn enough to supjHirt the missionary in charge, but also schools 
and native Christian workers ; tlius relieving mission boards and re- 
leasing" money to push mission work in other directions. The precise 
line of commercial work depends, of aaurse, on the city or country 
in which the press is located. 

In India mission presses must aim tn offset the importation of for- 
eign job printing by bringing their own work up to the highest point 
of excellence. The question of equipment is, therefore, important. 

Some missioTL^rics in villages an<l cnmparatively thinly populated 
districts are doing good with a very limited outfit, printing quite 
small tracts. Mission presses in large business centers must be 
equipped to turn out work on a lari*e scale. 

So essential is an electrotyping' foundry in this time of rapid prog- 
ress in cheap literature, that no publishinfj house, in American or 
European cities, can engage in the whirl of competition in cheap 
printing without its aid, and not until the same process is used in 
printing Oriental vernaculars, with their many delicately curved 
letters, can large quantities of books be printed at small cost. In 
order also to meet the demand for illustrations in commercial work 
and in Christian literature, the mission press must be equipped with 
a photo-engraving plant. 

These suggestions have been put into practical operation in the 
press of which I am an agent. When I first undertook to bring this 
about, practical men raised the objection that it would involve the 
employment of experts in these lines, and that the expense would be 
so great as to render the undertaking unadvisahle. By the help of 
Providence I was enabled to set up the various plants here, and to team 
to operate them. Then, removing them to India, t there taught the 
natives what I had learned at home. An interesting feature was that 
apart from the cost of the machinery and its erection, all the ex- 
penses connected with the learning and leaching, including the neces- 
sary waste of time and materia! in the various experiments, and the 
interest on some borrowed capital, were fulJy defrayed by the earn- 
ings of the press; and in addition thousands of rupees' worth of 
Christian literature was donated to various missions outside the one 
to which I belong. 

The one great object for which mission presses exist, and beside 
which all others dwindle into insignificance, is the production of 
Christian literature in large quantities and at a minimum cost; but 
this is impossible to he done unless the presses avail themselves of all 
the advanced triumphs of modern science as they are utilized in print- 
ing offices at home. To bring about this high purpose the superin- 
tendent of the mission press should himself have a practical knowledge 
of whatever line or lines of work he has in charge, and he must be a 
missionary; one who feels called of God to aid with all his powers 
in spreading the gospel of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. I 



FRAcncAL strccEsrroNS on rrs pnoDucriON 



55 



have found it possible to issue booklets, eacli containing sixteen pages, 
two by three inches, at the rate of 50,000 pages for one dollar. I have 
also found that by producing the plates by photography we can issue 
them in all languages. The manufacture of such booklets has already 
commenced in several languages. When our plant is enlarged, as 
wc propose, we shall be able to issue Bible booklets in 350 languages, 
at the rate of 480,000.000 pages a year. 

It is greatly to be desired that all the employees of a mission press 
should be Christians. It is only just that those who are of the 
household of faith should first be provided for. But skilled work- 
men must be had in our mission presses, even if non-Christians have 
to be chosen. In the mission press of which I have had charge for 
some years, including its very small beginning, I have sought to 
develop native Christian talent. Some native Christian boys whom 
I took fourteen years ago are now skilled workmen, and one of 
them is foreman of our job department. As an instance of his 
ability, it is a gratification to write that he, together with assistants, 
has done the composing work for the embossed literature for the 
blind which our press is now issuing in Gujurathi, Malayalam, Mara- 
thi, Tamil, Tclugu. and Canarese. To prepare the manuscript for 
embossing presented a most difficult task for the typesetters; but 
this native Christian, who, some years before had entered our press 
as an apprentice, so mastered every detail of " justification " con- 
nected with this work, that he deserves rank among the most skilled 
compositors of London or New York. 

The foreman of the electrotyping foundry is another instance of 
how native Christian talent may be utilized. On taking the electro- 
typing plant to India I determined that in addition to accomplishing 
its purpose, it should be made the means of providing employment 
for native Christians. I selected as the first apprentice a native Chris- 
tian who was ser\'ing as sexton of a church on a salary of three 
dollars a month. When it is borne in mtnd that the highest authority 
on this process writes, " There is hardly a step taken, from the first 
move until the plate is ready for the printer, that is not based on 
practical principles, and dependent for success upon the skill and 
intelligence of the way in which it is done," and that it involves the 
application of electricity and chemistry, the sexton of a native 
church seemed the most unlikely of persons to acquire it. He first 
learned to work the steam engine which moved the machinery of the 
foundry. Then he mastered each detail. After that we trained 
Christian apprentices. In three years he and his workmen could 
make electros equal to any manufactured in this country, and up to 
this time we have furnished electrotypes which are used in twenty- 
six diflferent printing offices in India. This Hindu church sexton, 
in that achievement, may bo said truly to have helped to usher in the 
dawn of that better day which is coming for the otit-casles of India, 
who, for many thousands of years, have been trodden in the dust by 
Brahmanical heels. 

The Hindu Christian in charge of the photoengraving department 
is also a notable instance of what can be accomplished through native 
Christian talent. He has not only been successful in learning to 



J 




LITERATURE AS AN KVANGELISTIC AGENCV 

produce half-tone and line work by simlijjlit. but in cloudy weather or 
the wet season he can photograph by electric light. 

The above facts demonstrate what may be done in the way of train- 
ing native Christians to become skilled workmen in mission presses. 
The departments of an up-to-date missionary press become by this 
method so many industrial schools. 

It is my experience that the best results follow when a morning 
prayer service is held, attendance upon which is made part of the 
employees' duties. Since the very beginning of our press, such a 
daily service has been attended by Christians and non- Christians alike. 

But beyond question each self-supporting mission press, out of 
its own earnings, should distribute many pages of helpful, instructive 
Christian truth. 

When we bear in mind that over seventy-five per cent, of those who 
leave the schools each year " are ignorant of Christian truth." and 
that tons upon tons of atheistic, agnostic, and other pernicious leaflets, 
paniphlets. and bocks arc distributed free and broadcast, with the 
awful intent of undermining all that has been done to Chrlslianize 
heathendom, we dare not close our eyes to the fact that an ever-in- 
creasing and imperative obligation rests upon mission presses, not 
only to print, but to see that what is printed is put into circulation. 

When those who are intnisted with the conduct and management 
of mission presses are filled with the spirit which prompted Gladstone 
to write: " We talk about questions of the hour. There is but one 
question — how to bring the truths of God's wnrd into vital contact 
with the heart and mind of all classes of people," then their work 
becomes a delight. They believe that the strongly intrenched powers 
of darkness are being put lo flight by the searchlight of God's truth. 
Far from being mere men of business, with an eye to monetan,- 
advantages, or striving only to arrive at mechanical proficiency, they, 
too, are missionaries, whose heart cry is: Light for the East. Light 
for the scores of reading millions in the East who have no light and 
are " groping in darkness." 

Rev. T. R. Sampson, D.D., President, Austin College, Sherman, 

Texas* 

It is not Ijecause the importance of Christian literature is not 
recognized, but because the means do not warrant the expenditure 
along these lines, that more has not been done up to this time. How- 
ever we may lament the lack of means to furthei this work, there 
is at least some compensation In the thought that possibly the time 
has arrived when this important work can be done more cheaply than 
it could have been done at some previous stage of the development of 
the world. In no mission field, possibly, are there wanting some in- 
dividuals now. of the first generation or possibly of the second, 
among the native Christians, who are thoroughly competent to do 
this work, which no foreigner could do in just the same way. I would 
not say one word to derogate from the importance and the value of 
the work which has been done by the noble company of accomplished 
scholars wherever missionaries have labored. We all recognize the 

* Madison Avenue Refonaed Cburch. April «j, 



NATIVE WRITERS 



if 



\ 



I 
I 



I 



Talue of the work which has been done by the foreigner. However 
perfect that work has been, it has still had some imperfections which 
must always characterize the work of any man in a tongue which is 
not his mother tongwc. Not many missionaries possess that peculiar 
dramatic talent which woulrJ enable one of tliem to put himself in 
the other fellow's place, and to see the thing with the native's eyes. 
Some few have it. It has been my privilege to associate with these 
men and to bear witness as to the wonderful powers which they had 
over these languages; but sttll, they were not natives, and not one of 
these gifted men would have dared, and would not have deserved the 
confidence which he has from us all, had he dared to commit to 
print wliat had been prepared unk'ss he had in some measure allowed 
it to pass through the alembic of the native's mind and heart in order 
to give it that peculiar flavor which would make it most attractive to 
the native reader. 

Now. brethren, I say there is some compensation in the fact that we 
have delayed this important work so long, because possibly it can be 
done more cheaply now. and there are waiting in every one of the 
old mission fields godly men and women, thoroughly equipped, both 
mentally and morally, to take up this work when God's people shall 
give the means into their hands wliich will enable them to do it. 

There is to-day in the employ of the American Board at Smyrna, 
a gifted young Greek. Xenophon Moschou, who is the pastor of the 
Evangelical Greek Church at Smyrna. I thank God that it was 
my privilege to take that boy from the street and prepare him for 
the work to which God. in His providence, has called him. The 
son of a priest in Thcssalonica, he went to the University of Athens, 
obtained the Ph.D. degree, and is one of the most accomplished schol- 
ars among the Greek nation to-day. That young man is capable of 
doing the highest literary work ; he is now preadiing and doing what 
be can in Smyrna as tlie pastor of that church. For want of means 
his brilliant talents are unutilized, except that one of the largest pub- 
lishing houses at .Athens paid him to translate Liddcll & Scott's Greek- 
English Lexicon into modern Greek. You know what a stupendous 
work tliat is. He gave nearly two years of hi.s valuable time to the 
translation of that work. Now, I say, a man whose scholarship is 
recognized by his own people is now rusting, sn far as his highest 
equipment is concerned, because Gnd's people have not yet awakened 
to the responsibility which rests upon them to put into the hands of 
this native brother, under the giiidance of missionaries for the selec- 
tion of material, the mcan.'i to prepare that literature which is neces- 
sary, not only for the evangelization of the unconverted, but for the 
edification of God's own people. 

Rev. Edward Rir/;s, Missionary, American Board of Commis- 
sioners for Foreign Afissions, Turkey.* 

The question how to find a market for mission books is a very im- 
portant one; it is the application of all the efTort made in preparing 
them. The circumstances of the work in different countries arc so 
widely different that it is a little difficult to classify and generalize the 

•Cbftmbcr Music H>11, April lO. 




J 




LITER ATUKE AS AN EVANGELISTIC AGENCY 

difficulties wbicli meet tliosc cnjjagcd in this work ; but I may mention 
some wliich 1 think will apply to most or all countries where this 
work exists; anil the first, perhaps, is one which applies to the 
workers, 1 mean those who have the superintendence of the work. 
These are generally missionaries, and many of these missionaries 
arc not thoroughly trained business men. This often proves a 
serious obstacle whcti carrying on this commercial business. It is 
a commercial business, although its object is not to get the returns 
so much as to get the books into circulation; and it is to be con- 
ducted on commercial principles ; not that the money must all be 
go', buck. 1 think it may not. and can not, and should not all be got 
back — that is, the publication of such works must be subsidized. 
Hence it is very important that those who are in charge of this work 
should be acquainted with business principles. Many a missionary, 
a noble and self-sacrificing man. is yet not able properly to keep ac- 
counts and superintend business transactions. Yet the whole matter 
mu«t be studied as a financial and commercial problem. 

One serious difficulty is the indifference of llie people generally to 
such works, and hence we have not otdy to find the market, but in 
many cases to create it. Another diflicully is the opposition of the 
mass of those great classes of people for whose evangelization the 
missionary work is carried on. 'I'hey are not only indifferent; they 
are opposed, and they will fight tooth and nail to hinder and frustrate 
the efforts to get Christian literature into circulation. 

Then there is another obstacle : the opposition of governments. In 
some countries this does not exist ; in other countries it is a very se- 
rious difficulty. In the Turkish empire the government has been 
forced by political influence of Oiristion Powers to give a certain kind 
of permission to the sale of books, but in an underhanded way, and 
by means of their own officials, they will oppose, in every case where 
it is possible, the distribution of books : so that this becomes a serious 
dilTicuhy and one which must be studied and overcome as it best may 
in each individual case. 

Then, there is another difficuhy, which is the indolence and Ignor- 
ance of paid agents. It is very difficult to get the proper men into this 
work of circulating religious books. 

Now I would suggest merely a few of the possible means for over- 
coming some of these or other difficulties. 

In the first place I would suggest the stimulating of education 
throughout the countries involved. If you wish to get books circu- 
lated in the Turkish empire, for instance, the educational system of the 
whole empire should be stimulated and aided so far as possible. 

Another point which should be carefully observed in cultivating 2 
market is to make the books attractive. Of course, that is self-evi- 
dent, and yet it has been too much neglected. The appearance of a 
book has a great deal to do with its circulation. Of course, the prices 
should be put as low as practicable, as well as they can be with rela- 
tion to the cost of production. 

Another means for stimulating the sale of books is to get intelli- 
gent native individuals interested in the sale of books, either them- 
selves as salesmen taking the books and distributing them, or simply 



CAIX FOR BOOKS IN SI'ANI:>tI 



59 



r 



cultivating the desire for them. Aiid then another means, which it is 
my imprtssioii has been too much neglected in llie past, is advertis- 
ing:. My point is not that the publications sliould advertise, them- 
selves, bm lliat the publications shouUI be advertised. This is a great 
art in itself, an art which is liioraughly undcrstuod and practiced in 
this country and in utlicr countries well advanced in civilization, but 
in many countries wlierc wc are trying tu circulate books it is not 
understood, and, consequently, neglected; and I think it should be 
introduced. We have an open field ; we can use the power of adver- 
tising where the merchants thcmseUx-s du not know enough to adver- 
tise ; they do not know what advertising means. Wc should make the 
advertisements In such a form that they will attract the eye, even the 
eyes of those who can not read, and attract their attention, and thus 
enlarge the sales. In connnercial enterprises ininiense amounts of 
money are used in advertising hooks. Wc should do something of 
tlic same kind to get the hooks onto the tongues of the different pea- 
pies, and so into their minds and hearts. 

Rev. G. B. Winton, Missionary, Methodist Episcopal Church, 
South, Mexico.* 

I represent a line of work in which unity and comity in the best 
and fullest sense of the term arc altogether possible, and that is ; The 
production of hooks — chiefly by translation — in the Spanish language. 

Twelve years ago a Methodist Episcopal preacher, South, began a 
systematic effort to supply the Spanish-speaking people with books. 
Our first intention was to produce such lM)cks as we needed for spe- 
cial denominational work, such as church manuals of doctrine, and 
so forth. Since, however, we have continuc<l in the same work, and 
are endeavoring to supply our native pastors and evangcli.sts with 
such iHMjks as arc specially necessary for them. We have gone for- 
ward with some systems of particular theology, and arc at present 
very busy translating into Spanish a brief Church History, thinking 
that a very important line. 

Wc have done this work in our denominational publishing hotises 
in the United States, finding that we could pro<hire books more 
cheaply and more satisfactorily in the United Slates than in Mexico. 
We have proceeded upon this system, that translations should be 
made by those whose mother tongue is ihe Spanish language, and not 
by missionaries. The supervision of this work has been in the hands 

the missionaries, under the correcting eye and hand of some one fa- 
liliar with the original, and familiar with the Spanish. We have 
carefully avoided publishing any hook which would cover the same 
ground as a book already existing in the Spanish language. Where- 
ever it was possible to ascertain the existence of a book, we have 
rather reprinted it. in some cases, or called attention to it, than re- 
translate it. That is altof -'ther a possible thing. 

Spanish literature reaches a larger constituency in mission fields 
than any other language, with the possible exception of two or 
three languages in the Orient. Whatever we may think of the sub- 
ject of national expansion, the Christian Church has the responsibility 

•CbAfobcr Mule HsII. Aprtl ]«. 






LITERATURE AS AN EVANGELISTIC AGENCY 

of giving the Gospel in every available form to those people who have 
been thrown on our hands by recent events. 1 very greatly hope that 
the mission meetings of the different churches working in Spanisli- 
speaking countries will take pains to come to an agreement in the 
future production of such books as may be needed in the various parts 
of the work. 

Rev. H. O. Dwigiit, LL.D,. MUsiouary, American Board of 
Commissioners for Foreign Missions, Turkey.* 

Experience in the mission field has rediscovered the power of the 
press. Hence the conviction found extensively among missionaries 
thai the book is an instrument of evangelization second to none in 
effectiveness. 

1. In any attempt to solve the problem of evangelization, one meets 
at least two surprises. One of the first experiences of the missionarj' in 
a non-Christian land is apt to be the discovery that the great Apostle 
spoke literally in giving a list of moral traits opposed in liis day to 
the entrance of men into the kingdom of God. To-day those traits 
confront the missionary throughout Asia exactly as described by Paul 
on the western edge of tht contincnl. The first work of the mission- 
ary has to be the culture of some degree of moral sense. 

The second surprise comes afler trying to better the condition of 
people sunk to this degraded level. Such efforts, if I mistake not, 
revolutionize the missionary's expectation respecting his work. He 
finds that a process, not a single act. claims his devotion. If one may 
judge from one's own experience, the impression of the missionary 
on entering the work to which God has called him is that it is of the 
simplest kind. He has to show men their need of a Saviour, and to 
make clear to their minds the imsearchable riches of Christ as a pro- 
vi.sion for just such need. He admits that the work is difficult. But 
he supposes that after the people, one by one, come to their knees in 
true repentance, casting themselves upon the loving Saviour, his own 
work is done. He may leave the converts to be developed under the 
influence of the Holy Spirit. But this expectation can not be justified. 
The missionary's work for the moral culture of men, like that of the 
Apostle Paul, is but begun when they have believed. The moral 
sense has to be cultivated continuously. The disease is deeply rooted, 
and deeply rooted love and patience only can find a remedy. 

TJie missionary has thus to include progressive moral training in 
his work of evangelization, for the type of Ihe growth of the kingdom 
of God in the hearts of men, also, is the grain of nmstard seed of small 
beginnings, reaching enormous final development jf so be that the 
culture is unceasing and tender. 

2. If the school can be made to do the work which it can do for 
moral culture, its relation to this part of the work of evangelization is 
that it places the burden of culture in the cultural pcriiod of life. The 
Lord Jesus, when He said, " Of such is the kingdom of Heaven." 
gave us a hint as to the time for saving the next generation — in its 
childhood. The Christian teacher during weeks, and months, and 
years may mold, according to the wisdom given him, open and pliable 

*K«dlBOn ATcnne Rcforracd Ctiarcb. April 15. 



J 



SCHOOt-DOOKS IM MORAL TRAINING 



61 



I 



I 

I 



minds. The power of the missionar>- in this matter, and his respon- 
sibility, too. grow out of his knowledjje : his knowledge of good and 
evil, his knowledge of motives, his knowledge of the channels by 
which the mind is influenced, and his knowledge of the power of 
the Holy Spirit. The sole condition of the effectiveness of the educa- 
tional method of evanj^elizalion is that the school be a Christian 
school in the fullest sense of the word; for all experience shows that 
education without tlie pervasive influence of the spirit of Jesus Christ 
is barren of reforming power. But where the teacliers. and the whole 
system of education cliosen, overflow with love to Jesus Qirist and 
the riches of spiritual life, the school is pre-eminent as a method of 
evangelization because of its singular facility for moral training-. 

3. And this prepares the way for our central thesis, wiiich we will 
give in the words of that man of eminent success in this branch of 
work, Dr. Murdoch, of India: "The most effectual way of putting 
truth into the minds of a nation, is to put it into its school-hooks." 

Let none imagine that our thought is to make books for use in 
mission schools which shall be other than thorough manuals of the 
sciences to which they relate. 

We should seek a high grade of intelligence for the preparation of 
books for schools. Such minds will hold to tlic purpose of making 
each book a simple but trusty guide to the principles of the science to 
which it relates. Nothing requisite to the work is sacrificed^ nothing 
needless is lugged unwillingly into the book to deform it, but the 
Christian personality, the high principles, and the love of humanity 
of the writer cling like a subtle perfume about the book, and somehow 
transfer themselves insensibly to the student's mind, 'ilie writer of 
perfunctory space-filling quality, may do for the prq>aration of books 
for schools elsewhere, liut on mission ground the writer of school- 
books must be one who makes literature, and not mere catalogues 
of facts, out of all that he undertakes. 

Two illustrations will clear up my meaning. In Turkey the devil's 
emissaries have discovered the fact which is here urged. Some of 
the schools of that country, both Muslim and Christian,, have adopted 
books skillfully prepared by French athesists or their disciples. As 
with the celebrated divine who cotild bring an audience to tears 
through his pronunciation of the word Mesopotamia, so these masters 
of expression have given to those schools, books which leave the 
scholar a believer in the maxim ; " Let us eat and drink. for to-morrow 
we die." although the theme of the book be as juiceless as algebra. 
On the other hand, the Mission Press at Constantinople, published a 
dozen years ago a Physical Geography of Turkey in the Turkish lan- 
guage. It was a choice book carefully prepared. The edition printed 
in Arabic letters and authorized by the Government, was intended for 
the use of Mohammedans. It was taken in hand by the native book- 
sellers, and sold off in a short time at $1.50 per copy without expense 
to the mission for distribution, Again and again Mohammcclans 
expressed, unasked, appreciation of its exposition of the qualities 
which make nations great. One Turkish official said : " If this book is 
true, the teachings of our Mollahs are false." Another Turkish 
official, a Pasha of the highest rank, asked the privilege of annotating 





6a LITERATURE AS AN EVANGELISTIC AGENCY 

a copy for some improvements in scientiSc terminology to be used in 
a second edition, for he said : " It is a scientific work of the first order, 
and at the same time it has a healthy tone to it which our people need." 
The inspiring ideas of that book of science had a circulation and 
influence far wider than we could have dreamed. Histories, biog- 
raphies, readers, primers, such as are issued by the Christian Litera- 
ture Society of India, and its namesake of China, all have place in the 
class of literature to which we refer, and lend themselves readily to 
the moral culture that we need for the mission schools. 

It is high time for all Christians to awake to the fact that the 
world is now so small that it pays to educate and elevate the sub- 
merged races. And it is high time for the societies which have the 
mission of directing for the sake of Jesus Christ this great work, to 
see that funds are provided for preparing and printing the books 
which the common schools must have, if they are to take the part ex- 
pected of them in the work of evangelization. 



» 



CHAPTER XXVI 

PLEAS FOR CHRISTIAN LITERATURE 

The Power of Boohs— Books for Children— Appeals from Missionarle*— 
What the Press Could Do. 

Rev. George Kerry, Missionary, Baptist Missionary Society of 
England, India.* 

Carey, the BapHst. gave himself the trouble to translate the Word 
of God into the language of the people of India, and he has been fol- 
lowed in that land by a succession of grand men, who have passed 
to their reward, and who gave strength and time to the providing of 
accurate, and intelligible, and simple translations of the Scriptures. 
All these men gave themselves, from time to time, to the preparation 
of other Chri.stian literature; chiefly tracts addressed to the heathen 
and explanatory of the Christian religion. Something has also been 
done in India in the way of providing commentaries on the Holy 
Scripture. That lias been to a large extent elementary, no doubt, but 
there were difficulties that beset the early missionaries there. In the 
course of years, these diiScuItics have been growing less ; they are less 
to-day. and will be less in the future than they are now, for a marvel- 
ous awakening is going on in that land. 

Missionaries have cstab]ishc<l vomacular schools in every village 
where they have obtained a standing, and the multitude of readers is 
increasing day by day. 

We feel that the day certainly has come when the proposition 
often urged should be carried out, for men whose work it shnll 
specially be to provide Christian literature. We xvant it for our theo- 
t^cal students who are being trained in the divinity schools and 
Christian colleges, where native ministers and others are prepared 
by the study and reading of God's Word for their work. We want 
it for the growing Christian Church : we want it f(ir the masses of the 
people, who are beginning to awaken to the thought that the Chris- 
tian religion has come to remain; that it is winning triumphs on 
an hands, so that ihe leaders of Hinrlui-;m are filled with alarm at the 
activities of the missionaries and the results of their labors. Hindus 
in different part.i of the country are forming societies for the pro- 
tection of their religion, and they are imitating the ways of the mis- 
nonaries. They have their street preaching, their preaching in 
squares and public places — and they issue their tracts. So these men. 
who are fighting against Christ, without knowing it are helping on 
the cause, for they stir men's hearts: they set men thinking and 
inqtiiring. and lead men to search for books that shall tell them of the 
Eff of C hrist. 

Atcduc Reformed Cbarch, April 15. 



1 



«4 



PLBAS FOR CHRISTIAN LITERATURB 




One of the most interesting and encoura^ng things which 1 heard 
a. little before I left India was this: that when the missionaries are 
selling copies of the Scriptures the natives come, saying, " Wc want 
the book that tells the story of the life of Christ." Men are begin- 
ning to hunger for the bread of life. We can not satisfy this hunger 
by the living voice. Wc are too few, but there is the living Word 
of God; and there are tlic explanations of the truth of God, which 
may be spread broadcast throughout the land. These the people will 
read, these they will ponder, and the Bible llien set before them will 
lead them to Jesus Christ. 

Rev. John W. Butler, D.D., Missionary, Methodist BpUcopai 
Church, Mexico.* 

Long before the doors were opened for the coming of Protestant 
missionaries into Mexico, God was preparing agencies to send out into 
all Latin America. T,hc Bible and Tract Societies were preparing 
Bibles and papers and tracts. Then, on the other hand, the people 
were being educated. A modern Mexico means an educated Mexico. 
Wc can see in the City of Mexico to-day things we could not see when 
we first went into that country a few years ago. Coachmen and 
porters and other public servants sit on the curbstones, in the door- 
ways, and in public places reading the daily newspaper. The young 
are being educated to read. Twenty years ago the cheapest daily 
paper in the Republic of Mexico cost 6*34 cents a copy, to-day there 
are daily papers there for i cent. 

Now the American army, going down into Mexico in tlie winter of 
'47 and '48, had with them colporteurs carrying the Bible, and also 
tracts and religious books prepared by the various societies. These 
tlie colporteurs dropped here and there as they went through the coun- 
try ; and we arc finding as we go about the country, that the Bibles and 
Testaments and other Christian literature left by these colporteurs 
produced or resulted in the establishment of a Christian Church. I 
think if we could get at the origin of every congregation connected 
with onr mission in Mexico to-day. we would find that this congrega- 
tion owed its origin either to a Testament or a Bible, a tract or a 
paper left by some colportcnr or sent out through the mail. I remem- 
ber some years ago traveling some forty miles to the south of Mexico. 
I was riding tiirough a cornfield. 1 heard a tunc being sung which 
I had heard from childhood in the Sabbath school. Following the 
song, I came to a mud hut, and found an old Indian seated in the 
doorway with a large Bible on his knee and a hynm-book in his 
hand. I asked him where he had procured those books. He told me 
his father had received them from a colporteur during the time that 
the American army was in that country. The next Sunday I returned 
to that little town and worshiped in a little mud chapel with thirty 
or forty Christians, all of whom had been tijmed from darkness to 
light by that book left there by a colporteur of the American Bible 
Society in the winter of 1847-48. 

Now the different missions working in Mexico have realized from 
the very start tlie necessity of having their own printing houses. 

• HadlMo ATtDttc Prc»byterl«i Church, AftW aj. 




LITERATUKE FOR CHIIJ^BEN 



6S 



I 

I 



nearly all the larger mission houses have these, and they have their 
organs, too. The Presbyterians publish a paper called " The Light- 
house"; the Baptists, a paper called "The Light"; the Methodists 
have their "Christian Advocate Weekly": and the Quakers and 
others their own papers. The missions arc printing not only these 
papers, but tracts by the hundreds and thousands. Our own mission 
publishes between three and four million pages of tracts each year. 
The E^esbyterians and the other larger missions publish, perhaps, an 
equal number. 

Let me illustrate to you the value of our paper. Recently I received 
a Idler from a part of the country that I had never visited. It was 
from a man whom I had never heard of before, and he said to me 
substantially in this letter; " 1 have been reading your paper for a 
while, and as a result I, my wife, and our six children have been 
converted to Christ. Eight of us are ready to be baptized and 
received into a Christian Church." 

Some time ago a woman and her husband came to the City of 
Mexico and took rooms in a large tenement house. Seeing the porter 
in charge of iheir apartments reading, she a.sked him what he was 
reading. He said, " I am reading something real good ; and if you 
like, 1 will loan it to you." The lady borrowed the tract; and her 
husband too, seeing the porter reading, asked the same questions and 
also borrowed a tract. Each was reading secretly, hiding the little 
tract on the approach of the other. Finally, the man got his courage 
up to the point where he could mention the matter to his wife, and 
they very soon understood each other. The result was that they went 
that morning, led by this humble porter, to the Protestant place of 
worship and were introduced to tlie Protestant minister. And after 
a time these two people went back to their little town, where they 
established a regular Protestant ser\*ice. That man and woman who 
had been awakened by Christian literature given by that humble por- 
ter, were the means, under the direction of the Spirit of God, of estab- 
lishing five Christian congregations, in their district. That is what 
may be repeated everywhere if you people at home will sttpporl these 
printing presses which the missionaries are establishing in tliose 
countries. 

Rev. H. J. Bruce, Missionary. Atnerican Board of Commission- 
ers for Foreign Missions, India* 

The importance of providing a greatly enlarged literature for chil- 
dren and young people in India is seen in the fact that a million 
students leave the government schools every year, and there are 
15,000.000 readers in the country. Thu.s the Government is doing a 
great missionary work in preparing this great amiy of readers. As a 
■nile they will not come to our preaching. As a rule they will take 
the printed page and read it, either openly or secretly. Hence a 
Christian literature is a necessity to counteract the great flood of 
infidel and corrupt literature tlial is being scattered among them. 

1. Too great importance can not be attached to the necessity of 
giving our literature for children the utmost simplicity of style — so 

*lfadiloo ATCQue RefofiDcd Cburch, Agiril aj. 




46 PLEAS FOTl CHRISTIAN LITERATURE 

that it can be easily understood. I have a wonderful little book, 
called " The First Book for Children." It is a model of pure, simple 
Marathi, and has been one of tlie most useful and successful Christian 
books ever published in Western India. Dr. Narayan Sheshadri calls 
it "a body of divinity for children." In its original form it was 
probably prepared by Gordon liall and Samuel Newell, our first 
missionaries in the ^^a^alhi country, and it was first published io 
1818. It required twenty-five years for it to grow up to its present 
form. My copy, printed ten years ago, represents the fifty-eighth 
edition as issued by the Bombay Tract Society, and many editions 
were published by the American Board and other societies in the 
earlier days. Thus for more than eighty years it has been one of our 
most useful books, and there arc records of conversions connected 
with its history. 

2. The appearance of our literature for children, as for adults, has 
been sadly overlooked. 

Pictures are as necessary in books in the vernacular languages as 
they are in English. One reason for the great success of the publi- 
cations of the Christian Literature Society of Madras, is that they 
are profusely and beautifully illustrated. 

3. The aim of all Christian literature should be to lead the readers, 
directly or indirectly, to Christ. It is a common saying among the 
people at Satara, with reference to our preaching, that wherever the 
preacher may begin, he always ends with Jesus Chri.st. Every tract 
issued should contain enough of the gospel, plainly stated, that a 
man may be saved by it if he only will hear. Our literature for 
children, while it should not seem to obtrude the gospel, should 
nevertheless be so permeated with its spirit, that its tendency will be 
to lead the reader to salvation tlirough Jesus Christ. 

Rev. J. E. Abbott, D.D., Missionary, American Board of Com- 
missioners for Foreign Missions, India* 

One of the most striking results of the contact of Oriental peoples 
with the Western world is tlie development of a taste for reading. The 
progress of literature in India is a marked illustration in point, and in 
the presentation of the subject I intend to confine myself to India. 
The large bookstores in India's chief cities that deal almost exclu- 
sively in English books and are patronized by Indians, are the 
outward proofs of the immense influence English literature is gaining 
over the Indian mind. 

1. At first sight the responsibility of missions for the production of 
pure Christian literature in the English language may not seem very 
pressing, but two considerations emphasize that responsibility. The 
first is that the poverty of the people creates a demand for the cheaper 
English literature. In the bookshops of Bombay, novels, whose sug- 
gestive titles of " Mysteries of London," " Mysteries of Paris," and 
the like, will give an idea of their character, crowd the shelves, and 
furnish the students a source for improving their knowledge of Eng- 
lish, and sad to think, a source of corrupting their moral life, lo say 

• M'dlMn Aveaue Reformed Ctiurch, April 15. 



i 



RESPONSIBILITY OF THB MISSIONS 



«> 



raothing of the false idea they give of life in Christian countries, of 
^vhich many suppose these novels are a faithful picture. 

The second consideration is that our cheaper religious literature, 
bowever good for us, is not exactly suited to them, for their approach 
to religious and social questions Is from a different starting point. In 
general, the whole setting of these books is foreign to them. The 
social life the book refers to is that of another people, and its pictures 
are not tlK>sc of their own home life, and so fail to touch their deeper 
and more tender feelings. Seldom does one see a religious tract from 
England or America Uiat is snilable to be placed in the hands of a 
[indu. The emphasis is on the wrong place for the Hindu point of 
iew. Tracts arc seldom needed on the existence of God, but on the 
way in which we are to regard Him. We do not need tracts to empha- 
size so much His omnipotence, omniscience, and omiiipre-sence, as His 
holiness, hatred of sin, and self-sacrificing love of man. 

What India, as to English books, needs, is to be flooded with high- 
class Christian literature in the English language, created on her soil, 
■written with her peculiar problems in mind, and published in a form 
'adapted to die pockets of the great mass of her readers of English. 

2. Only in the last fifty yi-ars ha.s there spnmg up a vernacular 
literature modeled after English literature. Generally speaking, its 
intrinsic merit is not high; first, hecause those for whom books of 
that character might be written are English readers, and prefer such 
books in English, and secondly, because the existence of a lower 
taste creates a literature to suit it. Expensive vernacular bonks sel- 
dom pay; the cheaper may do so, and hence the inferior writers fill 
the field in India. 

Those of us who are familiar with the production of Christian 
vernacular books and tracts are aware, in the first place, that our 
expensive books are not of so high intrinsic merit that they can force 
their way when English is preferred, and secondly, that althongh our 
cheaper books are sold at a less price than native books, they are 
handicapped by the fact that they are Christian, and too often because 
.of a lack of intrinsic merit here also. This department of Christian 
'work has not had the financial support which it needs to make a high- 
class literature possible, and we have had to depend too much on 
cheapness of price for securing its ciradation. 

Periodical literature, tixi, needs greater attention. Many missions 
have their weekly or monthly organs which have their limited circu- 
llation among Christians and non-Oiristians. But the insignificance 
of their size, the nnattractiveness of (heir appearance, and the fact 
^Ihat they are edited by missionaries or others who are busy with 
a hundred other things. make.«! one feel that Christian periodical 
literature in India lacks proper support. Instead of occupying the 
front rank in evangelistic work, pioneering the way. meeting week 
by week new phases of thought as mrrcnt events bring them to the 
surface, and forn'ng its way by its attractiveness and grasp of prob- 
lems affecting the Indian mind, it is made to hobble along half starved, 
in the rear. There are many monthly Christian magazines in the 
vernacular of India, but there arc none that approach the excellence 
in art and in contents of the magazines we have here at home. But 





PLEAS FOR CHRISTIAN LITERATURE 



such are much needed, where questions of deep interest can be dis- 
cussed in an exhaiistive manner. The lack is not because editors 
can not be found. In the Bombay Presidency there is a young man in 
the prime of life, a lirahman by birth, a Sanskrit scholar, with a mind 
deeply philosophic, a pwt whose verses arc loved and prized, and 
which notwithstanding their deeply Christian fervor arc sought for in 
the Hindu press, whose pen itches for its prupcr sphere, wlio could 
edit a magazine with judgment, and make it acceptable to Hindu and 
Christian. Bui the door of a providential opening stands only half 
used, because Christian givers have not realized the place this sort of 
literature might occupy if given the support its imjKirtance deserves. 

As editor for fourteen years of a weekly mission paper, The 
Dnyaiwdaya, I have had abundant opimrtunlty to watch the effect, 
and note the possibilities, of .such periodicals. Editors of the non- 
Christian press watch the.se productions from mission sources. Their 
attitude may he hostile or it may be friendly. In either case it gives 
the Christian press a greater number of readers because of these 
attentions from the non-Christian press. It is not an uncommon 
thing for the reformed press of India to side with the Oiristian 
press and thus work together for desired changes in the social and 
religious life of the people. Not only therefore is there the direct 
influence on the readers of the CTiristian press, but a very important 
indirect influence on the non-Christian press itself. Tlie wonderful 
increase of libraries in the larger towns and villages of India affords 
us further opportunity. Speaking for the Bombay Presidency, in 
these libraries and reading-rooms Cliristian literature is always wel- 
come. A little over a year ago I sent out cards to one hundred of such 
libraries asking them whether they would be willing to receive a dona- 
tion of Christian books. Among the replies received from their 
secretaries, it has been no little gratification to read from some of 
them that they personally believe the truths of Christianity and are 
glad to promote it by the circulation of Christian literature. This 
open door for our influence has not been entered as it might be. Its 
great value lies in the fact that thousands who, from fear of persecu- 
tion or from the fact of poverty, will not subscribe to our Christian 
periodicals or buy our books, will gladly read them in the libraries. 

Aside from the need of a proper Christian literature for non-Chris- 
tian readers, a very heavy responsibility rests on missions, Tract 
Societies, and their supporters, to furnish a suitable literature for the 
rapidlv increasing thousands of Christians. We do not want our 
Christian children to get a taste for the ordinary literature that cir- 
culates in non-Christian circles. Not that all of it is bad. Many a 
book of Hindu authorship is moral in it.i tone, and modeled after our 
own better literature, hut there is much that is had, and the only way 
to counteract a possible undesirable taste is to furnish a constantly 
renewed supply of fresh literature to keep up with the growing taste 
for reading. 

If men of means who are looking for opportunities to invest tlicir 
benevolent funds where their influence would he the most ;videspread. 
could but realize the importance that literature now holds in most of 
our mission fields, this tlcpartmcnt would have a strong supiwrt and 



J 



I 



I 



ml! its p-eat mission. Fortunately very little denominational 
literature is needed, so that Christians of all names can unite to fur- 
nish the funds for those books and periodicals for which the demand 
is so great and the supply so liniitcd. Fortunately, also, such help in 
the form of subsidy would not cut the nerve of self-help on the for- 
ei^ 6eld, because tlic supply can never keep up with the demand. 

Rev. W. T. A. Barber, M.A., B.D.. Headmaster Leys ScHoot, 
Catnbridge. England * 

It is eight years today since, with infinite sorrow, my mission 
work in China was ended. Two years before that we woke one morn- 
ing, and all our streets were placarded with cartoons of the hog 
hanging on the cross. The hc^ is an emblem of lust in China. Every- 
where there were biographies of Jesus as the God of Lust. 
Ever>'whcre the little boys were singling ballads: " Drive the foreign 
devils into the sea; drive out their religion." In every hand were 
books telling the awful tilings we did in Christian worship, and the 
whole country was filled witli the monstrous hum of what tlie literati 
bad scattered broadcast. 

China is a literary nation, and to be moved by literature. Within 
a year from tliat day our mission stations were being burned down; 
our women and our children driven out of the place, and some of us 
were murdered. In those days we were spit upon and scorned. 

What a mighty change ! The nation that was incased in its self- 
conceit for millenniums, absolutely self-satisfied, and never dream- 
ing of any lack — that nation took alarm first. And then came the 
awful battering-ram of war and smashed down the walls of its self- 
content and ignorance. And then came the wholesome sense of need. 
And in that hour these men turned — to whom? To the des]3iscd and 
hale<! missionary. He had dwelt among them ; he had npenctl schools, 
and he had rnnstructed '* virtue halls," and they turned tn him. What 
a magnificent opportunity for Christ. Never since the ilay when Con- 
stantine became a Christian was such an opportunity thrust upon the 
Church of Christ. And we shall use that opportunity better than was 
done in the days of Constantine. 

You have heard of the work of providing Christian literature for 
the Church; but outside of that there is this great nmltiiudc of men 
who are seeking and inquiring : " What are the principles that make 
nations great? " And you want hesidcs that a l)roader literature, such 
as the Christian Literature Society of China represents. And no 
greater use could Ik: made by any missionary society nf its educated 
men than that, in fair proportion with the other modes of evangelism, 
there should be men set aside for tJiat work ; and every missionary 
society ought to snbscrilic money, and ought to set at least one man 
to do his part in providing this great literature, at the same time that 
he preaches, and so keeps his mind in living touch with the blessed 
nund of Christ, that his own spiritual life may be tender and true; 
that his mental powers may be illuminated. 

Ten years ago the Hunan folk met together and said: " We bind 
ourselves together by a solemn oath that we will kill any white mis- 

*Ctstnl Pit»b]rtcfiui Cburcb, April 30. 





70 




PLEAS FOR CHRISTIAN LITERATURE 



sionary who comes within oiir borders, will cut his body up and sent 
the portions to each hamlet and town to be eaten In token of our 
undying hatred." 

Ten years ago they said : " Not a match shall be used, because the 
thing is foreign." And you heard how these very men sent up a few 
years later to Mr. Timothy Richard and said ; " We liave opened a 
college for our youth. We ask you to send down, to be its head, tlie 
Christian editor of your newspaper." 

Ten years ago. not a match, because the thing was foreign, and 
to-djy their great examination hall is lighted by an ekctric light I 
Which thing is an allegory. 

Mrs. J. H. Pettee, Missionary, American Hoard of Commission- 
ers for Foreign Missions. Japan* 

America has given much to Japan — so much that Japan often 
speaks with miidi gratitude of America as the " honored elder sis- 
ter " ; and it is with great gratitude that we acknowledge that much of 
the literature given to Japan has come from America. The iVoman's 
Magacine is a great help, and one of the children's papers that has 
been published for a great many years there is also a great help. It 
is not especially for that kind of literature that I plead this afternoon. 
A good deal is open to our women who are graduates of colleges, and 
to those who read even a little of English, as so many of them do. 
But it is not so for the great mass nf the women. One of these 
women complained that she did not have a new pair of shoes more 
than once in five years, while a tittle Bible-woman, who was a very 
steady worker and walked a great deal, must have a new pair two or 
three times a year. That gives an idea of how these women are shut 
up in their houses. They have the Bible and the tract. Do you won- 
der that we want something else besides the trad ; something that may 
he interesting and helpful and uplifting for them to read? As I said, 
America has given Japan much. It has also given Japan some things 
I am sorry for. Hundreds of women in Japan to-day, are spending 
their time, while their husbands are away from home, in playing 
cards and gambling at each other's houses. These are not our Chris- 
tians. But they are the women that we want to get hold of. And if 
we had something to offer them to read, interesting, and uplifting.and 
stimulating to a higher life, I am sure that we could persuade them to 
do something else with their life than to spend it in card-playing. It 
is for this kind of literature that I plead to-day. 

Mrs. W. M. Baird, Missionary, Presbyterian Church. U. S. A., 
Korea.* 

In Korea one of the greatest needs we have is for reading matter 
for the Christian girls. We have portions of Scripture, and the 
hymn book, thank God, and the women learn the hymn book by 
heart, and whole chapters and books of the Bible. But they want 
something else. If there is any one thing that a Korean woman has 
taught her from the time that she is old enough to know anything, 
it is that she hasn't any sense at all, and is just like the animals in the 

• Central PrcsbyttrUn Church, AprU m- 




I 

I 



KBEDS OF THE WOMEN 7 1 

6dd. But those Korean women who have become Christians are 
learning to read. I know of one community where not one of the 
nromen could read. They heard of a young woman in a neighboring 
community who could read and who had no way of getting a living, 
and they sent for her and told her that they would give her a good 
li\-ing. if she would stay in the community until everj'one of them 
could read. and at last accounts theywere learning very rapidly. There 
was a little girl six or seven years of age. who had never had enough 
to eat in her life, who attended a Christian school, opened by one of 
our ladies. She learned to read, and she taught her grandmother, 
seventy-four years old, and that woman is now one of the happiest 
women in Korea. Those women who are leaniing must have some- 
thing to read. They now have two little tracts that have been gotten 
out for the women and girls. That is all. 

In our station arc Sfvcn of us who arc ready, or arc getting ready 
to work. Wt arc hoping that we may be able to start a family reli- 
gious paper, that can reach the women. We have what we call 
country classes, twice a year, which country women can attend ; but 
there are hundreds and thousands of women ant! children whom 
we can not hope to reach, and who can not hope to get to us. and we 
want to start this newspaper, so that we can feel that the field is in 
some sense practically covered. This newspaper is to be divided into 
seren departments. The leading department is to be devoted to the 
interpretation of the Scripture. Then will be a department on 
women's prayer meetings. Then, a department on schools for little 
girls. Then, a kindergarten department. Fifth, will be a department 
for the teaching and care of the older children. Then, a department 
on the care of the sick and the homeless. And finally, there will be a 
department for general missionary intelligence, all over the world. 
This is something that we hope very much to do. dear friends, and I 
hope very much that within the next two years, at most, some of you 
may hear that these little white-winged doves will be scattered, at 
least once a month, and we hope once a week, all over that north 
country, carrying the news of Christ, and that wonderful light which 
comes with the knowledge of His light. 

Mrs. Wft-LiAM Ash MORE, Jr., Missiottary, American Baptist 
Missionary Union, China* 

I have had the care of a girls* school in South China for many 
years, first establishing it eighteen years ago. We study the Bible 
as 2 textbook in our schools. We have very few other books for 
those girls to read, and it has been a problem for years, with nie, what 
to do with those girls on Sunday. The same is true of the boys' school. 
They need some other good literature that ihey can read on the Sab- 
bath. They have the Bible six days in the wctk, in their schools. 
We have found it very difficult indeed to furnish them with the read- 
ing that we wanted to give them. I can remember with sorrow the 
padcages after packages of books that I sent for from the different 
presses in the different parts of China. Some came, and they would 
be in a dialect which could not he understood by any but the very best 

• Ceotnl Pmbyttrian Church, April 94- 






PLBAS FOB CHSISTIAM LITERATURE 

educated women in our church. If very well educated, they could 
guess at some of the meanings of the cliaractcrs. Others would be 
so classical that none could understand. Of course, our girls all 
learn this classical language, but until they have been in school four 
or five years they are not able to take up a book that they know noth- 
ing about, and read it right off, without stumbling over many of the 
characters. 

The " Pilgrim's Progress " has been put into the Chinese character, 
not only in the classical character, but also in some of the dialects. 
But one of our best educated women read this book, and she thought it 
was a very funny book indeed. After having a missionary explain 
the religious teaching of this book, she said, " Why, I thought it was 
just an interesting book. I didn't know thai it taught an}'thing about 
religion at all." So you see that this book that we count so much on 
here at home is not always just the thing that we need out there. 

A mission scliool magazine is published by the English Presby- 
terian Mission at Swatow. It Js a very good magazine, but only 
those who have been educated in this particular way of expressing the 
thought, can read it. Many of the children that have been educated 
tn our schools are not able to read it. 



Miss Isabella Thobuhn, Missionary, Methodist Episcopal 
Church, India,* 

Some years ago, back in the eighties, a lady was traveling around 
the world. Some people travel around the world and see the sights ; 
occasionally they see the people ; they bring away what they buy, and 
that is all there is of It. Others travel around and leave behind them 
blessings and blessedness, that lives and grows. And one of this lat- 
ter class when in Lucknow, consulting there with one of the mis- 
sionaries, decided upon a paper to be published for the women of the 
country who had learned to read, but had nothing to read. She gave 
for this, five thousand dollars. The Woman's Society of our church 
took the matter up and raised twenty thousand dollars as an endow- 
ment, the income of which was to publish periodicals for women. We 
do not attempt a magazine, but a little family paper, going into the 
homes and bringing just what you would like to put into the homes 
of people who had nothing else to read — something for the mothers 
and something for the children — Bible stories, and maps, and family 
stories. This was begun in Lucknow, with two papers, one in Urdu, 
and one in Hindi, semi-monthly. It was found that there was more 
money to spare, and now we publish five papers, two of them semi- 
monthly, and the others monthly. They go chiefly to our own people, 
but they are also in North India and elsewhere. There is 
nothing paid for them necessarily, except postage. But there are 
women who can not get money to buy anything to read, and some- 
times it is given free. As the paper is carried out by the Bible-women, 
you find the boys waiting at the street corners and saying, " Is the 
paper out yet?" And the boys read it to their mothers, when the 
mothers can not read. It is appreciated very highly, We consider 
that it is a good work that has been done, and I will mention, in the 



•CeotTAl Prcab]rt«rUn Cburdi, April 14. 




J 



KEEDS OP THE WOMEN 



73 



I 



interest of endowments, that I have found, traveling through the 
coiintry, that the women who gave the money, many of them, have 
forgotten that they ever gave it, and while they have been asleep, and 
thinking of other things, thai which they did eighteen years ago is 
doing its work, and will go on through the century or through Uie 
centuries to come. That is a special good that literature can do — that 
when it once goes out of our hands, it g'^es on to bless, and it may be 
used in this way when we have passed away — we who have begun the 
work. We have taught the children to read, and after having done 
that, we must put something into their hands. They have nothing 
of their own. No one has ever been interested to give them anything. 
The men of India have said that the reason they have never taught 
the women is because there was nothing fit for them to read ;that there 
were things fit for men, but not fit for women. Happily, there is 
Christian literature. The greatest need has been for the non-Chris- 
tians: for those who have been taught to read, but who are not 
Christians. 



I 



Miss S. C. Easton, Missionary, IVomen's Union Missionary 
Society, India* 

As late as 1837, Indian men were asking in astonishment, mingled 
with scorn, " Can you teach a donkey reading? Can you teach so 
intelligent an animal as a horse to read? If you can, you can teach 
a woman." 

To-day it is estimated that in India there are a million women who 
can read. 

Is it putting it too strongly to say that this instruction by the 
Christian Church is a positive injury, unless good, wholesome litera- 
ture be provided ? 

With the activity of the Mohammedan presses, with the atheist 
periodicals advertising infidel books — the common infidel books of 
England and America, and offering them at half price to the students 
of Christian institutions, unless the Church of Christ is roused on 
this matter of Christian literature. I think we must agree that we are 
doing an injury rather than offering a benefit. Read they will, once 
taught to read. Read they will, whatever comes into their hands. It 
13 for the Church of Christ to decide what they shall read. 

In the government report of education in 1893, the number of girla 
under instruction was given as 294,318 ; and that was exclusive of col- 
lege students and of entrance classes. That the Government is 
providing for so large a number, and an increasing number every 
year, I think, ought to be sufficient to prove that the responsibility of 
thp Church of Christ with reference to education is on the decrease, 
while her part and her responsibility with reference to Christian 
literature will increase with each year. Up to this time, most of the 
literature of India has been translation — a translation verj- largely 
not in the ideas or illustrations or expressions fitted to the life and 
ihought of the country, but literal translations of our occidental books. 
viliich are wholly, or in a very large measure, unfitted for the Oriental 
nrind. This has been very largely due to the fact that Christian litcra- 

■CannlPrcabrtcrteaCbarcli Aprils. 





f4 FLRAS FOB CHRISTIAN LITERATURB 



turc has no recognized place in the work of most missionaries. It is 
rcl^ated to their spare moments. It is a side issue, put upon alrcady 
greatly overburdened lives. I think the time is fully ripe, and 
it is most important that certain missionaries, both men and women, 
connected with different societies, should be set entirely free by their 
boards at home to devote (heir tinie. their energy, and. if possible, 
their entire attention to this very important branch of the work. 

1 hope the result of this Conference is g^oing to be that we go out 
from here to the uttermost parts of the earth, to strive together, with 
one heart and mind, to push, as never before, this matter of Christian 
literature. 

Rev. Maurice Phillips, Missionary, London Missionary So- 
ciety, I»du2* 

I would like to emphasize the necessity of spreading Christian 
literature among all heathen nations. I have been connected with the 
Christian Literature Society and with the Tract Society in Madras for 
many years, and I have had a great deal of experience of the gocni of 
the books produced by these Societies in India. They are the means 
of scattering tlic knowledge of the gospel far and wide, and all mis- 
sionaries in India take very great interest in distributing these books, 
and every year millions of these books are sold in India. 

You are aware that a great many girls have passed through our 
schools. In our schools they learn the elements of Christianity. 
When they become wives and mothers, what books do they read ? 
They read our tracts : they read Scriptural stories, and they teach 
their children these stories. They themselves were tau^bt the most 
obscene stories about the gods of India, but the girls that have been 
brought up in our schools, buy our tracts and our books, and read 
them, themselves, and teach Lhcm to their children. In this way the 
books get into the homes, and they greatly purify the thoughts of the 
family. They eradicate Hinduism from the minds of the people. 
Some twelve years ago, in conjunction with a native brother, I started 
a newspaper — a monthly newspaper — called " The Messenger of 
Truth "; and there is not a paper in India more popular than that. 
One hundred thousand copies are sold every year, and I could give 
you many instances of the reading of Uic " Messenger of Truth " 
resulting in conversions. 

Rev. Timothy Richard, Society for the Distribution of Chris- 
tian Knowledge, China* 

Were the papers of this Conference intended to teach the mass of 

Christian church members who have not deeply studied the method.^ 
of foreign missions, I would feel constrained to illustrate at some 
length the necessity of a wider conception of the scope of Christian 
literature. 

But to an audience of Christian leaders, like those in this Confer- 
ence, I wilt only briefly refer to four points. 

I. We should follow the ex.imple of the Christian Church at the 
periods of its greatest vitality in the past. There were, in the days 

*Cc»uil Pmbficriaa Clmrcli, April 30. 




I 



\ 



ITS SCOPE AND EXTENT 75 

of the conversion of the Roman Empire and also in the days of the 
conversion of Northern Europe, as well as in the days of the Reforma- 
tion, diverse problems which the Christian Church discussed and set- 
tled by its literature. There are world-wide problems of our day 
which we must settle by our writings; and no writings of apostolic 
fathers or of medieval times can solve problems which were not in 
those days in sight. 

2. Christian literature should compass the solution of as many 
of the problems of life as the non-Christian religions attempt to 
solve. Brahman, Buddhist. Confucian, Taoist, Mohammedan and 
other less prominent religions collectively attempt, among other 
things, to explain the philosophy of the universe, the history of man, 
the providence of God, the laws of nature, and the laws of society. If 
Christian literature does not attempt to solve as many problems as do 
the non-Christian religions, and does not give clearer solutions of 
these problems, their followers will assuredly cling to their old faiths. 

3- Christian literature should be coe.xtcnsive with the works of 
God. In the textbooks of tlie Christian religion we have an account 
of the creation of all things hi the heavens above and in the earth be- 
neath, with the command to multiply and subdue, so that man under 
God may have dominion over all things. 

We have also an assurance from our Lord Jesus Christ Himself 
that the Holy Spirit would be given to guide us into all tnith. Reve- 
lations of truth since John was in the isle of Fatmos, are therefore, 
likewise sacred and divine. Modes of action in the cosmic forces, the 
laws governing nature and the progress of the human race, have been 
revealed to us in profusion during recent centuries, and have enabled 
us to vastly extend our dominion over the earth. To call this knowl- 
edge secular or profane is not Biblical. It is even a profanity and 
the basest ingratitude to God. We must therefore set forth in Chris- 
tian literature all discoveries concerning the works of God. 

4. The extent of Christian literature should also be commensurate 
with the needs of man. 

It is a sad fact that, although the earth could support ten times the 
present population, millions of our feflow-men perish from slow star- 
vation, not only in non-Christian countries, but also in Christian 
lands. Instead of devoting their energies to the rcninval of causes of 
suffering and crime, the greater part nf our legislators are largely 
occupied in increasing armaments, intended to suppress revolt again.>;t 
present conditions. As literature was enlisted in the interest of the 
abolition of the slave trade in the past, the literature of the Christian 
Church must, in our day, discuss measures for ameliorating the 
effect on our fellow-men of adverse economic conditions. 

In all successful mission work, whether in barlwrous or civilized 
countries, the Bible has had to be supplemented by other books. In 
order to capture the attention and regard of the best minds in non- 
Christian lands, we must offer to them the highest products of our 
best intellects. The sort of education which we give our own sons 
and daughters must be supplied to leaders of thought in the unen- 
lightened nations. Nothing less than this is a sufficient extension of 
^ristian literattire. 





PLEAS FOR CIIRISTIAN UTESATURE 



Compute the difFercnce between the national revenues of Chris- 
tian countries and those of nnn-Christian covintriL-s, and yuu will find 
in thai difference a measure of the superior vaUic of Christian htera- 
turc over the non-Cliristian. 

Or, think of the chief factors of modern progress, material develop- 
ment, social and international institutions, education and religion, 
and they arc summed to us in llie value of our commerce. The aggre- 
gate commerce of the world to-day is eleven times as much as it was 
ninety years ago. The cause of this vast increase, when sought in 
history, is found to be inseparable from the spread of new ideas, 
which may be justly defined as a wider diffusion of Christian knowl- 
edge. 

Our Emmanuel said, " What docs it profit a man to gain the 
whole world and lose his own soul." Those following Him have 
striven to save souls, esteeming them to be more precious than aught 
else in the whole world. These same Christians daily pray, " Thy 
kingdom come." That kingdom is to consist of an assemblage of 
souls redeemed out of ah nations, and tongues, and tribes. Who can 
estimate the vahie in the eyes of God of that vast throng of His first- 
bom? Yet the salvation of the multitudes in each of the tribes, and 
kindreds, and tongues must be through saving knowledge, in whose 
conveyance Christian literature is the main agency. The preacher 
speaks with comparative infrcqucncy and to comparatively few. When 
a nation is born in a day, the individuals of the nation must have been 
previously instructed by the printed page. In the pnxress cf con- 
version and reformation of whole nations from the earliest time till 
now, a chief and abiding influence has been through Christian lit- 
erature, and its value in the process can scarcely be exaggerated. 

John Murdoch, LL.D., Christian Literature Society, India.* 

Literature has followed the usual course of things. A savage docs 
everything for himself, and does it imperfectly. Civilization begins 
with a division of labor; with progress, work becomes more and more 
specialized. To this the great advance in every direction in modem 
times is largely attributable, Missions pass through similar stages. 
At the commencement the same missionary was evangelist, pastor, 
teacher, doctor, author, and printer. 

But the Home Committees of Missionary Societies have been very 
slow to recognize the importance of Christian literature. It has been 
regarded as a fforergon, to which a missionary might attend in addi- 
tion to his regular duties. Missionaries are not commonly set apart 
for literary work. 

The Church Missionary Society is a noble institution, managed 
by good, earnest men. Its " Centenary History " lias lately been pub- 
lished in three mas^rve volumes. Its elaborate index does not contain 
" Literature," as a heading. Under " Cliristian literature," it is only 
noticed that the Christian Literature Society for Inilia published the 
lectures of Dr. Barrows. 

The " History of the London Missionary Society " devotes a chap- 

* Madison Avenue Refonned Church, April 15. Rc&d by Rtr. G<org< Rabtoa, D.D. 




DEMAND rOR LITERABV MISSIONARIES ?? 

ter to " Christian Literature in India." It thus describes how little 
has been done : 

I" The utmost that can be said is that the Bible, or parts of il. have 
been translated into a goodly number of Hindu languages, and thai 
a considerable number of Christian tracts and books have been, with 
more or less success, put into a Hindu dress. Many school-books have 
been prepared, and a few papers and periodicals provided and main- 
tained. Yet it is hardly too much to say that a Hindu Christian litera- 
ture in any sufficient sense Is still practically non-existent.*' 
Two explanations are given : 

" I. Responsibility for the adequate performance has never been 
fully and frankly realized by the home governing bodies. . . . Chris- 
tian literature up to the present has not been a fully recognized and 
adequately supported department of mission work. 

" 2. This state of things has, among other serious drawbacks, pre- 
vented the existence of a class of literary missionaries. . . . This 
perhaps will be one of the developments which the twentieth century 
has in store." 
H While something has been done, the supply of Christian literature 

■ in India, as stated in the " History of the London Missionary So- 
ciety," is inadequate both as to quantity and quality. How could it be 
otherwise? " What literary work is now done by missionaries in the 
vernaculars is in a casual way, by busy men who, with difficulty, 
snatch the required leisure in the midst of other pressing responsibili- 
ties, and who are generally withtnit adequate native help." 

Home Committees recognized that schools and colleges could not 
prosper without educational missionaries. There are now upward 
of eighty of them in India ; but most .Societies have done next to noth- 
ing in providing those whom they have taught to read with Christian 
literature, to secure the beneficial exercise of the ability imparted. 
Truly, " the legs of the lame are not equal." 

Dr. Weitbrecht thus shows the increasing importance of Christian 
literature in India: 

" Owing to the great extension of Government education, and the 
pressure on mission schools of examinations and education codes, 
s<iueezing down religious instruction to a minimum, the provision of 
Christian literature for the army of readers is rapidly overshadowing 
the question of conveying a limited amount of Christian instruction 
to the comparatively few who attend mission schools." 

■ Happily, although there has been past neglect, the prospects of 
I Christian literature arc brightening. 

I As educational missionaries are necessary to put schools and col- 

leges on an efficient footing, so literary missionaries are similarly 
required. Their duties are thus descriE)ed hy Dr. Weitbrecht : 

»" Who is to watch the needs of his province, to inquire after literary 
workers, native and European, to suggest to them the part that each 
shall take, to unify and press forward the production of Chri.stian 
books in each of the great languages of India ? We must have literary 
missionaries, one at least fur each language area." 

The Minute of the Committee of Correspondence of the Church 




J 



7& PL£AS FOR CHRISTIAN I.ITEKATURE 

Missionary Society. September 26, 1899, thus aclcncwledgcs the value' 
of Christian literature: 

" 1. The committee have for some years had pressed upon them 
the importance of taking a larger share in the evangelization of the 
world through the agency of distinctively Christian literature, spe- 
cially in connection with their work in China. They believe this 
branch of missionary labor to be second to none in solemn responsi- 
bility and in possibilities of usefulness, as being well nigh the only 
means, humanly speaking, by which to reach the more educated 
classes of Chinese society." 

The Kev. Dr. Weitbrecht, one of the Society's ablest missionaries, 
has been allowed to give himself to literary work in India, and the 
Rev. VV. G. Walshe has been similarly appointed to China. 

The Baptist Missionary Society, since its establishment, has taken 
a warm interest in Bible tranFlalion. Several years ago it set apart 
the Rev. Timuthy Richard for Christian literature in China^ and it is 
hoped that a missionary will Ik given for EL-ngiiH, 

This year the Wcsteyan Missionary Society appointed the Rev. E. 
W. Thompson, M.A., to "literary work " in Mysore. 

The United Presbyterian Church of Scotland, for more than forty 
years, has shown its appreciation of Christian literature by paying 
half the salary of Dr. Murdoch in India. In China, it maintained the 
late Dr. Williamson till his death. His successor is the Rev. Timothy 
Richard. 

It will be seen that some progress has been made among British 
Societies in recognizing Christian literature as a department of mis- 
sionary agency. It is hoped that one result of the New York Con- 
ference will be a like acknowledgment on the part of American So- 
cieties. 

Two important fields, which it is desirable to occupy, will be briefly 
mentioned. 

The Mahrattas. — The Mahrattas, numbering nineteen millions, are 
chiefly found in the Bombay Presidency. Politically, they arc the 
most important race in India. If they were Christianized, they would 
prove zealous and able missionaries. 

The first Protestant mission to the Mahrattas was commenced in 
1813 by the American Board. It did very much for Marathi litera- 
ture by establishing a well-equipped press; it still maintains the 
Dnyanodaya, a valuable weekly paper, now in its fifty-ninth year. 
But a literary missionary is greatly needed. The secretary of the 
Bombay Tract and Book Society is a retired military officer, an 
honorary missionary, who wrote that he accepted the ofEce because no 
one else would take it. The missionaries of the .\merican Board have 
taken special interest in Marathi Christian literature, and it is sug- 
gested that the Board set apart one of them as a literary missionary. 

Mohammedans. — Among the forces arrayed against Christianity. 
Islam presents the most compact and impenetrable front. 

Of missionaries now in India, the Rev. E. W. Wherry, D.D., has 
given most attention to Mohammedans. He has written a commen- 
tar>' on the Koran, a valuable tract called " The Sinless Prophet, 
etc." It is suggested that the American Presbyterian Board appoint 




M 



I 

I 



I 

I 

I 

I 



SLACKNESS AMONG MtSSlONARIES 79 

him specially to labor among Mohammedans. He might first prepare 
a full account of the existing Christian literature for Mohammedans, 
showing which pwbfications are most likely to be useful, and pointing 
out desiderata. 

If the American Societies would co-operate as proposed, though 
much would still remain to be done, a great step would be taken in 
advance. 

It is a truism that tracts and books are useless until they are put 
into effective circulation. This is the main difficulty, hoc opus, hie 
labor est. At first everything was given away gratuitously ; now, 
wisely, as a rule all except leaflets are sold. 

It is cheerfully allowed that there has been an increase in tile circu- 
lation of Christian literature. The complaint is that this circulation 
is the work of a minority ; that many missiniiarics do little ur nothing 
in this respect. If all took an equal interest, the issues would be quad- 
rupled. 

I. It is granted that more is done in circulating the Scriptures than 
in other directions. Still, in 1898 the Madras i^ible Society had to 
spend Rs. 11464 on the circulation of 51.367 Scriptures, realizing 
Rs. 2,337. TJie average value of the Scriptures sold was about Y^ 
anna; tlie cost of circulation was 3>a annas. It is true that it was 
worth 3>^ annas to put a portion of God's Word into effective circula- 
tion ; but should tliis expensive system be continued if the work could 
be more efficiently done for half an anna' 

The " Minutes of a Conference of Secretaries of the Indian and 
Ceylon Auxiliaries of the British and Foreign Bible Society held at 
Madras, 1896." give the folowing as the result of " Past Experience 
of Auxiliaries '' : 

" ii. All have deplored the costliness of the Colportage system, it 
being found that the sales thus cflFected amount to only a small propor- 
tion of the cost of maintenance." 

Both at the Lomlon Centenary Ctmferencc in 1888 and at the Bom- 
bay Decennial Conference in 1892-93, the following resolution was 
adopted : 

" Resolved, That the Conference desires to record its conviction that 
greater economy and increased efticicncy in circulating the Scrip- 
tures might be secured, if the foreign missionary societies would, 
wherever possible, themselves undertake tins work, the expense of 
carrj'ing it on being still, where needful, largely defrayed by Ibe 
different Bible Societies." 

The '* Minutes " give the result as follows: 

" iv. In almost all cases the practical outcome of these appeals and 
of this resolution has been extremely scanty." 

a. To test the interest in tlie circulation of literature, a large mis- 
sion field was selected, mainly dependent upon one Indian Tract 
Society for its supply of Christian literature. In i8y8 it contained 
134 American and European missionaries, and at least 63 ladies work- 
ing" among women. The number of native Christians was aboiat 
t20,ooo. The Tract Society's ledger showed that, during the past 
year, 56 missionaries bought vernacular literature; 141 made no pur- 
chases, A gratuitous supply of evangelistic leaflets was offered post 




PLEAS FOR CHHrSTIAN LITERATUKE 



free 10 any missionary. Eighty-six accepted tlie offer; 141 did not 
apply. Out of 95 stations, 61 received supplies ; 34 received none. In 
1897-8. 25 subscribed to the Society ; 172 did not subscribe. Out of 
197 Americans and Europeans only one offtred a MS. for publi- 
cation. 

3. Scattered over India there are hundreds of thousands of edu- 
cated Hindus whose reading is mostly confined to newspapers hostile 
to Christianity. To benefit them, a cheap monthly illustrated paper in 
English, called Progress was commenced about twenty years ago 
by an Indian Tract Society. Its monthly circulation is about 3,000, 
which, for India, is considered fair. Last year out of 857 AmL-rican 
and European missionaries, there were 62 subscribers and 795 non- 
subscribers. The former showed their appreciation of the paper by 
taking 493 copies. 

For the present state of things, the Home Committees are primarily 
responsible. For about a century they have gone on without requiring 
missionaries to state what they were doing for the circulation of the 
Scriptures and other Christian literature. It was perhaps supposed 
that every missionary would do this without any inquiry on their part. 
O sancta simplicitas! But Home Committees had sufficient worldly 
wisdom to require returns of school attendance, contributions of 
native churches, etc. They knew what the effect would be, if mis- 
sionaries were allowed to go on without inquiry on such points. 

The remedy was discovered fifty years ago by the Madura Mis- 
sion of the American Board. It is simply requiring every missiouary 
to fill up a return, containing the following particulars: 

Number of Bibles sold or given. 

Number of Testaments and portions sold or given. 

Number of Tracts given or sold. 

Number of other books sold. 

Amount received for Bibles and portions. 

Amount received for other hooks. 

This form has been filled iTp regularly with great advantage to the 
mission. Many a young missionary would not have felt the import- 
ance of Christian literature; but the return required him to give it 
attention. 

Missionary societies should supply ruled returns, which would both 
call attention to the subject and facilitate the preparation. Some zeal- 
ous men are nnmethodical. The forms would require them to survey 
their whole work, and tend to prevent any part of it from being 
overlooked. 

The absence of a book agent at a station shows that cither the cir- 
culation of Christian literature is neglected, or that the missionary 
attends to details himself, instead of training the native church. Every 
mission, in a town of some size, should have a book shop. 
This should be considered an integral part of the mission, and be 
supported by it. The limited funds of publishing societies can best 
be spent on the production of Christian literature: the cost of circu- 
lation should fall upon the missions. Thus divided, it would be little 
felt ; otherwise it would seriously cripple publishing societie.'!. 

At the beginning of the century a classified descriptive catalogue 



MISSION'S ONLY WILL SUPPLY XT 8l 

sfaoold be prepared of the existing Christian literatore in eadi of the 
bngmges with ihe desiderata un<ler each head. A similar catalogue 
shoald be issued every decenniiim. 

The advantages of this are so obvious, that further remarks arc 
mnecessary. 

The following resolutions, with regard to Christian literature, are 
respectfully submitted for consideration: 

1. That missionary societies should recognize Christian literature 
as a department of ev'angelistic effort to which select men. who have 
ihomn the requisite ability and inclination, should be set apart, as in 
the case of education, being supported by their societies as before. 

2. That the remarks regarding the Mahrattas and Mohammedans 
be forwarded for the consideration of the American Board and the 
American Presbyterian Board of Missions. 

3. That missionary societies should require annual returns from 
their agents regarding the circulation of the Scriptures and other 
Christian literature.* 

4. That a complete classified catalogue should be prepared of the 
existing vernacular Christian literature, with desiderata under each 
bead. 

Rev. Richard Lovett, M.A.. Secretary, Religious Tract So- 
ciety. London.'f 

I want 10 state as my first proposition to yon, that apart from Chris- 
tian missions there would at this moment be no Qiristian literature 
over a very large area of the world. Some time ago there was a 
fashionable shibboleth that said civilization should precede Chris- 
tianity. As a matter of fact, civilization in any real sense whatever 
never does precede Christianity, and civilization as such — that is. the 
enlargement of the borders of civilized life through trade and com- 
merce, through annihilation of space, through forces that are not in 
themselves Oiristian — has done nothing whatever to enrich the world 
with a helpful literature. Take for example the great British East 
India Company. It was in very close touch with many parts of India 
for a century before Carey went there. You can not trace anything 
in the history of that society remotely resembling a Christian literature 
circtilalcd for the benefit of the people under its control. If you 
go to Africa and look at the history of the great Dutch company that 
for a still longer period was in touch with South Africa and 
with native life, you will find that tliey never lifted a finger nor spent 
a coin nor seemed to feel that they had the remotest responsibility to 
the natives, with whose life and with whose products they were in 
close touch, as to providing a helpful and uplifting literature. I was 
speaking a few weeks ago with that prince of modern missions, the 
Rev. W. Holman Bentley. of the great Baptist mission on the Congo, 
and I said to him. " Mr. Bentley. what did trade do for the natives 
along the Congo before the mission opened up that great waterway? " 
He said, " Nothing," and, as you know, it was to Mr. Bentley's labors 

"The Brttiob anil Foreica Bible fMciety Ga.b1eil tbeir deleiiate, Ui« Ker. Caaoa Bdnondg 
dufint; (he Conference tbM it cuppons thit propoML 
t Cenuil Pntt>]rterUa Cburcb, April ay 




J 




Sa FLEAS FOtt CHRISTIAN LITKRATURE 



that ihc reduction of the Congo languages to writing was due. 
Attliough civilization in a form has been in touch with many areas of 
that kind for long years, you can not trace to any of these influences 
anything really effective in the way of producing Christian literature. 

On the other hand — and this is my second proposiiion — with very 
limited means, modern Christian missions have heen marvelous in the 
way of providing Christian literature for the heathen peoples with 
whom they have been hrought into contact. I think the Church is 
coming to feel thai one of the greatest achievements of niodem mis- 
sions has been literature. This Christian literatnrc, imperfect and 
unsatisfactory as it is, is still in many respects one of the greatest 
achievements of the Church. 

Take, for example, the history of the Serampore mission. There 
were side by side with Carey and the work of his hlerary colleagues 
men who gave enormous energ\-, enormous time, wasted themselves 
nobly in evangelistic service, and you can not trace their work in India 
to-day ; but you can trace in a hundred ways the results of Carey's 
persistent, devoted, comprehensive hterary work. 

If you go to other fields you find the same story. The directors of 
the London Missionary Society a little over a hundred years ago sent 
a company of men to Tahiti. They were, in the curious phrase of 
tliat lij7ie, " Godly men acquaintetl with the mechatiical arts," and the 
theory was that by their trade and liandicraft, and by their power of 
convincing the natives of the benefits nf civili?:ation, there would 
very soon be established in Tahiti a self-supporting mission — a center 
of light and influence from which there might extend to the other 
islands of the South Seas self-propagating missions. Well, now, 
what happenefl ? Henry Knott, a bricklayer, was the salvation of that 
mission, and he was the salvation of it because he was led very soon to 
see that little or nothing could be done with those people until the 
preaching of the living voice was supplemented by the abiding influ- 
ence of the printed page. Thus he was slowly led to make the chief 
work of his hfe the preparation of the Tahitian Bible and Tahitian 
summaries of Christian truth, and it was these, ratlier than the evan- 
gelistic work of the preacher, that ultimately made that island a cen- 
ter of light for so many places in the South Pacific. 

You have the same lesson taught from South Africa. I am not for 
a moment seeking to undervalue evangelistic work in the mission 
field. From the first, the two potent forces in Ihc life of the Christian 
Church have been the living voice and the printed page. We some- 
times forget that this has been so from the first, and it is of Divine 
appointment. I am here to say that I believe most firmly, and I hope 
one of the great influences resiihing from this Conference will be 
more and more to impress upon the Church this conviction, that the 
great missionary weapon of the twentieth century must be a literature 
saturated with the gospel, and ef!icient for the proclamation of the 
Christ. 

I say that if you go to South Africa you find the same law holding. 
We had in London not so long since one of the greatest trophies of 
modernmissionaryefTort.theman.Khama.thegreatBcchuana chief, 
the man wlio unfortunately has been ltd tu believe that civilization. 



THE PROBLEM BEFORE THE CHURCH 83 

apart from Christianity, is more willing to sell him bullets than 
Bibles, more eager to get drink into his country than it is to establish 
schools or devcli.ip collegialc ethication. Now Khania is b tropliy of 
the great work of MolTatt, and MofTalt's greatest work, that which 
will be most permanent in its influence over the great Bcchuana tribes, 
so far as we can judge it to-day. is the literary work enshrined in a 
form which appeals to the Hechuanas" sympathy and intellect in asso- 
ciation with the Word of God and the fundamental doctrines of the 
gospel. 

My third proposition is this : The achievements of the missionary 
church in Christian literature do not deserve at the present moment 
to be considered as anything more than elementary, and I say that 
avowedly and in the light of those wonderful achievements. The 
Church has served the apprenticeship for a great service which she 
has yet to do in the future if it is ever adajuatily to be done. 

Some lime ago 1 was talking with one of the ablest of our Indian 
missionaries, and he quott-d to mc a number of statements from mis- 
sionaries of ten or twenty years' standing, as well as from members 
of the Brahmo-Somaj and others, who had this strange burden for 
their theme, that positively one of the hindrances in India at the pres- 
ent moment to the -spreacl of the gospel is the inadequate nature and 
the imperfect character of much of the Christian literature which has 
been printed. Well, the explanation to those who know the facts is 
very simple. I have noticed that the Church at home is always very 
ready to appropriate the glory of a successful literary work accom- 
plished by a missionary' or a band of missionaries. Rut I am here to 
say that one of the diffiailties in the way of the administration of 
modem missions is this: That there is hardly a governing board of 
a missionar)' society, there is hardly a constituency of a great mis- 
sionary society either in America or in Great Britain which is pre- 
pared adequately to support the burden of literary labor. That is the 
problem which is before the Church of to-day. Since Dr. Murdoch's 
paper was written, the missionaries of all the different denomina- 
tions in South India at their meeting passed unanimously a se- 
ries of resolutions of which the burden is just this: There is greater 
need to-day than ever for Christian literature ; the achievements of thf 
past in this respect are at the best very imperfect, and hence the differ- 
ent boards of directors at home should give more attention to this 
work, devote more funds to it. and endeavor to secure abler native 
agents to work in co-operation with the missionaries, who, from their 
long residence fn the country and their acquaintance with the different 
vernaculars, are best fitted to guide and to develop the production of 
a literature like this. 

The great principle in all fields is the same : that we should drop 
the haphazard method of the past ; that we should endeavor to con- 
duct the preparation of Christian literature on thoroughly scientific 
principles, and that we should be prepared to devote Lo it — and this 
end of it is the practical question — we should be prepared to devote 
to it very much larger sums of money and a very much more intel- 
ligent attention and study than the Church at home has ever yet given. 

I was at a debate not so long since where the other view was again 




I 



PLEAS FOR CHRISTIAN LITERATURE 




and a^in emphasized, that it is the work of the missionary sodety to 
preach the gospel; not to provide htcrary missionaries. Well, now, I 
venture to say to this meeting tliat this is a misreading of the exper- 
ience of the past and it is a failure to appreciate the greatness of the 
present. One has at a time Hkc this the vision of a great opportunity. 
Oh, if the Church at home could only realize that God is placing in its 
hands to-day a weapon of absolutely incalculalilc influence in all the 
great mission fields! If you take our own English literalurc. satu- 
rated as it is with Christianity; if you lake books like " Paradise 
Lost." like the " Pil.i^rim's Progress," like any of those great Christian 
classics that have become part of tlie life-blood of our common Anglo- 
Saxon nature, and winch are, as 1 say, absolutely incalculable in 
their influence here, you have the measure of the opportunity abroad 
now before the Christian Church. Rnt it can only he made effective 
as the Church at home realizes that this is not a matter to be left to 
this or that missionary in the different outposts of the field, or in the 
great centers nf missionary life; it must became a question nf home 
policy ; it must become a question of vital importance to the mission- 
ary enterprise; and when it becomes this, I believe, as I firmly hope, 
that the twentieth century will see victories in the mission field as far 
beyond our wildest dreams as our achievements are beyond the 
dreams of those who founded the great modern missionary societies 
a century ago; and if we give ourselves to this work in failh and in 
zeal, God will honor and bless it beyond our largest anticipations. 



P 



CHAPTER XXVir 
PERSONAL PRESENTATION OF THE GOSPEL 

Uanncr of Presenting the Gospel— General Work for Women— Pcrwoal 
Dealings with Inquirers — The Evangclist'i Qaalitics. 



HuttCf of fVocttttng the Gospel 

Rev. W. F. Oldham, D.D., Missionary, Methodist Episcopal 
Church, Malaysia.* 

The subject assigned me is " How to present the gospel to non- 
Christian hearers so as to persuade and win." I thank the framer of 
this subject fur the dL-licacy of the wording and the inipUcations of 
the phrasing. 

The good news of a Deliverer from sin is to be sounded in the 
ears and offered to the understanding of " non-Cliristians " — those 
who have not yet learned the Clirist — not merely "' for a testimony," 
using them as an incidental means of bringing good to the speaker 
and the cult of which he is part, but so as to " persuade and win " 
the hearers to the light and the power of the good word of Him who is 
preached to them. 

The qnestion is, how is this insistent, urgent gospel of Christ to be 
presented so that it may " persuade and win." 

I. The presentation must be tevel to the understanding of the hear- 
ers. " Faith Cometh by hearing." But the hearing is not merely of 
sounds falling upon the outer ear, but reaching the inner mind. 
Here, therefore, is great call for skill and thorough knowledge of the 
people addressed. Each people has its own mental characteristics. 
Ideas can only be adequately conveyed by him who has a knowledge 
)f the mental processes that obtain among those with that particular 
of mind. The preaching to a South Sea island congregation 
must necessarily be very different from tliat to a philosophical Hindu 
audience, or to keen, rationalistic Japanese hearers. Nor is the method 
to be varied merely along such wide lines of cleavage as separate the 
savage or scmi-savagc from the men of cultivation, though of differ- 
ing civilization and alien faith. Among the different grades of the 
same people there is necessity for very different presentation of 
Christian teaching. The dreamily introspective, poetic-minded, hazily 
^philosophic hearer uf the Hindu schools in India can not and must 

)t be approached as the poor, semi-starved, overborne people of 
the lower castes, nor as the assertive and somewhat blatant young 
men who pour out of the Government schools. Nor are the grossly 
materialistic lower classes of China to be reached by the same 
methods as those that may be expected to appeal to men of education. 



•Cknw«le Hall, AprU ■4. 



A 




86 TERSONAL PRESENTATION OF THE OOSPEL 



Surely there is reason, therefore, for a closer delermination and a 
more (hnrongh preparation than ordinarily obtains in missionary 
preaching. Even the missionaries themselves arc in many cases too 
largely under the dominion of the belief that all that is necessary is 
" to preach the gospel," without recognizing the exceeding skill neces- 
sary to rightly rlividc the word of trjit]]. It is often forgotten that the 
gospel is an-comprehensive. suited to all needs, hut must be applied 
to the special wants of any given community. There is the well-fur- 
nished dispensary for the healing of all human ills, but the untrained 
hand taking down the same medicine for all classes of patients could 
scarcely be expected to effect much good. No more delicate nor dis- 
criminating task is there before the gospel preacher than that of suit- 
ing his methods and his message to the differing aptitudes and 
wants of Ills hearers. There is, therefore, one initial duty upon the 
missionary societies to choose trained men. and, further, to afford 
their candidates, when chosen, the opportunity to familiarize them- 
selves with tlic religious thinking, the habits of mind, the traditions, 
and the history of those to whom they go, and to provide for such 
oversight of the further diligence of the missionary along those lines 
when on the field at work, as will insure intelligent and effective gos- 
pel presentation. The crying need of the American missionary 
societies, at least, is this prtliminary training of the missionary. As 
it is, the great portion of the men and women are chosen without any 
reference to whether thry are to go to the interior of Africa or to 
Japan, with the merest smattering of knowledge concerning the reli- 
gion, the mrntal habits, etc., of the people to whom they go; and on 
reaching the field, they are, for the most part, so cngidfed in multi- 
tudinous drudgery, that I make bold to say the first five years in the 
mission field are of very doubtful value to the people among whom 
they appear. Much money is wasted, many precious years rendered 
abortive, many earnest minds discouraged and eager hearts chilled 
by the manifest impotence arising from lack of thorough prepara- 
tion. The churches must provide suitable training-schools, or attach 
missionary departments to the existing theological schools, if we are 
to cease blundering. 

2. Again, the preacher must avail himself of all truth already in 
the minds of his non-Christian hearers. All truth is Christian, and, 
whatever its secondary source, comes primarily from Him who 
lighteth every man that roTucth into the world. There are not two 
sources of truth, but one. Let the preacher therefore sincerely and 
generously give the largest possible credit to all existing triith in the 
systems under which his hcnrers have been trained. Christianity does 
not ask for a " tabula rasa " for the writing of its golden words, but 
seeks rather to present ITim as the " fullness " and the " fulfiller," 
who is already everywhere present in all the faithful in the measure in 
which they hold religious truth and spiritual values. Every grain of 
unacknowledged truth in the mind of the hearer is a mountain obsta- 
cle against the usefulness of the unknowing and intolerant preacher. 
Here, again. I would point the necessity for the training of the 
preacher in the knowledge of the faith to whose adherents he preaches. 
In the denomination to which I belong, of all onr theological semi- 



Uv\NN£R OF PRESENTING THE GOSPEL 



«7 



nan'cs but one gives any but the most perfunctory attention to the 
study of the alien faiths, and yet scores of men gu from these non- 
fitting schools to all the mission fields of Asia "to heat the air" 
throtigh years of straitened and constricted service. 

Wlien the preacher is a foreigner, very great delicacy is necessary 
to avoid hurting the national feeling or race prejudices. What- 
ever the facts, a flaunting of the superiority of one's own peo- 
ple and their ways as over against the " effete East," can never pave 
the way for that lending of the heart to the power of the message 
which alone is the paramount object sought in all preaching. It goes 
hardly with the heavenly message when the earthly messenger 
appears in any way an alien in thought and in national affinities ; and 
when the smoke from the funnel of a gimboat is constantly seen on 
his horizon, and the loss of a province or two is the penalty of any 
physical violence done to him, the non-Christian hearer can not be 
blamed for violently disapproving of any expressed or implied exalta- 
tion of foreign lands over their own. nor for doubling the self-sacri- 
ficing nioltves that inspire the preacher. When the bearers are ambi- 
tious Ja(>anese, or contemptuous Chinamen, or fanatical Muslims, or 
the secretly aspiring young men of India, the need for greatest 
delicacy is imperative. There is room for wide divergence of opinion, 
hut I am persuaded that he is the best missionary, who, when he 
reaches the people whom he is to serve, ceases to be an Englishman, 
or an American, or a German, in one great engulfing desire to serve 
those who henceforth shoukl Ik- his own. 

If those be the characteristics to be sought in the order, manner, 
and form of the message, there are some desiderata in the Inner con- 
tent of the message that can only be supplied by thf inner life of the 
messenger. There can rarely be persuasion and never heart con- 
test without deep earnestness in the preacher. 

" Send us teachers with hot hearts," said a heathen delegation, ap- 
pealing to John G. Paton. " Hot hearts " give currency everywhere 
to the minted words of the Scriptures, and though the form of expres- 
sion may vary and ouslit to vary with different peoples, the fact of 
an intense and heartfelt concern in the hearers and belief in the mes- 
sage, can never be absent, if we are to prevail. 

Much, too. will depend npnn the presence of a deep sympathetic 
love. We win not. because we love not. Attempt to disguise it as we 
may, if there be in us any secret contempt for the people, any lofty 
feeling of haughty .superiority, any idea of comparative worthless- 
ness in the race, or poverty of salvablc malerial in the persons ad- 
dressed, the message is witliout power, and rarely effects anything. 
How often have we been amazed at the comparative unfruitfulness 
of splendidly equipped men, while again others, with no special mental 
outfit, seem to have found the secret hiding-places of power and the 
most stubborn oppositions liave broken down before the Tove-per- 
suading earnestness of men who came from mounts of vision where 
ihcy looked upon God that they might learn to look with conquering 
compassion upon the sore needs of their bearers. How well do I 
remember a bumble man of God who had but halting knowledge of 
the language, and whose intenectu.il compass in any language was 




I 




88 PERSONAL FRESENTATION OF THE C'OSPEL 



not great, who, yet, among the hardest oppositions, laid such hold 
upon the hearts of his Muslim hearers that many of them were 
secretly won to faith in Jesus Christ, and several made open profes- 
sion of their faith. One weapon he wielded. More effective it was 
than David's sling, or Shamgar's ox-goad. lie attacked the opposi- 
tions against his Lord — he defended his loyalty to his Master, with 
such yearning love for the opposers that lie rarely failed to win. In 
the absence of this love, the man, however splendidly furnished other- 
wise, would much better return to his own land where he may do 
less harm even if he do no more good. 

And last, but all comprehensive, the missionary preacher needs the 
fullness of ihe Holy Spirit — the secret of the hiding-places of God's 
power. For the Spirit is He who is the illuminatar, the quickener, 
the energizer of the spiritual life among all men. Though there be 
all knowledge, personal amiability and cagL-mcss to win^ unless there 
be added that inexpressible something, rliat ineffable, mysterious but 
all-compelling energy — the preaching will be largely in vain. 

Follow the records of missiiinary triumph, and see how always 
it is men bedewed with the Spirit's presence and anointed with }iis 
power, who have been the great conquerors, from Peter at Pentecost 
to the humblest native worker who in teeming India or China gathers 
his countrymen into the church by the score. How came William 
Taylor, in unfamiliar South Africa, speaking through interpreters, 
to gather native converts by the hundred: or years after in more diffi- 
cult Uombay, still through interpreters, to win I'arsecs, high-caste 
Hindus and Mohannncdans. as well as godlcs.s nominal Christians to 
humble surrender ;o Jesus Christ? Read the thrilling story of the 
Baptist Ongole mission, or the even more fascinating lale of how 
at the Adjmlhya mela in India. Missionary Knowlcs, witli a band of 
bowed and weeping native helpers, saw scores of Hindus of all castes 
and conditions seek the Lord Christ with an abandon and depth of 
earnestness not to be exceeded in a revival in any Christian land. 
This great company knows of hundreds nf others who have been vic- 
torious " turners of the world upside down." These have seen opium 
smokers of China saved ; proud, mnccitcd literati awed into humble- 
ness; gross clod-bound coolies toLiclied with the power and the grace 
of the invisible. Contemptuous Brahmans nf India have humbled 
themselves; fierce Muslims have cried for merry at the cross; the 
poor have been uplifted; the lofty broupht low; the sinful and the 
sorrowing have been gladdened ; and the opprc.'i.^ied and bowed in 
heart have been joyously set free. And all this, brethren, not by the 
might nf human knowledge, nor by the power of hnman eloquence, 
but by the Spirit of Ihe Ixirrl Got! reincarnate*! in human hearts and 
so preparing and pervading the message that came from them that 
before our eyes thousands in all lands have yielded themselves to the 
power of the invisible God. Again the message sounds in all our 
ears, to be individually realized—" Tarry ye until ye be indued with 
power from on hiph." The all inclu.'^jvc need of the preacher in 
foreign lands is to be a man Stephen-like, " full of faith and the 
Holy Ghost " ; tlien shall the gospel preached through his lips " per- 
suade and win." 



MANNER OF PRESENTING THE GOSPEL 



S9 



I 



Mrs. W. M. Bairu, Missionary Presbyterian Church, U. S. A., 
Korea.* 

Christ left no directions for the establishment in unevangelized 
lands of institutions for the teaching of foreign languages, science, 
and art, or for the introduction of even medica! science upon a large 
and absorbing scale. That He did not do so, can not be taken as evi- 
dence that He discountenances such departments of work, but rather 
that He values them only in proportion as they contribute directly to 
the salvation of souls. And this brings us to a difficulty at the very 
beginning of an attempt to treat evangelistic work as a department of 
foreign missions. In the light of (he simple directions given us dur- 
ing our Lord's last moments upon earth the accepted classification 
becomes reversed, and foreign missions become a department of 
evangelistic work. Educational, medical, literary, and benevolent 
enterprises become not forerunners, nor contcniporaries, but attend- 
ants upon the one supreme object of saving lost souls. And the 
introduction of educational and benevolent enterprises into a com- 
munity not yet surrendered to Christ, may be regardcfl as a positive 
detriment, insomuch as the fat, well-fed, well-read heathen is less 
accessible to the gospel, than the poor fellow who has nothing, knows 
nothing, and sv) respontis gratefully to the touch of a friend, and 
learns with a great throb of heart-hunger that there is One who loves 
and cares for him. Now as then, the friendless and the poor hear 
Him gladly. 

First, and always first, is the work of presenting and inculcating 
the gospel : and yet. believe this as firmly as we may. there are some 
hindrances in the way of giving evangelistic work its rightful place 
in foreign missions, which it may be wortli our while to consider. 

For several reasons evangelistic work is the most difficult of all 
work lo do. In the first place, missionaries are often more poorly 
equipped for this fonn of service than for any other. We go out to 
a heathen country trained lo treat and care for the sick, able to carry 
on schools and colleges, to introduce trades and industries, fitted to do 
acceptable literary work, or with a good organizing faculty that may 
even result in the establishment of churches. But in the infinitely 
more delicate and diffiailt work of dealing directly with human souls, 
many of us are awkward and unskillful. 

Something stands in the way of asking with ease the straight- 
forward question : " Have vou beard of Jesus, and do you know that 
in Him is your only hope of salvation? " And lovingly and tactfully 
to press the matter in the face of indifference and rebuffs, we find 
proportionately hard. 

Another very great hindrance to prosecuting purely evangelistic 
forms of work, is the very often more or less imperfect acquirement 
of the native language by the missionary. No other department of 
work suffers so much at the hand.s of the man or woman who has 
tiot mastered the vernacular. With the help of partially trained 
natives, such a one may establish schools, prescribe for the sick, direct 
orphan asylums or other inslitntions. and even attempt literary work ; 
but if we are rightly to divide the Word of truth to listening people 

• Canwgle Htli. April 16 





9© TEOSONAL PRESENTATION Ul' THE GOSPEL 



whose very lives (Jepend upon it; if wc arc to reach those hidden 
springs of feeling and trust which bubble up silently in every human 
breast, we must do it by the free use of their own mother tongue. 

The remedies for these two hindrances readily suggest thctnsclves: 
No missionary, man or woman, should be sent out without a definite 
training in personal work for Christ. Gefore leaving home, mission- 
aries should learn to master all false sbanie in approaching other 
people on the subject of their soul's salvation. They should have 
already reached the point where ihey arc willing to be all things to all 
men, if thereby some may be saved. No one need fancy that per- 
sonal work will be easier among a heallicn people than among those 
of his own language and race. The mission field is no place for 
experiments that can be tried in the honie land. All should learn to 
handle the Bible as the sword of the Spirit. They should study it 
with reference to the soul-needs of others, and cxjiect to wing their 
shafts entirely from its pages. 

Again, the master)* of the native langtiage is essential. To young 
missionaries, eager, vigorous, and anxious to begin work at once. 
this study is often exceedingly irksome. And the temptation is strong, 
after the acquirement of what is euphemistically styled " a working 
knowledge " of the language, to abandon sustained effort, and use 
time and energ>^ in something more clearly fruitful. But such a 
course is little short of self-murder from the standpoint of success- 
ful evangelistic work. A fixed determination to acquire the native 
language with something very like the ease and correctness with 
which iJiey use their own mother tongue should characterize the men- 
tal attitude of all missionaries until the goal is reached, even if it 
takes the whole of a long term of field service. 

Given thorough previous training in work for souls, and a good 
knowledge of ihe language, much of importance yet remains in the 
manner and method of presenting the gospel. How not to do il, 
might easily occupy a numher of page.s. Above all things avoid 
appealing to false motives. I once knew a class of women who were 
gathered together for daily Rible stndy. The attendance averaged 
between twenty and thirty. They learned Bible verses and hymns, 
and showed a pious spirit that warmed ihc heart of ibeir teacher. Yet 
they vanished into thin air when Cliristmas and New Year's passed 
by without bringing them substantial gifts, and no expenditure of 
effort afterward ever sufficed to bring tlicm together again. Motives 
are so mixed in the mind of the Oriental, and so very little suffices 
for an inducement, that too great care can not be exercised. In a 
missionary community of considerable size, where missionary work 
has been prosecuted for a mtmlicr of years, it was discovered that 
without exception the native church was made up of the servants and 
their families, anrl the various hangers on and dependents of the 
missionary establishments. Cert.iinly. while we ought to expect that 
those connected with us should become converted to Christ, yet a 
church made up entirely of such, can not he said to have struck its 
roots into the soil ! When heathen people begin to flock to us. not 
becAU.se they receive education, or employment, or whole or par- 
tial support in any way, but because we have for them the Word of 



MANNER OF PRESENTING THE. GOSPEL 



9« 



Life, then have we at last tlic right to shout as we journey, " Deliver- 
ance has cotnc." 

The presentation of the gospel, to be effective, should be in con- 
formity with native custom, and in tlic spirit of Christ. Women 
especially, who have been trained in evangelistic methuds at home, 
will have much to learn in most Oriental countries. 

Among the methoils which hold an honorable place, are itinerating 
and chapel -preaching. The use of the first term docs not imply a mere 
covering of the ground in order lo reach a given place within a given 
time, which can hardly be called in itself a method of evangelistic 
work, but a journey consisting of series of stops where a hamlet, 
house, or single individual offers an opjiortunity to sell books, or to 
drop the good seed of the gospel by word of mouth. Personally, I 
value no evangelistic method so highly as personal conversation. 
Nothing else admits so much faithful and persistent projecting of 
one's self upon the hearer; no other method brings the preacher and 
the people so close togeiher, and h must be added in consequence, that 
no other method necessitates so much jjersonal piety ami consecra- 
tion on the part of tlit- missionary. The people are very largely illit- 
erate, and l!ie printed page may have little uf convincing jKJWcr for 
their dull minds. They are not accustomed, probably, to the spec- 
tacle of a man speaking in public, and although they may understand 
his words, they are very apt to know little or nothing of what he is 
saying ; but the living epistle, they are as quick as the quickest to read. 

After the first period of evangelistic work, that of proclamation, is 
past, and a good Christian constituency is secured, comes the exceed- 
ingly important period of inculcation, when Bible classes for the 
funher instruction of believers, and schools for tlic training up of a 
native ministry, are of the greatest importance. Now. if from lack of 
workers, or from lack of appreciation of the situation, or for any 
other reason, the people are left unshepherdcd. only partially looked 
after and taught, the missionary may confidently expect but one 
thing, and that is, tliat the evil spirits which have been cast out will 
take to themselves countless other spirits more wicked than they, and 
re-entering the place which they had left, will make the last stale of 
thai poor people worse than the first. 

In establishing such classes and schools, which may be considered 
as the beginning of a lasting church organization, some things will 
need lo be carefully weighed. Arc the attendants upon your classes 
to be fed at mission expense, and their traveling cxjx-nses for one or 
both ways to be paid by the missionary? Are your schoollxivs to 
drone every hour of the day over their honks, with idle and llal>by 
muscles, living at a much better rate than they ever did in their 
lives, while their bills are all accommndatingly paid by EnE;Hsh or 
American money? Are they everlastingly to take in, and never be 
expected to give out? Such a course may be easier for the mis- 
nonary, more pleasing to the native, and much more conducive to a 
flattering attendance, than if the missionary insist upon self-support. 

From the beginning, and this is the conclusion of the whole matter, 
let the missionary never fall back from his high hope of establishing 
a native church, self-supporting, putting up its own church buildings. 



J 




TERSONAL PRESENTATION OF THE GOSPEL 



paying for its awn native pastors and literature ; a church self-propa- 
gating, furnishing its uwn evangelists, pastors, and teachers, men 
mighty in the Scriptures, ahlc to rightly divide the Word of Truth ; 
and lastly, a church capable of self-government. Difficulties there 
are many and great in the way of the accomplishment of such a 
purpose, hut the promises are to him that overcouietli, and the power 
is of God. 

Kev. Henry Richards, Missionary, American Baptist Mis- 
sionary Union, Africa* 

1 ventured In i8"y among a people that had no literature, no dic- 
tionaries, no grannnars, no books of any kind, and yet had a splendid 
language. The business of the missionary was to reduce this lan- 
guage to writing. VVc read : " How shall they preach, except they be 
sent?" Rut, hnw shall they preach except they can talk? — and the 
chief business of the missionary in going to such a people is to learn 
the language. Without the language we are not able to do anything. 
We began to try to learn it, but it was very difficult because there 
were no books, and not even a man who could speak English as well 
as this language, so as to interpret. I was the only missionary at 
that time among the people; I beg-in to try to talk to the people, but 
what could I say? I had men whU me for whom I must buy food. 
I would look at the food or the fowls that they brought, and I would 
hold open a piece of cloth, and measure it with my hands, and if they 
thought it was sufficient, they would accept it; if not, I would meas- 
ure off more cloth until they assented, That is how we began litera- 
ture in the Congo region. But we could not preach the gospel in tliis 
way. We must learn the language. I took a notebook, and every 
word tliat I could bear distinctly I wrote down, and wrote down the 
meaning underneath. In this way 1 had quite a notebook full at last 
of words and sentences. As I now look over them, I am very much 
amused. I noticed there was great affection between the mother and 
the child, and I thought I would like to get the word for " mother." 
I thought at last I had it ; but a short time afterward I found out the 
word miant " a full-grown man." Wc went on this way until we 
were able to talk with the people about ordinary matters. 

It is not a barbarous language, as we hear some of the African 
languages are, without much grammar in them. I venture to say I 
can preach belter in the Congo language than in the English. 

At last we began to talk to them about the creation, and found they 
Icnew God. They knew God as a Creator, but they said : " God 
doesn't love us or care for us," so they worshiped idols, and used their 
charms lo keep away evil from them. Tt seemed necessary to teach 
them the Old Testament) and to teach them that God was good and 
they were sinners. 

I went on in this way, but they wotild not acknowledge that God 
was good. I remember one day T was trying to show them that 
God was good. There is an Insect in that region called the " jigger," 
which burrows ttnder the toe-nails, and multiolies if it is not taken 
out. One day a man said to me : " You say God is good ! " I said : 

• Cmtr*! Pmbrterikn Church. April 3% 



UANNES OF PRESENTING TUE GOSPEL 



93 



" Yes; I do say He is good." " Well," said he, " then who made the 
jiggers? You slop talking) " Tlicy ask many questions not easy to 
answer. Wc wait on this way teaclnng, for six and onc-lialf years 
and there were no Christians. I saw no change. We suffered much 
from fevers. At last my wife was obliged to go home. She was 
quite willing I should stay and preacli the gospel. Many of the mis- 
sionaries, as you know, died in a very short time after arriving there. 
Wc had no comforts, no proper houses lo live in, and some of us 
began to question whether we had not gone out too .soon, and 
whether we should not have waited for civilization to be introduced. 

When I l>egan to get better, I thought : " Why was it that in the 
days of the Apostles, they preached, and souls turned from dumb 
idols lo serve the living God? " In reacting the gospels, and reading 
the Acts of the Apostles, I found out I had been making a mistake. I 
had not been preaching the gospeL Someone said to me, wlien I 
told them that the people did not feel themselves to be sinners: 
" Translate the Ten Commandments. Do not you know it is the law 
that convinces of sin?" " Yes.'' 1 thought. " thai is true." Wc say 
easily enough here: " Lord, have mercy upon us, miserable sinners," 
and it is quite true, but wc don't feel il. When I told them ihey were 
sinners, they did not like that, as wc had to use the word which means 
" bad people.'' They were very angry. Tliey seemed to have no 
conscience of sin whatever. 

After translating the Commandments, I read them to them. To 
my delight they said : " Yes, those Commandments are good," And 
another thing they said : " And wc keep them, too." I said : " How 
can you say that? 'Thou shall worship the Lord thy God!' Do 
yon do that ? *' " Oh, yes, we do." I said : " Tt says : ' Thou shall 
not make any idols.' You have idols here with ynu. Do you keep 
that commandment?" *' Yes. we do.'' T.hen in regard to stealing. 
There was a man that had stolen from me. I said to him : " Thnu 
shah not steal; have you kept that commandment?" He said: 
" Yes." I said : " How about the hammock that you stole from 
me? " He said : " That is not stealing: I only took the hammock to 
the town." Then he became very angry, and broke up the congre- 
gation. And they went away. Then \ came to the conclusion that I 
should have to preach the gospel ; the law wasn't the thing. I began 
to translate Luke's Gospel, and immediately ihe people were inter- 
ested. Tliey listened with great attention when they heard that Jesus, 
the Son of God. came down, lieing born a baby, growing up to be a 
man. and going about doing good. As I went on from day to day 
in translating. 1 got on as far as the sixth chapter of Luke, and the 
diirtielh verse. Then I had a great diffiailty*. The people were 
notorious beggars. They wanted everything f had ; one a blanket, 
another a knife, another a spoon, and so on. The verse reads : " Give 
lo every man ihat asketh of thee." Tt ocairred to me to pass over that 
verse in translating. But my conscience began to accuse me; and 
the question was a great trouble to me. People were coming to the 
station now lo hear the Word of God. It was the gospel they were 
interested in. I went in my room lo pray about this matter. The 
oommentanes I had did not give me much help, and I did not know 





94 PERSONAL PRESENTATION OF THE GOSPEL 



what to do. It occurred to nic : *' You begin again at the beginning 
of Luke." So I began once more at the first chapter and thought it 
would give me time for consideration. And at last, after about a 
fortnight, I came back again to the thirtieth verse, and I maile up my 
mind that Jesus meant Jnst what He said. And 1 read it to them. 
As soon as I had finished they were very glad; that was the most 
interesting sermon they had ever heard, and they came and said: 
" White man, give mc that; give me that."' There was one consola- 
tion; I had very few things then. I gave them the things they asked 
for. This went on for a day or two. and I began to think : " Where 
will this end? What will become of it?" And on looking through 
the window I saw the chief's son. and the people were showing the 
things, and a man was saying: " 1 got this from the white man." An- 
other said: " I am going to ask for a thing like that." The chief's 
son said: " No; buy the things you want; ycni will take away all 
that the white man has." And from that time on I had to give very 
few things away. 

This work on the Word of God went on until I came to the cruci- 
fixion of the Ijird Jesus; then the climax occurred when I told them: 
" You say that you arc not sinners? There is Jesus dying for yoti. 
He never did any wrong, but died for your sins, and for mine." 
Then I could see that the Holy Spirit was convincing them. It is still 
the Holy Spirit that is convincing of sin. 

So the work has been going on. sinners have been converted, ever 
since; and now we have 1,500 church members at Banza Mantekc. 
All over Africa the work is prospering. 

GtnenJ WcA for Womeo 

Miss A. E. B.^SKERv^l,LE, fndia; \fLsstonary, Baptist Church in 
Cannda* 

(a) Itinerating and Bible or tract distribution—One missionary 
thus describes the opening of touring work on her field : The preach- 
ers and pastors began to request that we come to their villages. " We 
can not talk to the women, do come and help us." they pleaded, and 
thus the touring began. With one or two Bible-women, I would 
take up my abode in a chapel or school-house at some central point, for 
two or three weeks. Every morning we were off to one of the many 
near villages and back for a noon-day children's meeting, followed 
by a Christian women's meeting, after which the afternoon was spent 
among the heathen women in the homes, and the evenings were 
given to general Bible class. In this way. we visited all the churches 
on the field, and managed to accomplish a good deal in their imme- 
diate Tieighborliood. I make my home in a house-boat, when I go 
for long tours of a month or more. This district is well supplied 
with irrigation canals, and there arc many villages along the banks of 
the main waterways. We visit in these, slaying one, two, or three 
days, as the work demands. Inland there arc small canals branch- 
ing from the main canal, and into these wc put a small rowboat and 
are pulled or poled along to the more distant villages. 

In the early days it was quite a task to get work started in these 

• Cmlrary B«ptUe Chutch, Apf il 14. 



GENERAL WORK FOR WOMEN 



95 



I 
I 



villages where no white woman had ever been seen before. Our 
usual plan was to walk slowly down the village street hoping that 
some one would speak to us. thus opening the way for conversation. 
Sometimes a potter at work in an open yard would give us an excuse 
for standing and talking, or a tree all in flower would offer an oppor- 
tunity to ask a question, perhaps of a woman in a doorway near by. 
By the time a nuntber of questions had been asked on both sides quite 
a crowd of women would gather and we would be catechised — our 
sex, age, reason for being unmarnecl and su on^thcn the question 
for which we had been waiting : " Why have you come here? What 
is your business in our village? " We would reply that away in our 
country we had Itcard that they were worshiping idols of wood and 
stone, and that wc had come to tell them that these idols are nothing, 
and that there is but one true Gofl. and perhaps suggest that if any of 
them had a shady veranda wc could all sit down and hear about this 
one true God and the one way of salvation. If we had succeeded in 
winning their confidence a bit, one of the women would lead the 
way to her veranda or to her cow-shed, or to her back yard, and we 
would all sit down, and the hymn-book and the Book of books 
were gotten otit, and for two. sometimes three, sometimes four hours 
we worked on (the Bible- woman and I taking turns). Six months or 
a year later on revisiting the village we usually found many who 
were ready to call us to llicir houses. Of course it was not all such 
plain sailing. There were villages where the men folk were ugly, 
abusing the women if they even looked al us, and there were other 
villaf^ where, perhaps, one orthodox old woman would set her 
face against us, and not a hearing could we get. 

It is pleasant in going from village to village to meet and he recog- 
nized by women we had met and talked with the year before. We 
went to our old haunts, and after asking after everybody's welfare, 
we would ask: " Well, do you remcmlwr what we talked about last 
year? " Some did. more did not, and at best it was a very vague, im- 
perfect remembrance. So we licgin again, and tell them the story ; 
and as it was last year, so it was this, God gave us an abundant en- 
trance into many a village, and we had large audiences. In one large 
village where we had an exceptionally good time a mother expressed 
regret that her daughter was not present. " for," said she, " after you 
went away from here last year, she couldn't talk of anything but 
you." And the sister near by said; " she prayed to your God, Jesus 
Christ, every night before she went to sleep." Here was a grain of 
comfort, a seed dropped in a dark, yet loving heart. 

A lady missionary says that the very sight of the tent sets people 
thinking. It reminds them that the missionaries come to teach that 
there is only one true God. One day an nhl man asked her who pro- 
vided funds to buy tent and traveling outfit, and to pay expenses of 
travel from place to place. This gave her an opportunity to explain 
to the crowd of women around what the love of Jesus does. They 
wore all very much interested as she explained to them how the 
people who love Jesus thought about them, and wanted them to 
know and love Him too. They concluded that nothing in their re- 
ligion teaches them to think about other people in this way. 






r 



PERSONAL PttESENTATION OF THE GOSPEL 



In the distribution of literature, wherever practicable, it is better to 
sell than to give it away; that fur wlu'ch even a small price has 
been paid is more carefully ust:(l and treasured. Briglit-colored 
bindings have proved a great attraction. Tliough such a small pro- 
portion of women can read, many have little boys or jjirls who read 
to them. One old woman who bad been baptized but a few months, 
bought Scripture portions, in spite of the fact that she could not read 
herself, nor could anyone in her household, nor in the whole village. 
Cut, joining with five others, she called a heathen priest from a vil- 
lage three miles distant. They paid him half a quart of grain apiece 
each night for four nights to read the books to them. They were read 
in the street where everyone could come and hear. 

Another woman was much interested as the missionary and her 
companion read and sang about the I'rodigat Son. and said she 
wished they would write it out for her. She gladly bought a copy of 
Luke's Gospel, so that her boy could read tlie story to her. 

(b) The benefit of general "Lecture Meetings."' — India's non- 
Christiau women arc not sufficiently advanced as yet to Ix-nefit very 
much from public " lecture meetings," as we understand the term. 
When Christian women meet In village school-houses or chai>cts to 
l>c instructed in Christian living. Christian work, temperance, 
hygiene, the training of children, and other important topics, a few 
heathen women might muster up courage to venture in. But to reach 
them with Christian truth, the missionary must go to their homes. In 
their own qu.irters large audiences will collect in some shady place 
or under some convenient shed or veranda. Kou-castc women and 
those of the lower castes will gather in still more public places, some- 
times in the street. A missionary says; "In some villages the 
women begged us to come again in the evening, and we found that, 
after the evening meal was over. Uiey would sit for hours in the 
moonlight, listening." 

(c) The value, or otherwise, of singing and exhibiting lantern 
views. — It might be going too far to say that no young woman who 
can not sing should be sail to India as a missionary. Yet the attract- 
ive power of Ihe gift can scarcely be overestimated. That singing 
has an important place In the work, is the universal testimony, 

Pictures illustrating our Master's earthly life help wonderfully in 
fixing the facts in the mcmor\- of the women. The picture rolls used 
to illustrate the Sunday-school lessons in Christian lands have done 
good service in this way ; but caution nutsi be exercised in the use 
of them, as the ignorant women in the villages arc apt lo misunder- 
stand and think these arc new objects for worship. 

(d) The co-operation of native pastor or evangelist.- — In the 
beginning of itinerating work among the women on a field, the na- 
tive pastor's co-operation may he necessary in introducing the 
missionary to the Christian women in the villages. Afterward the 
pastor's wife, if an educated and capable woman, can usually render 
vcr}' efficient help. The presence of the missionary in the village 
(though she is only a woman) will often attract large crowds in the 
streets ; and if accompanied by an evangelist he can engage the atten- 
tion of the men while .she and her Bible-women talk to the women. 



GENERAL WORK FOR WOMEN 



97 



Her presence, too. will often give the native worker courage to make 
an extra effort in behalf of unbelievers who are higher in social 
standing than himself. In some cases ihe missionary times her visits 
so that she may find the women when the men arc away at work in 
the fields, and under sucli ciraimstances the presence of a man would 
be a hindrance, rather than a help. 

Miss Jessie Duncan, India; Misstoitary, Presbyterian Church 
in Canada* 

We arc finding opportunities for sem'cc in India which were not 
granted our predecessors. Everywhere wide open <loors invite us 
to enter and possess the land for Christ. TIk* children may be 
reached through their desire for a secular e^^iucation, while calls arc 
coming from Hindu and Mohamtnedan homes, which for centuries 
have been closed to the light, and now wc arc free to enter these and 
teach their inmates those tnitlis which are able to make tliem wise 
tuto salvation. 

X. Wc will speak first on metliods of presenting Christian truth 
to children. On account of caste prejudices among the Hindus 
different schools for different classes of girls have to be maintained, 
but Mohammedan girl.s will come into each of these schools, as they 
usually alrend the one nearest their home. 

The smaller cliildren will necrl to he taught the Bible orally, and for 
illustration, a sm.nll supply of objects such as are used in infant 
classes at home, a blat-khoard and colored chalks, may be success- 
fully used. We must educate the children through the eye as well 
as through the ear; we must excite their curiosity and impel their 
attention, not by scolding or beating them, but by the magnetism 
of a well and tactfully taught lesson. We should aim at giving each 
child a clear knowledge of the way of salvation: wc should teach 
them also the main facts of the life of Christ, and hymns, of whicli 
they never tire. A shortened form of the ten commandments is 
reviewed almost daily in our schtx)ls. while one carefully selected 
verse of Scripture is expected to he .so well learned through the week, 
by the pupils, that they may repeat il without mistake to the mission- 
ary on the Sabbath. At times we also teach them answers out of a 
simple catechism, or some beautiful hymn. 

In all our schools we are, however, able to advance beyond this 
elementary teaching anrl have Uible classes. Each child as soon a3 
she is able to read is required to provide herself with a Bible, and 
all such are promoted to the higher classes and taught separately. 
We must, of course, teach these girls the life of Christ in a more 
perfect way than they have hitherto learned it ; and how shall we best 
do that? Wc have tried many ways, but no method has given as 
much satisfaction as one largely adupted in our mj.ssion during the 
last few years: viz.: teaching according to an analytical outline. We 
have a complete story of the life of our Saviour taken out of the four 
Gospels, from the first words written by John telling the divine origin 
of the Word, to the last recorded utterance of the evanp;elists. To 
teach this has not proved such a gigantic task as would appear; for 

•CalTsry Baptht Church. April 94. 





qS personal presentation of the cospel 



wc have found that it can be accomplished in a year, or even less 
time, when the lessons are given day by day. Large charts containing 
the same analysis hang on our school walls and not only ser\'e to give 
Ihe pupils the names and places of the different lessons, but also make 
reviews a simple matter. Handbooks containing the same lessons are 
given to the scholars that ihcy may prepare tlicir lessons at home. 
T,o illustrate these lessons wc gathered together as many large colored 
pictures as we could, carefully mounted them on cloth and grouped 
them together by sixes in the order of the lessons on the chart. A 
good map of Palestine is also necessary for this kind of teaching. 

It is not much wonder that teaching in this way and applying every 
lesson to the hearts and lives of our pupils, wc are often cheered 
by a pupil whispering: " I love Jesus, Miss Sahib, I never mean to 
worship idols any more." 

Other parts of the Bible should be taught to advanced pupils. 
They are fond of Old Testament history; and once I liad great 
pleasure in taking up the Acts of the Apostles with two of my classes. 
Xo illustrate this I secured a book full of good piLlures, and with this 
and our Bibles wc began studying thai wonderful history of what 
Paul and the other Apostles did, aided by the Holy Spirit of God. 

This kind of teaching excludes the use nf heathen pundits or 
teachers; and I would like to say here that I strongly disapprove of 
allowing a heathen man or woman to teach the Bible, as is sometimes 
done where Christian teachers are not available in India. But along 
with this a diffiailty comes to mind which has often presented itself 
in the work there. There are women whom we know to be Christians, 
who. at least, give every indication of being such, but who, on account 
of the many things which hinder, are not baptized Christians. Would 
we be juslificct in allowing any such to teach the Bible in the schools, 
or must we enforce silence until they arc openly avowed and baptized 
believers? 

2. Work among women. — A large number of women in India 
live in the secUision of the zenanas, having almost no intercourse 
with the outside world ; and were it not that the lady missionaries and 
their helpers are allowed to enter into these homes, this ciass of 
women would be wholly unreached and untauglit. 

We all recognize the temporary nature of zenana work, but believe 
that as long as the seclusion system, child-marriage, and kindred 
evils prevail, whicli compel the children to be taken out of school at 
an early age. this kind of teaching will he necessary. It is no longer 
necessary, however, for us to conceal our true motives in teaching 
the women to read. The women know and accept as incvitahle the 
fact that in order to he taught to read they must also take Scripture 
lessons and learn to read the Bible. This is often looked npon by 
them at first as a bitter pill, yet by God's blessing it does not always 
remain so. Oftentimes the most bigoted women become at last the 
most earnest students of the Bible. 

For the oral lessons which will need to be given first, pictures will 
be found as good a medium for imparting the truth to women as 
to children. But as there is a power in the beautiful words of the 
Bihie, which is not in human speech, if the attention of the women 




rERAL WORK FOR WOMEN 



99 



can he gained while \vc read, this is preferable to wholly telling the 
[lesson slory oiirseives. 

The women who thus reofivc iis into their homes make lis sharers 
[in their joys and sorrows : and as personal influence the worM over 
fis the strongest influence, so we can often best teach these women 
by showing iheni that we are their friends, not by insisting on the 
regular lesson when heart and mind are stirred with unusual emo- 
tion, but by speaking words of comfort and cheer, and by having 
heart'to-heart talks with them. 

Although we should, as a general rule, avoid controversy with our 

piipiJR and not adopt an argumentative style of teaching; yet, if we 

would exert the highest influence for good over those whom we 

teach, we must make their religious l>e]icfs a study, and be able, 

fwhen occasion offers to speak intelligently nn the subject, to refute 

Ifieir objections and to answer their arguments. We ought, for the 

sake of Mohammedan women, to know what the Koran teaches ; its 

truths and its errors. Its truths are all gained from Judaism, or from 

I Jesus himself; for Mohammed has given us many facts of Old 

fTcstamenl history, and even said true things at times about the au- 

ithenticity of the Bible, the divinity of Christ, the prophecy being in 

llsrael'^ line, etc. Aside from this, there is nothing left in Moham- 

'tnedanism, as one has said, but "an absurd fatalism which denies 

all moral freedom, and one-sided views of God." We should study 

the life of Mohammed also to show the vast superiority to it of that 

perfect life — the life of Him who is our Prophet, Saviour, King. 

Mohammedans have no Saviour. 

The Hindu religion requires less study than the Muslim faith, for 
it is not so subtle, having less truth mixed up with it. Tt is full of 
flagrant errors and moral abominations, teaching the doctrine of 
transmigration of souls, giving to its followers their choice between 
all God or no God, the worshiping of many idols or no idols. 

Before I close this part of my subject I want to bring before you 
some questions which arise in connection with our zenana work 
which it might be well for us to discuss, viz. ; 

( 1 ) Should we try to exact fees from our women for teaching 
them? 

(2) How long should we continue to visit homes where no results 
have been reaped ? 

(3) Should we encourage zenana women who have become Chris- 
tian at heart to leave home, husbands, friends, in order that they may 
become baptized Christians? 

Some of the lower castes of Hindu women enjoy a freedom which 
is quite unknown to their high-caste heathen sisters. Some of our 
readers belong to these castes and arc taught in the house-to-house 
visitation, and there Is a way by which we can reach numbers of them 
together, which is impossible in the case of those more secluded : viz. : 
by gathering them into weekly mothers' meetings. The school build- 
ings, our bungalows, and certain villages are the places where some 
of these have been held : but had we helpers enough we might make 
a larger use of this kind of teaching. 

The baby organ, large colored pictures, and singing, form the at- 





PERSONAL PRESENTATION OF THE GOSPEL 



tractions beside the simple earnest preaching of tlie gospel, and we 
seldom fail of a gcxjd audience, while sometimes the numbers are 
surprisingly large. 

Each school should be made, as far as possible, a center for evan- 
gelistic effort on behalf of all classes of the comnmnity. Sewing 
classes for women are often a great means of good. By familiar 
talks with these women while we sew. a nuitnal friendship may l>c 
formed which may do much toward winning them to love our 
Saviour. Of course we try to teach them hymns and g^ve a Scripture 
lesson before dismissing. 

A very important part of our work is that of trying, during the 
winter months, to reach the women who live in tlie outlying districts 
of our field. This can only be done by our missionaries during three 
months of the year, on account of the extreme heat ; and in that time 
Httle can be accomplished compared to the vastness of the work to be 
done. The very simplest truths must be taught these village people. 
We are often told that in our regular steady work we should avoid 
demolishing the Hindu faiths until wc have given our pupils some- 
thing better in their place, hut I must confess to often reversing that 
order hiTC. No matter how we introduce the gospel, it must be told 
as simply, earnestly, and rnnvincingly as possible. I have usually 
taken with me a Bible-woman who is able to play the accordion, and 
by means of that instrument and singing, we have, as a rule, been 
successful in securing good audiences of women wherever we went. 

Miss E. A. Preston, Missionary, Methodist Church in Canada, 
Japan* 

A difference in conditions necessitates a flexibility of method that 
adapts itself to its field of labor. Save in a moditicd form, caste, early 
child-marriage, and total seclusion of women, are not factors with 
which we nmsl reckon in our work in Japan. On the other hand, it 
is yet uncertain whether day schools with religious instruction will 
be possible under the provisions of the new educational relations. 

My home for many years has been in an interior province of 
Japan. Hriefly speaking, our methods of work among the women 
and children are two: I. Meetings; 11. Visiting in the homes. 
Covering to the exlcnt of our ability the area of our province as often 
as possible or desirable, wc hold meetings in the churches, in the 
silk and cotton factories, in the homes, in children's meeting-places, 
by night or by day. In meetings or elsewhere, ihc teaching of the 
gospel truth clearly and simply is of the utmost importance. There 
should be an oft-repeated telling of the story so old and so sweetly 
familiar to us. so new and so strange to them, till there is an intelli- 
gent understanding of it. 

Individual circumstances should decide the question of collecting 
fees fiom the women or children for secular teaching when it is 
used as a means lo an end. If they arc willing to attend, and at the 
same time pay, there can he no rcasonahlc objection to taking fees: 
not exacting them, however, if proved a hindrance in carrying out 
our aim of giving to them Jesus. 

■ Calrury BapdM Church. April >4. 



GENERAL WORK FOB WOMEN 



ICX 



To all of those who believe but are not baptized, the Bible teaching 
wiih reference to baptism should be clearly pvon, but further than 
that, where it involves extreme personal sacrifice, it should be left 
to the individual conscience, nor should I prevent such, if sincere, 
from teaching the Bibles in the school or in the meetings. 

I do not favor indiscriminate visiting', but there is a harvest field of 
opportunity too large for the few sickles at our command, in visiting 
the homes of the women who attend our meetings, former students 
of our girls' school, and new homes into which in some legitimate 
way wc make or gain an entrance. Wc should visit systematically, 
faithfully, and as fre(|ucntly as seems desirable, with reading of 
the Scriptures and prayer in every possible place. 

How long should we visit homes where no results arc reached? 
No cast-iron rule can be followed. Sometimes the door of itself may 
be closed against lis, but I am reluctant to cease effort once begun 
on behalf of any home or any woman as utterly hopeless of fruition. 
Often I have been encouraged in persistent effort by seeing, after 
long years of apparently fruitless visiting, some dormant, indifferent 
life develop into a beautiful Christian character. 

Our work among liic children consists chiefly of Sunday-schools 
and children's meetings. lie our melliods of work what they may, 
the extent to which they succeed in enthroning Christ in the hearts 
of the women and children is the measure of their efficiency. 

Mrs. J. C. Arciiiuau), Missionary, Baptist Church in Canada, 
India* 

I have been in India twenty years, and if I had twenty lives to live, 
I would give them all to India. There is no work which God has 
given Ic woman, which exceeds in beauty and grandeur the work 
which is to be done by women for the women of India. I have gone 
into the zenana homes, and seen the dark faces brighten, and the 
lives turn from darkness to light. 

One time. I was touring with my husband. We went tn one village, 
where we found that we had to move the tent early in the morning. 
I got out. and while Mr. Archibald and our assistants were getting 
things moved. I saw some women a little distance away. Their eyes 
said : " Come here." and I moved toward them, and they moved 
toward me. They said : " Arc you going to move nut of the village ? " 
I said: " No. We arc going to move our tent." I began to talk to 
them about its being rather hot and dirty work that tliey were doing. 
1 easily slipped into a talk about another place, which is good. I 
said : " When I get done here in India, my Father has another house, 
and T am going to it," and then I began to talk to them about the 
many mansions. I didn't say it was " many mansions." anH I didn't 
say it was God in heaven. T said He was my Father; I talked about 
how beautiful it was. and said that I was going there, and I would 
like so much for them also to go there. A woman came out from 
behind the crowd, and said : *' Do you think your Father would 
give me a room in that house? " " Oh, yes. I am sure that He would. 
because He told me to tell you." She looked hesitatingly, and said : 



•Central Probjrtcrlao Oiarcb, April 13. 



J 





loa PERSONAL PHI'^ENTATION OF THE GOSPEL 

" I have on such a dirty dress; are you sure He would let me in?" 
I said : " 1 am sure, because He sent mc to come and tell you that He 
would let you in." Still she showed she was not satisfied. " But you 
know I am only a woman." Oh, that awful phrase — I am only a wo- 
man! "Are you sure he would let me in?" "Oh. yes." I said, "I 
am a woman, and He sent me to tell you that He would take you in, 
too." " My friends." she said, turning to the women around her. " I 
believe in this Saviour of the world. 1 liave heard about Him often. 
Since last year, I have never worshiped ido]s." 

Pcnonal Vofk vnth Individuals 

Rev. M. L. GuKtxjN. M.D., D.D., Missionary, American Board 
of Commissioners for Foreign \fissions, Japan* 

Our aim is to change the unconverted and indifftTL'nt into inter- 
ested inquirers, and these inquirers into Ftrong and aggressive Chris- 
tian believers ; and we are to do this through jjcrsonal dealing with 
Uieni. h is personal dealing: not ecclesiastical, using ceremony or 
sacrament ; not oratorical, seeking to move men in the mass by t!ie 
magic of eloijuent ■ipeech. It must be personal ; recognizing, in the 
most degraded, minds to think, hearts to feel, wills to act. It therefore 
obliges us to present the religion of Christ as at once intelligent, pas- 
sionate, powerful. 

But personality means much more to the Christian than an aggre- 
gation of intellect, sensibility, and will. It means likeness and son- 
ship to God, largely, though not wholly, obliterated by sin, but still 
possessing the possibilities of restored moral and .spiritual fellow- 
ship with Him, and brotherhood to man, including capabilities of 
sharing the best society on earth or heaven. 

To such persons, to all such possible though tmconscious sons, 
brothers, and sisters, we missionaries come as those whose minds have 
been illumined, whose hearts have been warmed, whose wills have 
bowed to the sway of God's love in Christ Je.sus. Holding this con- 
scious sonship and brotherliood as our highest dignity and most 
priceless possession, we seek in the name and spirit of Christ to 
awaken the same consciousness in those to whom we arc sent. 

Jesus Christ was the highest and most perfect personality the world 
has ever seen, the ideal son and brother in actual realization, and 
therefore our supreme model in personal dealing with men. We 
may imitate Him in His personal conversations with inquirers, in His 
use of sparkling epigram, pungent question, or startling declaration: 
but behind all this, inspiring us and our words, must be a sense of 
llie love of God, the actual presence with us of the loving Father, 
reluctant to lose one of His children, and seeking through us to call 
every one of them back to Himself. This, as the first chapter of the 
oldest Go.spcI tells us. was the gospel of God, the good news from 
God, which Christ preached when He went into Galilee. 

How did our Master use this gospel of God to reach men and turn 
ihem from their sins? A method nnce, and perhaps often, used, was 
to urge on them the duty of loving their enemies, blessing them that 
curse, doing good to them that hate, and praying for their perseoi- 

• CaracKie Hall, Apnl 14* 



I 





EVANGELIZING THE Hicn CASTES 



t03 



tors. Such teaching was not only startlingly different from that to 
which they had been accustomed, as it is different from what the un- 
christian world knows to-day; it was more wonderful still because 
of the reason implied. They were thus to become the real children 
of the Heavenly Father. How so? Because iht: Father, moved by 
this same love is always making His sun to shine and His rain to 
fall on evil as well as good, on unthankful as well as thankful, on 
unjust as well as just — that is, God makes His universe the organ and 
expression of self-sacrificing love. This brings us to the very foun- 
tain and source of the gospel, and its explanation as well. For to 
such love there is, there can be. no stopping-place ; and it prepares us 
to understand, as nothing else could, who Christ is. why He came 
to earth, and why He lived and died as He did. A God who so 
loved would not spare even His only begotten Son. A Son so sent 
would fill His life with miracles of love, to cleanse the foul leper, or 
raise the widow's son. Nor would He refuse to bear the bitter 
cross. TTius we are brought, and thus may we bring those to whom 
we are sent, face to face with the liighest expression of Divine love in 
the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. As it was with our Lord so will 
it be with us. H we can l>ecomL' the instruments of this love we shall 
not fail to lead the unconverted to become inquirers, inquirers to 
become Christian believers, and believers to become, in their turn, 
" fishers nf men." To others, our people may be loathsome because of 
(heir degradation, or ludicrous because of their habits and customs, 
their shallowness and conceit, but to us they will always be first and 
above all possible sons of God. And if. as has been declared, " infi- 
nite pains with the individual " has been the secret of a most success- 
ful pastorate in New York, bow much more should it be the secret of 
our success as we go among those whose alien race, language, and 
civilization have hitherto barred out from their hearts the gracious 
'■ Gospel of God " I 

Evuiselixla£ tfie High CasUs 

Rev. George F. Pentecost, D.D., Presbyterian Church, U. S, 
A., Vonkers, N. Y* 

It goes without saying that evangelizing is the normal and divine 
method of propagating the gospel. We have heard a great deal of 
what evangelistic work has done among the low castes. In the 
same way I want to speak one word for a method of evangelistic 
work amongst the high castes. It was my privilege for nearly two 
years to preach the gospel to the high-caste, educated. English-speak- 
ing men of India, and I have not found in all the history of my 
ministry a more acceptable people than these high-caste, educated 
men of India. This is a class of men that it is almost impossible to 
reach by our ordinary missionary methods ; but we must not suppose 
that the gospel is only for the poor and down-trodden. The first 
convert of William Carey was Krishna Pal. and the chief of the 
converts, the men who have made the mightiest impression in Ben- 
gal, have been Brahmans who were converted under Dr. Duff. 

*Cu^etcic Hftlt, AprLt «4. 



J 




I04 PERSONAL PRESENTATION OF THE GOSPEL 



Now, I have time to mention but one or two illustrations, and 
then in a single minute to make an appeal. 

I was preaching to a company of four or five hundred college men 
in Calcutta, and amongst them was an old man sixty-five years of 
age, a man of beautiful classic countenance, and as I stepped down 
from the platform he tarried a moment as though he wouhl like to 
speak to me. I went up to him, and first making his (Jriental salaam, 
he then reached out his hand in English fashion and said; " I am 
glad to see you. Dr. Pentecost." I said to him : " Are you a Chris- 
tain?" " No, I am not a Christian; 1 am a Hindu. 1 shall never 
be a Christian. I never have heard since I was a boy a Christian 
sermon." I talked with him a little. " No," he said, " I am a Hin- 
du; 1 shall die a Hindu. But. ah," he said (I had been speaking 
of Jesus), and the tears rolled down his checks, " Sahib, i could love 
Him." 

A Rajah from one nf the small central cities of India came to my 
hotel in Calcutta, and said to me : " Come ont and stay with us ; we 
haven't a great many English-speaking men. but we can gather from 
fifty to one hundred collegt men in my state, and I will bring thera 
to my palace and keep them a month, or whatever time yon can give 
to them ; come out and teach us the fundamentals of Christianity." 
It was impossible for me to go. I said to him : " Are you a Chris- 
tian? " " No," he said, "' I am not a Oiristian, and I shall never be 
a Christian; I am a Hindu, but my grandchildren and all our grand- 
children here in India will be Qiristians. and we want them taught 
now. Tell your people when they send missionaries to India to send 
their best men, because India will be a Christian country within half 
a century." That was the testimony of a Rajah. 

Now this is the appeal 1 want to make; We have our missionaries 
overworked in every missionary station in India and China; it is 
impossible for them to reach the people save to a lin:ited extent. Wc 
have Oiristian colleges in Bombay, in Calcutta, in Lucknow. in 
Delhi, and all over that land. We are turning out from these colleges 
high-caslc young men. fully educated; they understand English, and 
they long tu hear English, and they will come to hear a man who has 
a real message for them. Now, how arc we to evangelize them? Lay 
hold of hundreds of our edncaled men who know how to reach this 
class ; let them go from the United States, and let them gather in this 
great host that lias been prepared by our colleges, those young men 
who have been softened and mollified in the Christian atmosphere. 
Such a course is hound to create a thousand Christian bungalows in 
the land. That is the way to reach the high castes ; and every one of 
these pastors who go to India for six months will come back on fire 
with enthusiasm for Christian missions, and the Church at home will 
be stirred up as by no other agency. 

Rev. George Owen, Afissionary, London Missionary Society; 
China.* 

Missionary work involves many forms of labor. We need in the 
mission field medical missionaries ; wc need schools ; wc need Chris- 

• CatncKic Hall. April 14. 



POWER OP PUBLIC i'KEACniNG 



105 



tian literature, and no Christian work is complete or satisfactory that 
does not include these. But I place in the forefront of all missionary 
work the constant public preaching of the gospel. 

The great masses of the Chinese people are unlettered. Not one 
woman in a thousand can read a single word, and not more than ten 
per cent, of the men, taking town and country together, have ever 
been to school. How then shall tiiis great unlettered mass of Chinese 
people ever hear of Christ, except through daily public preaching of 
the gospel ? I am glad to say tliat a great deal of preaching is being 
done in China. Every mission station lias its street chapel or preach- 
ing-hall, and it is daily open for many hours. The one ttiat I had 
charge of in Peking is open every day at twelve o'clock, an<l it remains 
open until five or six. and T reckon that no fewer than 15,000 different 
people have heard the gospel in that one chapel every year. 

In this way the gospel — the light of God — is streaming out upon 
ihe masses of the Chinese people, and if you were visiting any of 
our great mission stations you would find that lai^e numbers of the 
people have learned something of Christ ; tliey have been to these 
chapels and have heard the preaching of the gospel. Through the 
preaching of the grjspel, prejudice and opposition have largely died 
away in the ncighlHirhood of our older stations, and we have won the 
confidence and respect of large numbers of the people. A scene 
which I have often witnessed in Peking I may describe to you : A 
foreigner is preaching; a Chinese scholar from the country comes in, 
but he has never been in a missionary chapel before, and he stands 
just at the entrance or behind the door; you recognize him as a scholar 
by his appearance; he listens with contempt U]X)n his face, but grad- 
ually that contempt gives place to an expression of wonder, and you 
see the man's eyes enlarge and his mouth drop as he listens, He 
nudges one of his neighbors sitting or standing near, and he says: 
" Is not that a foreigner preaching?" " VVTiy. of course he is a 
foreigner; can't you see? he is preaching," " What is he preaching? 
He is talking our language!" "Of course he is; can't you hear 
him?" "How did he come to know it?" "Why, he learned it." 
" How did he come to learn it? T didn't know they had sense 
enough." Then he listens a little while longer and says to his neigh- 
bor: " Why, he is quoting from Mcncius, and now he is quoting from 
Confucius; why, he knows our literature. Is every foreigner like 
this man? " " It is not Hkcly. They know better than to send tlicir 
best men out here. They keep them at home." 

And by the preaching of the gospel in this way the Chinaman is 
brought in contact with the foreigner. You know China is filled 
from end to end with slanders against the Christian missionary and 
against all Western people. The people believe these slanders in 
their own homes. But bring a Chinaman face to face with a mission- 
ary, and let him look into that missionary's eye. and hear his voice, 
and catch the spirit that breathes through his words, and that China- 
man goes home fully convinced that those slanders are lies, and that 
Christianity is a good and a holy thing. Let us preach, preach, 
preach, and in that way shall we leaven China with Christian truth, 
and the years will soon come when China will be won for Christ. 





PERSONAL PRESENTATION OF THE GOSPEL 



The Evingclut 

Bishop J. M. Thoburn, Misshnary, Methodist Episcopal 
Church, India.* 

The gift and office of the evangelist date back to the organization 
of the Church of Pentecost, and, like other purely spiritual gifts re- 
ceived at Pentecost, that of the evangelist undoubtedly was intended 
to be a permanent inlicritancc of God's militant Church. The Uni- 
versal Church needs the evangelist, and in no part of our world-wide 
domain is he so urgently needed as in the foreign field. Here, how- 
ever, as in the home land, his gifts and calling arc not always clearly 
understood, and too often certain forms of labor are classed as evan- 
gelistic which fall very far short of tlie kind of work to which that 
term w-ould have been applied in New Testament times. 

It is extremely common, at least in some mission fields, to apply 
the term " evangelistic " to nearly all forms of labor which involve 
preaching. It is very common to hear men, whose time and strength 
have been given almost wholly to educational work, expressing their 
strong desire to be released from that duly in order to take up evan- 
gelistic work. In some cr-^es, of course, such language would be 
correct enough, but more commonly those who use the term mean no 
more by it than that they wish to engage in the ordinary work of 
preaching. They fail to perceive that there is often an important and, 
indeed, essential diflference between the preaching of the evangelist 
and that of the pastor or otlier laborers who are set apart for preach- 
ing in the genera] sense. 

In like manner a very common and very excellent kind of work is 
known throughout India bv the tenn " itinerating," which is appro- 
priate enough, but which nevertheless is not infrequently com|Wundcd 
with the term " evangelistic." In carrying on this form of work one 
or more missinnaries equip themselves with a tent, a little light fur- 
niture and other domestic appliances, and, taking long tours through 
the country, preach in the villages antl market-places as they go. This 
is a very interesting and every excellent kind of work, but it is not, 
as a general rule, evangelistic work. 

Another very important kind of missionary labor is sometimes 
spoken of as evangelistic, which might more properly be called the 
work of exploration. In newer fields, especially such as are often 
met with in Africa, the missionary is called upon to take long tours, 
exploring the country, getting acquainted with the people, trying to 
make them understand what the object of his work is, and, as far as 
possible, giving them such glimpses of the light of Christian truth as 
the circumstances will permit. Dr. Livingstone, for instance, gave 
the world an example, on a magnificent scale, of this kind of work ; 
but although that sainted hero was undoubtedly one of the best men 
in missionary annals, yet if living he would be the last to say that 
he was an evangelist. The New Testament evangelist is one who 
moves from place to place, sometimes with great rapidity ; but this 
one peculiarity of his work does not constitute him a successor to 
Philip of Cesarea. The mere fact that a man is a preacher of the 
gospel, or that he moves about freely among the people, or that he 

• Carafe Hftll, April •4. 




I 



I 



THE E\'ANGELTST ^^^^ 10? 

explores unknown regions, or that he devotes himself exclusively to 
preaching, docs not by any means a)nstitute him an evangelist accord- 
ing to the New Testament standard. 

If we go hack to New Testament times, we find a very striking 
illustration nf the correct meaning of this term as iUuslratcd in the 
life and labors of Philip, the pioneer evangelist of the Christian 
Church. In the first place his preaching possessed one notable fea- 
ture in the fact that Christ was his theme. In simple but notable 
words, he is introduced to us as a man who " went down to Samaria 
and preached Christ to the people." We notice these two peculinri- 
ties in Philip's preaching: In the first place his theme, and in the 
second place the power which attended his word. The successors of 
Philip in every age will be found, if genuine evangelists, to possess 
these two peculiarities. They are not cranks; they for the most part 
eschew all sensational methods; they are men who live superior to the 
influence of either praise or censure, and they always preach Christ 
with power sent down from Heaven. With rare exceptions, they con- 
fine themselves to proclaiming Christ and His salvation. 

The proclamation of a living Christ is the same to-day that it was 
when Philip visited Samaria. It h not enough to proclaim llie fact that 
Jesus rose from the deatl. hut to add tn this the supreme assertion 
that He who was dead and rose to life again is living still ; that He is 
the King of nations, the Saviour of sinners, the Helper of universal 
human itj'. 

In these extraordinary days, when all the world has become one 
vast mission field. Christian workers of every kind are urgently 
needed in every land, The apostle is needed to enter a thousand 
opening doors; the New Testament prophet, the pastor, the teacher, 
both after the New Testament pattern and that of the modern mis- 
sion, the successor of Luke, the beloved physician, the mtnistrant of 
the poor ; all these and other classes of workers are needed in all our 
mission fields to-day. but perhaps most needed of all is the anointed 
evangelist. The way of tills chosen messenger of Ckjd has been pre- 
pared before liim. and to-day. not merely thousands, but literally mil- 
lions, of our race may be said to await His coming. 

It does not seem to be God's plan that the evangelist should find 
his chief field of labor among those who live in dense pagan darkness. 
It may not always be so, but in most cases it would seem as if a cer- 
tain amount of preparator\' work is needed before the evangelist 
enters his field. Vast regions may be found in which darkness so 
covers the land and gross darkness the people, that neither the 
Christian religion nor its leading truths have ever been heard of, and 
among a people so densely ignorant it is usually found that the way 
of the evangelist must needs, in some measure at least, be prepared 
before him. But the whole nun-Christian world is by no means living 
in this benighted condition. In the great outlying regions, beyond 
the confines of what we arc accustomed to call Christendom, many 
millions may be found who understand fairly well what might be 
called the outlines of the Christian religion. Millions, I might say 
many millions, of the people of India have advanced beyond the stage 
of ordinary paganism, and more or less tacitly admit many of the 




I 




PEKSON^VL TRESENTATION OF THE GOSPEL 



truths of the Christian Scriptures. In China also, where Christianity 
is very widely known as the " Jesus religion," the way of the mes- 
sengers of Christ has been prepared to aa extent which few persons 
outside of China itself can readily believe. In Japan the light has 
been diffused still ninre rapidly and much more generally than in 
any other part of the Far East, and in some sections the highway of 
the future evangelist seems tn be in course of rapitl preparation. In 
Spanish and Portuguese America tlie way is wide ojicn, not merely 
because religious liberty has been assured In the people, but still more 
because of the measure of spiritual light which many <?njoy. 

Perhaps the most urgent demand for the missionary evangelist at 
the present day is that which comes from the baptized Christians of 
the great mission fields of the East. The evangelist is needed on both 
sides of the globe, but liie missionary evangelist is specially needed in 
the Christian conunnnilics which God is raising up in non-Christian 
lands. Some of these communities are rapidly increasing, and it is 
the opinion of many careful observers that the ratio of increase is 
not only ailvancing, but will very probably advance much more 
rapidly during the early years of the new century than ever before. 
If such should be the case it can lie seen at a glance how imperative is 
the necessity to provide for the thorough evangelization of the people 
as they arc gathered into the Church. 

I shall he very sorry if these remarks suggest to anyone that I am 
assuming that foreign missionaries receive converts without careful 
scnitiny, or that baptism is administered without evidence of intel- 
ligent faith on the part of tlie convert. I merely deal with existing 
facts, and advocate no theory. In nearly all Asiatic fields families, 
kinsmen, clans, and castes, are inclined to move together, and this 
adds to the probability that many persons will adopt the new religion 
with only a superficial knowledge of its obligations. Hence the 
necessity for raising up an agency specially fitted for the most im- 
portant work of evangelizing the large and growing communities 
which bear the Christian name in mission fields. 

The urgency of this demand beeomes the more apparent when it is 
remembered that more than half the women in the world, outside of 
Christendom, arc practically inaccessible to the ordinary Christian 
preacher. Even where a measure of liberty is enjoyed, and where 
mothers and daughters are permitted to attend public worship, the re- 
strictions upon personal intercourse are such as to deprive the women 
of many of the privileges which their husbands and brothers enjoy. 
The result is. as might have been expected, that in Christian commu- 
nities, especially in country districts, the women arc often found de- 
plorably ignorant and superstitious, anil much more firmly wedded 
to idolatrous and even cruel customs than the men. It need hardly 
be sai'd that there can he no hope of a worthy future to any com- 
munity, so long as its women do not rise to the level of a truly Chris- 
tian life, and hence we sec at a glance how imperative is the noocs- 
sity of providing an effective agency for thoroughly evangelizing 
those women in our mission fields, who. while bearing the Christian 
name, breathe but little of the Christian spirit, and know but little of 
the nature and obligations of the Christian life. 



I 



THE EVANGELIST lOg 

" Bat how," it may be asked, and no doubt will be asked by many, 
"how can the evangelist reach the women of the Oriental world? 
How can they be broufjht into his assemblies, or how could he gain 
access to assemblies of their own? " 

In all matters of religious procedure we are very prone, like the 
printer, to follow copy. We accept precedents carefully and 'oyally. 
but often forget that nia.uy accepted precedents were at the outset 
innovations, and that adaptation to new emergencies is worth more 
than old-time precedents. The evangelists who arc to spread light 
among the four hundred milHun women of the East must be taken 
from the ranks nf the women themselves. They may not, Indeed they 
need not, and perhaps can not, adapt their methods to past prece- 
dents or present ideals, but in ways in which God Himself will lead 
them, they can, and I most unhesitatingly believe will, l>e called, 
anointed, and thrust out into this needy field; perhaps the most needy 
which claims our attention. 

A few years ago the late Miss Phoebe Rowc, of the Methodist Mis- 
sion in North India, expressed a willingness, and even an ardent 
wish, to devote herself to the work of evangelizing the Christian 
women living in the villages and remote towns of upper India, and 
during the rest of her brief life she prosecuted this work with un- 
flagging zeal. Her plan was to take with her a small band of tried and 
trusted Hindu womai, and also \vhcn possible to have one or more 
native preachers at hand, to assist in specrial eniLTgcncies. Very 
often, however, the little band went about without a male escort, and 
yet in perfect security. They often met with opposition, or at least 
with signs of hostility, bnt this was usually owing to their as.sociation 
with low-caste people, and not to the mere fact that they were Chris- 
tians. In every village they sought out the Christian women, but at 
the same time they were often able to reach all the women of the 
place. This blessed work proved of value in many ways. In the 
first place it revealed the actual condition of the Christian women in 
thf villages and remote districts. It proved the means of enlightening 
very many neglected people, of reaching the homes of the people more 
effectively than ever before, and, above all, of making Qirist known 
personally to many who before had barely known His name. 

No fixed rule can he laid down for evangeh'sts, and if any system 
of labor is chosen for them it must he of the most flexible character. 
The kind of evangelism needed at the present day, not only in Chris- 
tain lands, but still more in the great mission fields of the East, is that 
which will reach the individual as readily and as effectively as the 
great multitude. 

The whole Christian world to-day, and especially the great mis- 
sion fields, need men and women who are willing and ready to spend 
and be spent in making Christ known to individuals. If a great mul- 
titude chances to throng around the messenger of Christ, as of old 
Ihcy gathered by thousands around the Master, well and good, but 
ne should never forget that even in the case of Christ l^imself, it 
Mcms to have been exceptional rather than usual for the audiences to 
be so large as to embarrass the speaker. At times and under excep- 
tional circumstances this no doubt happened, but if we carefully scan 



I 

k I 





PERSONAL PRESENTATION OF THE GOSPEL 

our New Testaments we can hardly lielp noticing how frequently our 
Saviour taught His gieal lessons to single individuals, or at most, to 
a humble little company. 

" But how," it will be asked, " is the great host of evangelists 
needed at the present day to be recruited? Where are the men and 
women who arc to go forth into the waste places of the earth? WTiere 
arc the reapers? " 

Perhaps we have made our appeals too exclusively to men, and have 
hot believingly and' persistently cried for help to tlie Lord of the 
harvest. Perhaps, too, we have clung to our own ideals and rejected 
many of the little ones of the kingdom who have been thrown in our 
way, and who might have done effective service if encouraged or even 
permitted to do so. For some kinds of missionary service we need 
culturefi and trained men and women, who are capable of rendering 
good service in any part of the world. But for other kinds of serv- 
ice the " little ones " of the kingdom are best adapted. It seems 
very probable that the rank and file of the evangelists in mission fields 
musl, at least in the immediate future, be composed of persons who 
can barely read and write, and in many cases, perhaps many of 
those selected may not he able even to read. I have given careful 
attention to this matter during recent years and have Iiecome con- 
vinced that a very large majority of the converts gathered in the re- 
mote country districts are first ijifluenced by men who can only read 
imperfectly their Bible and hymn-book, and in some cases can not 
read at all. I have even ventured to estimate the proportion of such 
humble workers, and am inclined to think that four-fifths of all the 
converts received in some districts are first induced to forsake their 
idols and turn lo God through the efforts of these humble men. Their 
teaching may be of a very limited character, but it is effective. They 
may employ a rude style of speech, hut they are understood. The 
simple villagers understand not only the speech, but what is more 
important, they understand the speaker, when a man like themselves 
comes among them in the character both of a disciple and a messen- 
ger of the world's Saviour. 

It need hardly be said that simple, earnest men of this kind d» not 
observe much formality in prosecuting their task. The village evan- 
gelist does not need a pulpit, or even a house of worship ; he does not 
even stand up to preach before a company of hearers, but in the long 
evenings of the hot season he may be found silting cross-legged 
under a village tree, or perhaps, on a cot placed conveniently for the 
stranger by a frientl, with possibly a score or more people seated 
aroimd him asking questions, and often pausing for a few minutes to 
discuss some matter among themselves. If the stranger is a singer 
he will very prohahly sing some hymns, and possibly pray, but he is 
!>ound by no fixed routine, and like a practical man he never loses 
sight of his objective point, which is to win the people and induce 
them to submit to God and receive the mighty Saviour, whom he 
knows and loves and in whose Name he comes among them. 

It would be strange indeed if the thought has not already occurred 
to many present, that men of this class are hardly evangelists, and 
that the work described is hardly in any proper sense evangelistic. 




THE EVANGELIST III 

This may be true in a measure, but if such men are not really evan- 
gelists they furnish the material of which splendid evangelists may be 
made. Even as it is, their work often seems as abiding in character 
as the average result of the labors of men who have enjoyed vastly 
better advantages. Give them proper leadership, and provide proper 
nurture for their converts, and they will soon achieve such results as 
will surprise both friends and critics. 

If we arc really in earnest in our work, if we really believe that 
Jesus Christ has called and sent us forth to evangelize the nations, 
we must learn to take more practical views of the work b» fore us. In 
India there are fifty million souls who live below the line of social 
respectability. All these thronging millions can be reached by evan- 
gelists taken from among such workers as I have described. I can 
not speak from personal observation, but have reason to believe that 
multitudes can be found among China's teeming millions equally 
accessible if sought out in the right way. Let us be willing to learn, 
and no less willing to unlearn ; let us, when we see an open door 
before us, ever remember that an invisible hand has opened it, that 
we may enter and take up whatever duty or privilege we may find 
awaiting us. T,he missionary workers of this eventful year have been 
led forward, I might almost say thrust forward, till they now stand 
upon the threshold of such opportunities as mortals have never before 
enjoyed. It is my solemn and yet buoyant and joyous belief that 
if the men and women in this Conference, and those now at the front 
whom they represent, will only move forward without doubt and 
without wavering, they may easily add ten million souls to the mili- 
tant hosts of the Captain of our salvation before the close of the first 
decade of the new centurv. 




CHAPTER XXVIII 
EDUCATION AS AN EVANGELISTIC AGENCY 

Place of Educalion^The Teacher as an Fv.ingelist — Primary SchooSi and 
Kindergartens— Training Schools and Calteges — Higher Educa- 
tion of Women — Principles of College MoDagcmcnl. 



Tlw Plkce of Eiuotion la Fordgg ItidsloiM 

Rkv. \V. X. a. Bakklk, M.A., B.D., IVcskyan Missionary So- 
ciety, London* 

When Christianity sends its ambaasadurs to licathendom it is with 
tlie aim of radically changing the character of heathendom ; of build- 
ing up a Christian state. Every element of national distinctiveness is 
to he left uiitouchetl ; but the sanctions of life are to be diflFcrent; the 
individual, the home^ the village, the city, the state, are to realize a 
new motive and a new power. To save the individual is the first step, 
but the objective for which the campaign must be ordered from the 
first is the Christianizing of tlic nation. 

Now, there is but one gospel to be prcache<l which can accom- 
plish this. It is tlie good news of a personal, spiritual God who reveals 
Himself; who, incarnated as man, has lived and died to make atone- 
ment for sin ; who now lives to inspire and help all willing souls daily 
to cojKjuer evil. In the (."hristiau ideal state every member of the 
body politic nnist be made familiar in idea and in experience with this 
Evangel. All life must thrill with it, all effort be ins]>irfd by it, all 
knowledge glow, all nature be irradiated with it. The stamp and im- 
press of God's jKoprietorship must be plainly read all over the wide 
realms where science discovers His treasures and makes them man's. 
Where research kindles at the great thoughts of antiquity, where 
perception rejoices in the splendours of the imagination caught and 
made permanent on canvas or in stone, there must each generation be 
taught to claim its inheritance as from God. This is the message of 
God to each generation as it comes into the light : " All is yours, and 
ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's." 

The work of Christendom then in preaching the gospel is a life 
occupation, high as hca%'CTi, broad as life, far-reaching as the utmost 
bound of thought or sensation in the complex being of man. The 
framework of its activities must include the whale of life. The little 
child that can be taught to kneel at its mother's knee and pray to the 
Unseen; that child when its eyes are opening to the wonders of 
nature ; that boy or girl when comes the new toilsome delight of men- 
tal training and the trial of wings of thought; that youth whose 

* Camenic Hall, April 15. 




I 

I 



I 



r 



THE PLACE OF EUUCATION IN FOREIGN MISSIONS II3 

trained imagination new areas of knowledge lure to exploration and 
to conquest ; that man who needs help to soar on steady pinion and 
not to crawl broken-winged through the mire — all these must be 
touched by the preaching of the gospel. Of preaching the gospel, 
then, education is an integral part. It is true that the good news is 
from without, is an in-ducation. But it is so to be used that there may 
be the true function of c-ducation ; thai we may draw out to the con- 
sciousness of man from beneath the accumulated rubbish of millen- 
niums of ruin that fact which lies hidden in that single clause in his 
pedigree, " W^hich was the Son of Adam, which was the Son of God." 

We then when we lay the foundations of a new Christian state are 
bound to provide for School as well as Church, for teaching as well 
as worship. Happily, we should now have far to seek to find those 
who profess that there is only one way of preaching the gospel ; that 
the spoken address — the word of exhortation or of exposition-ex- 
hausts the limits of the legitimate activities of the messenger of 
Christ. God saves a man. He does not subdichotomize him and save 
his soul while his mind and body are left unsanctified. The mini- 
mum equipment of a mission in any land nmst include the preaching 
to the heathen, the cliurch for public worship, and the school for 
training tlie young: and in all three the gospel is preached. 

History has universally justified the sign of the coming of the 
Qirisl: "To the poor tJie gospel is preached." In non-Christian 
lands of old civilization the converts are nearly all poor. Hence the 
elementaryChristian school gaihcrs the uut-castc. and, in the few years 
before the grim necesoilics of poverty drive the little hands to labour, 
does its bcdt to broaden the horizon of knowledge beyonil the limits 
of the hamlet, and irradiates all with the gracious presence of Him who 
bowed all Heaven into a peasant's life in Galilee. Rut Christianity, 
by its very nature, uplifts. The out-caste gains new dignity, his mind 
gains new powers, his chiMren have new ambitions. The Christian 
community becomes conscious of a great part to play in the life of 
its nation. The soul that lay dead outside the city gate when it heard 
the voice. " Arise," arose to new life for body and mind. Education 
must grow. In lands of the East even the first generation of Chris- 
tians will need more than the elements of knowledge. The native 
systems have their own stanrlards : the Christian Church must assert 
its value in the national life by obvious inteilcctual as well as moral 
strength. It can not live permanently by the initiative and dominance 
of the Western missionary: it will need native pastors who will be 
true overseers, teachers who will be true educators, leaders who will 
be true thinkers. The Christian high school or college is the ex- 
pression of the Church's faith in its own future as a permanent factor 
of the national life. 

We act upon this principle in lards professedly Christian. We 
believers give our sons the best training possible, and many are the 
Christian men at the head of learning, science, art. politics. We 
do not undervalue the fervent testimony of the recently converted per- 
son of little education, and we are profoundly convinced of the neces- 
sity and permanent power of simple lives whose only knowledge is: 
" Christ loved me and died for me." But anyone who has watched 



i 




EDUCATION AS AN EVANGELISTIC AC.ENCY 



individual missionary lives knows how absolutely without mental 
oxygen is the atmosjiherc of a heathen land, and how the missionary 
without mental resource is apt to fall, through sheer excess of nitro- 
gen, where broader training and knowledge would have given an 
ampler air. And if this be so for the Occidental, how much more 
necessar>' is this breadth of knowdcdge, this enrichment of mind for 
the Oriental or the African who Is to bear the burden of an infant 
Church. It is in the high school that the needed oxygen must be 
generated. 

What then is to be the style of the school thus shown to be essential? 
First and foremost, then, it must give the very best education possi- 
ble. The teaching of secular subjects is not to be thrown in as a bribe 
to secure an opportunity for adding a Uiblc lesson. 'I'he Christian 
school must stand so high as a giver of knowledge that no secular 
Institution can afford to i>oint the finger of scorn at its equipment or 
its alumni. We must fearlessly show that wc welcome all knowledge, 
and that we seek to Icam and teach the very best, but all at the foot 
of the Cross. To knowledge, we add all else Chat is of good report. 
The whole atmosphere of the school must be distinctively and unmis- 
takably Christian and spiritual. To difTercnt minds will come differ- 
ent soiutions of the problem as to the time-ratio of Scripture lessons 
and secular subjects. The one general principle which must guide 
the solmion is that, while there is a difference, there is no antagonism 
between the secular and the sacred. The secular may always be 
brought up to the level of the sacred, the sacred need never be brought 
down to the level of the secular. For my own part. 1 would rever- 
ently open the day with prayer, and would not seek to give more time 
to definite Scripture work than would be so assigned in an ordinary 
school at home. As a definite and public avowal that Christianity 
and its morality are to be the basis of all education, 1 would assign 
that much time to it in the curricula of our mission high schools. Dut 
he would be a strange missionary teacher who could not make his 
pupils feel a dozen times a day that geography is but the tfescrip- 
tion of one of God's estates, that Jt is God whose will makes the laws 
of physics, chemistry, or astronomy ; God who rules in the history of 
nations; and that the laws of number, order, and thought are ex- 
pressions of His mind. 

I know that many will express Uic fear — bom, let us frankly con- 
fess, of experience — that in the routine of school life the spiritual will 
be apt to be lost sight of. and the routine nr the mechanical will oust 
the ideal. Be it so; to know the danger is half the virtory. Ts it edu- 
cation alone where this danger is real? Has the minister's study, his 
pulpit, his endless round of devotional meetings, in which he must 
always I>e talking about the spiritual ; have these no danger of the 
conventional, the ]>rofcssional, the mechanical? AH forms of Chris- 
tian work have this danger, in difTercnt ways, but not in different 
degrees. Constant. living contact with the living Christ alone can 
avoid it. but such communion triumphantly does avoid it. 

In order then tliat the education given may be of the best, each 
missionary schoolmaster must choose by what medium he will con- 
vey his pupils into the new realms of knowledge. Shall he use the 




^ 



I 

I 



» 



THE PIJICE OF EDUCATION IN FORErCN MISSIONS US 

language of the West, or shall he translate his knowledge into his 
pupils* speech so that it may come to them untransbteiJ? Here 
again opinions will vary. The answer seems to me to be best obtained 
by referring once more to the iiltimale ideal of a Christian national 
state. Where, as in India, the governinwit is British, or as in South- 
ern Africa and elsewhere the civiHsing factor is to be American or 
British, higher education has already crystallised along the lines of 
examinations in the English language. It is obviously best in such 
lands to use English textbooks for the teaching of science and math- 
ematics. But where as in China there is and should he nn govern- 
ment English system, the final vehicle of culture will be t!te spoken 
Chinese itself; and it is well that it l)e quickly furnished with the 
terminology and textbooks of the new lore with which it is to be 
enriched. 

But the school, thus necessary for the growth of the Church itself, 
will always be a strong evangelizing agency. It is a matter of univer- 
sal experience that sooner or later the value of the Western education 
becomes evident to the outside world. The youth of non-Christian 
lands, high-caste or aristocratic though he may be. is soon found 
wishful to sit on benches in the missionary school, even at the price 
of sitting by the pariah and submitting to the foreigner. He recog- 
nizes the justice of the theory of education which counts morality an 
integral factor, and he makes no objection to the Scripture lesson. 
To him there is nothing higher under heaven than the teacher, and 
he has placed in thai venerated seat the missionary, the preacher of 
the creed of Christ. That fact is eloquent of a whole world of change. 
What an ojiportunity is thus gained ! How eagerly does every true 
evangelist seize rliis strategic position! Not only dnes the missionary 
thus gain every day an attentive and intelligent audience which his 
Itinerant brother might well envy, but his intellectual interest and 
honesty speak through evcr\- honr of the day ; he looms large before 
his pupils as the hero who has won the fights which they must face. 
And the creed which breathes in his life, the faith in and communion 
with the living Christ that is avowe<liy his most cherished posses- 
sion- — these acquire a vantage ground from whose height the force of 
moral rebuke may strike the student who shrinks from the cost of a 
porcr life, but which is far above possible attack of contempt and 
dislike. 

The union of Christian and heathen students in the same school is, 
of course, a difHculty : its effects will be different according to weight 
of character. It will be here as it is in educational institutions in 
Christian lands. Let there he the strong personality of .a Christian 
head-master, secure a strong Chri.stian lone amonp the boys, and the 
outsider will he won. Let the Traders of the Christian section be 
weak, and there will He danger; the burden of the principal will be 
all the heavier until the incoming of the crested wave which follows 
the Irougli of the sea shall uplift him and the new school generation 
to new heights of purity. Men must f\^hx for their faith; and the 
inherent power of Christianity must be trusted to keep its own and 
win its way. 

Experience shows that in such mission schools many of the heathen 



1 




Il6 EDUCATION AS AN EVANGELISTIC AGENCY 

pLipils do become Christian; and still more who make no profession 
of change have yet breathed a new atmosphere which has altered all 
life for them. The terror of the price to be paid, the horror of ostra- 
cism, the anguish of home and mother, the social persecution, keep 
many a Nlcodcmus to the hour of twilight and the whispered prayer. 
Can wc wonder ? Are we so strong that we can afford to despise 
him, who, while he sees and knows Christ, yet dares not pay the 
price, and sorrowfully turns his head away? Consider the difficulty 
with which one of us would become an active propagandist Moham- 
medan. Take away the pitying tolerance with which Englishmen 
woukl look upon our individual insanity, and substitute for tliis the 
Oriental's indignant alarm at the traitor, and the incoming tide of im- 
moral influence; add the worst species of horror-stricken family boy- 
cotting : and then can we wonder that a Chinese mandarin or a Brali- 
man, though convinced, does not confess Christ? Do not misunder- 
stand me ; woeful is the relaxation of moral fibre that follows untruth 
to innermost conviction. But be very tender, and remember that He 
said ; " He that is not against me is for me." And we who are build- 
ing not for a day but for all time can afford to wait, thankful that in 
our building we have mortar at all, even if it be not tempered to 
truest strength. For though many pass out from mission schools un- 
avowed, yet what gain there is in the mere mental change of attitude ! 

With the more thoughtful upper classes, I am not sure that this 
preliminary stage may not be an essential. We are happily familiar 
at home with mighty waves of spiritual influence which sweep from 
time to time over our churches. Now, as far as my knowledge goes, 
ordinarily the Holy Spirit docs not move on heathen populations — 
at any rate in Eastern lands — in this wondrous way. He does 
mightily save men in every heathen land, but a revival in the sense 
that wc have lermt to associate the term with the lalxiurs of such men 
as Moody, docs not occur among unprepared Chinese or Hindus. 
The remarkable thing is that such revivals do occur amidst the gene- 
rations that have been leavened by the influence of Christian schools. 
When, a year or two ago, the Rev. Thomas Cook, one of our most 
successful English evangelists, made a special campaign in Ceylon, 
he found that many were brought to conversion, but with scarcely an 
exception every convert had been educated in mission high schools. 
True education is ever the handmaid of true religion. 

While the progress of the world forces the non-Christian civilisa- 
tions into the paths of Western education, their governments-^ 
whether foreign, and therefore avowedly neutral, or native, and there- 
fore conservatively alien — are certain to give Western science without 
the moral basis of Christian teaching. Is the Church then to look on 
and see the whole of the higher education of the country un-moral? 
Purblind indeed would her leaders be; utterly nnstatcsmanlike in 
their criminal neglect of obvious opportunity and duty. Nay, it is 
matter of constant experience that many a heathen father deliberately 
sends his son to the mission school for the sake of the moral teaching 
of the creed he does not accept. Rather that, with all its risks, than 
none. T do not ignore the fact that English literature is steeped in 
Christianity, but it must be the Church and the Church alone which 



d 



I 



I 



THE PLACE OF EUUCATION IN FOREIGN MISSIONS ll? 

can add to this the direct spiritual impulse. It is for the Church to 
say : *' Knowledge you shall have, knowledge of all that the West has 
toilsomely learnt; but not without the crown of all knowledge, the 
knowledge of God In Jesus Christ the Lord." 

Yes, forth from the mission school goes the educated youth of the 
land with the potentialities of a new national life. Wc give the initial 
mental and spirihial impulse, but the lines of thought will soon 
diverge. It is well it should be so; not for us is it to impose our own 
moulds, but to make inherent the tnie principles of national growth. 
Forth from the school goes the minister well trained in Holy Writ, 
with broad and deep views of the meaning and mode of revelation, 
to train a Church, to lead a spiritual kingdom, to enrich with a devo- 
tional literature. Forth from the school goes the teacher who, inspired 
by the methods which have made him what he is. will lead generation 
after generation of Christian children in paths of knowledge. Forth 
will go the Christian business man, manufacturer, magistrate, whose 
life will be broadened, whose productive power will be mullipUed, 
whose justice will be made unimpeachable by the knowledge and the 
inspiration of what he learnt at the school. And forth will go the man 
who lias not acknowledged Christ, to positions of influence in a land 
where Christianity is always in active contest with native creeds. 
And what will be the attitude of such an one in this great contest? 
Here and there will be one who will become bitterly hostile because 
he knows he ought lo be a Cliristian. But for the most of this class 
the memory of tlic dignity, the ChriJitian character, the mental honesty 
of his old teachers will make each one fair in his attitude towards his 
teacher's faith. The evil devices, the mean and unscrupulous oppo- 
sition, the ignorant calumny which heathenism will use against Chris- 
tianity will have no support from him. He knows the character of the 
books, the worship, the morals attacked. All his mental treasure has 
come from these teachers. And firmness and moderation, true judg- 
ment and wholesome opinion, will be possible as never before, for 
all society will l)e leavened with such men. 

And ihc generation will grow old wliile younger generations arise, 
filled with new national enthusiasms, which, though sometimes ap- 
parently hostile, arc themselves a witness to the power of the fresh 
spring of hope. And in many a case it has happened, and in many 
will it happen, in the hour of adversity, of bereavement, of lone- 
liness, of age, of the .-shadow of the Eternal, that the grey-headed man, 
meditating on his past and fighting his way on, will come before a 
Cross, where memory becomes faith, where the shadow of the Eternal 
becomes the llfiht of the Eternal, and the self-satisfied Pharisee bows 
his bead, Pharisee no more, Publican now, saying : " God be merciful 
to me 3 sinner." 

Rev. R. Wardlaw Thompson, M.A., Secretary. London Mis- 
sionary Society. Loudon* 

I desire to call attention to a point which I think the churches 
need to keep in view more thorouK"hly than they sometimes do in 
their pra yer and thought in r^ard to educational missions. 

• CAfncffk H«ll. April ay 





EDUCATION AS AN EVANCEUSTIC AGENCY 



The discussion as to the place of hijEfhcr education as a very inn 
]iortant necessary branch of missionary work^ is a discussion that lias 
practically ended in Great Britain in connection with all of our great 
niissinnary sociLlics. It has ciinie to Ix; behevcd by many who but 
recently objected to it. The evidence has bcajme overwhelming as to 
the advantage of edncational work as a great hantlmaid of the gospel ; 
but I think we are a little in danger now of going to the other ex- 
treme. The pressure of the demand in India connected with govern- 
ment education and connected with university education is all in the 
direction of secular knowledge and the squeezing of the religious 
teaching in the schools to the smallest compass possible. The danger 
now felt in China is of the same kind. Chinamen are eager to get 
Western knowdedge, not the knowledge of Western religion, but the 
knowledge of Western science; and the pressure on llie missionary in 
China soon will be the same as in India. 

Now, I am not at all an advocate for interlarding religious phrases 
with geographical lessons. I think you may do great harm as well as 
great good by higging in religion in various ways, but I do feci that 
we do need to kcrp before us much more prominently this which was 
impressed upon me by the late Mr. Wigram, the Honorary Secretary 
of the Church Missionary Society. I asked him. after he came back 
from a visit to India : " What is your opinion about the higher educa- 
tion ? " " Well." he said. " I agree with you that we need to maintain 
and press forward the higher education ; but we need to take care that 
our educationalists are not men who are mainly educationalists, but 
that the heads of our colleges shall be ihe men most filled with the 
spirit of Christ and the ardor of evangelization." 

What a peculiarly difficult position to fill! We want men mag- 
netic in iheir influence, men who can lay hold of young men person- 
ally. \Vc want men so filled with the great idea tliat the mission 
school is the means of leading llic Ixjys to know Oirist in the most 
susceptible years of their life, that the whole atmosphere of the 
school shall be pervaded by Giristian influence. 

It 19 all very well for friends at home to discuss the pros and cons 
of the educational mission, but the spirit of the mission teachers 
depends upon the spirit of the churches that send them out. It de- 
pends upon your care and thought and yonr earnest maintaining of 
t^em in about as difficult a position as c:in be given to men in the 
mission field. There is no sphere of work which promises higher 
results to the man who is capable of reaching those great results; 
there is no sphere of work which demands greater spiritual earnest- 
ness, and quickness, and sensitiveness. There is no sphere of work 
which makes a more constant demand upon the tliouglu and help of 
the Church. 



D.D., Secretary, Methodist Episcopal 



I 



The "Teacher as an Evangcliit 

Kev. a. B. Lku.\.kkd, 
Church. Nrzv York* 

It is thoroughly understood on the mission field that all work tends 

ultimately to the evangelistic end. wlictlicr it be in the hospital, or in 



* Carnegie Hal). April as- 



J 



THE TEACHER AS AN EVANGELIST 



"9 



I 
I 



I 



the school, or in the chapel. The one great thing on the fiehl is tu 
bring men to Christ. A physician in a hospital in China knows very 
well that he has done but htilc for the man to whom he ministers if he 
has only cured him of his physical ailments. And so, too, in the edu- 
cational institutions everyivherc, the mere instruction of the intellect 
does not achieve the supreme object of the school. The missionary 
doctor approaches the heart of the heathen by way of his body ; the 
professor or teacher in a missionary school would lead the heathen to 
Christ by way of his intellect : and' so. whether the work of the mis- 
sionary is a ministry in the liospital or in the higher educational in- 
stitutions, its one great and uUimatc object is to enthrone Christ in 
the hearts of the people. 

Now we know very well that tlie great burden tliat presses down 
upon the heathen is suiK.TStition. When I first found myself in the 
midst of the Chinese [xxiplc, their superstitions were somewhat 
anuising, hut after a few weeks among them, and increasingly as the 
weeks and months went by, their awful superstition became a weight 
upon my heart. No man can mingle with them very long without 
feeling that the burden of superstition under which they are ground 
down, as they go through life, is too intolerable to be borne. But 
nothing but intelligence will dissipate superstition, and if you lead a 
man. so to sjwak, to Christ, so that he begins to recognize Christ, and 
yet do not clear his mind ajid deliver his life from superstition, you 
have done but little for him in the way of making him a new creature. 

Philanthropic and educational work are necessary to development 
in the United States and England ; they are equally necessary in China 
and in India, and in every part of the world. 

Rev. Thomas W. Pearce, Missionary, London Missionary So- 
ciety, China.* 

One of the most honored names on the roll of missionaries is that 
of Dr. Jaiiifs Leggc, who did a marvelous work in the mission field 
of China. Some may know him as the translator of the Chinese clas- 
sics : others may know him as a preacher to the Chinese, for he was 
both ; but his earliest work and some of his best work was in what 
was then called the Anglo-Chinese College, from 184,-^ onward. He 
was led at length to abandon that work because he thought that the 
results were not sufficiently evident to justify the continuance of this 
branch of work. We who have succeeded Lcgge know belter. We 
know something of the results which sprang from his work. I have 
seen some of the best of evangelistic work done hy a man who became 
converted whilst he was a student under Dr. Lcgge. A native 
preacher who was associated with me for a long time was able to 
deal in a ver>' convincing way with certain phases of heathen supersti- 
tion, as a result nf the training he had received under Dr. Legge. 
That man established Chinese churches in Australia, and he estab- 
lished churches in China. His work was successful, and it remains 
because he was trained in what was then considered, I daresay, an 
institution for secular education. 

The opportunity in China is largely for the educational missionary. 




*Cvneefe Hall. April a]. 




I«0 EDUCATION AS AN EVANGELISTIC AGENCY 



I can adtl a word of remarkable testimony. In one part of Kwan^- 
tung-, tlie most somhem part of China, it has been the custom for 
some years for nearly one tlionsand young men to present themselves 
in an examination for the first degree. Last year only about three 
hundred came forward as candidates for their degree. The magis- 
trates made careful inquiry as to the falling nflf, and the answer was 
that promising young men are so eager for Western education that 
they are going to Hongkong and to Shanghai. They have imbibed 
the spirit of the new times. They will not learn along the old lines. 
They will have Western education at any cost. This is the oppor- 
tunity of the missionary. 

As to the utility of missionary education as I have seen it : The in- 
spector of schools in Hongkong said to me recently, " Some of the 
best schools in this colony are being carried on by the Christian mis- 
sionaries." 1 was rejoiced lo have that testimony, and I tliink it 
significant and indicative of the line that we should lake in the future; 
our endeavor should be to preserve the intimate connection between 
education and every oilier form of mission effort. 

Rev. G. W. Citamberl.mn, D.D., Missionary, Presbyterian 
Church, U.S.A.,Brasil* 

To quote from an editorial, double-leaded, in the daily paper be- 
longing to the priests of the city of Uahia; " Whatever may be said in 
regard to the methods of the scliool which the press have been prais- 
ing, it is a Trojan horse, introduced into this city by men who have 
despaired of exercising inHuence over men of mature minds and 
sound judgments, and are turning their attention to the deceiving of 
the children. The faithful can not matriculate their children in a 
school of that character without incurring the anathema of the 
Giurdi." 

Rome fears the school a dozen times more than she fears the 
preacher. Why? Because the schools which we have opened in 
Brazil enthrone the Bible and recognize Jesus Christ as Director; 
therefore Ihe alarm that a school should be praised, after eighteen 
months of existence in the city of Bahia. The tirade which followed 
was the best advertising that we ever had for our school. The fol- 
lowing term the children could not be accommodated whose parents' 
attention had be?n first called by this denunciation. 

A prominent merchant and manufacturer said lo me in the custom 
house the following day: " I liave read that tirade of abuse; I was 
born in this city: I am fiflv years old, and I never have learned any- 
thing useful from one of our priests. They call me an atheist be- 
cause I have ceased to go to public functions, and because T do not 
allow my wife and daughters to go to confession, Xow do you know 
what I am doing in my factory? Tlie building that T was going to 
reserve for operatives is ready; you may take it and teach what you 
please in it and I will pay the expenses." He is a man whom his 
countrymen called an atheist 1 He has since been paying the ex- 
penses of four Christian teachers. At the end of the year he 
said: " I wish an exhibition." It was objected lo; it wasn't fair to 

• C«m(V<eH»IU April >s. 




I 



i 



t'KlUARY AND VILLAGE SCHOULS I 31 

either the teachers or the pupils, for the pupils had been of a very 
heterogeneous class, but his answer was that it was so much bet:er 
than anything else in the country that he would like to have the Gov- 
ernor and the Minister of Slates and everybody interested in educa- 
tion present. He had his way, and the first article on the printed pro- 
gramme — whicli this mail, called an atheist, had printed at his own 
expense — was " Prayer by Mr. Chamberlain." And after prayer he 
said to me : " Say what yuii please," and I had an opportunity for 
the first time to speak to the Governor of a State into which you could 

fut all of the Middle States and Ohio, and leave a margin for Rhode 
si and. 

Primary aad Village Scliools 

Mks. K. J. Bell£iu)Y, Missionary, Church Missionary Society, 
India* 

Priman,' and village schools must be awarded one of the fore- 
most places in all missionary' enterpnse. A glance at the statistics of 
the Churcli Missionary Society will show us that this necessity ha* 
been recognized, for we find that, out of the total number of educa- 
tional institutions under its control, rather more than three-fourths 
are village schools of the primary grade. The results have amply 
justified the wisdom of this course of action. Built, equipped, and 
maintained at a trifling cost, when compared with elementary school* 
at home, they form the nursery and the training-ground of the native 
church, and arc an indispensable factor in its organization. 

Many may ask why. when the Government provides education, as 
in India, should it be necessary for the Church to step in ? The Chris- 
tian's answer is brief, and may be summarized in a single sentence. 
*' Because state education is based upon a system of so-called strict 
religious neutrality." This, in India, and especially in the Travan- 
core and Cochin native Slates, means, that while any allusion to Chris- 
tianity is eliminated from lesson, and reading-books, heathm fables 
and stories, not necessarily of an instructive, or even of a moral tone, 
fill their pages. Thus the children's minds, at a very early age, are 
saturated with the very ideas, generally debasing and degrading, 
which an enlightened Government is professing to endeavor to dis- 
pel. Again, in the native States of India, the Governments, though 
subject to the British Government, arc essentially heathen, as is the 
case in Travancore, and nn education whatever is provided for the 
lower castes. In such districts it is absolutely necessary for the 
Church to maintain her own schools, and give the poor, the out-caste, 
the pariah, an equal share of the blessings of the gospel. 

Primary schools, as the term is understood in the Madras Presi- 
dency, are only taught as far as the Fourth Standard, which, how- 
ever, is quite sufficient to meet the requirements of the average Indian 
peasant. The child is tanght to read, write, and cipher thoroughly, 
and in all the Church Missionary Society's schools, the first hour of 
each day is devoted to a Scripture lesson, which every child, of what- 
ever creed or caste, is bound to attend. The general currjcidum in 
these schools, in any district, is uniform witli that of the primary de- 

* Central Prcibyteri«n Cliurch, April *4. 





122 EDUCATION AS AN EVANGELISTIC AGKKCY 



partTTicnts in all middle and high schools carried on in that district. 
The advantage of this is that it enables an intelligent child to pass 
from the village primary into the high school without having to 
recover any lost ground. 

Tlic huiUHngs in which otir primary schools are held, are generally 
of tlic simplest construction. A low wall, about three feet in height, 
of mud or stone, incloses a rectangular space of dried and beaten 
mud. and four pillars, one at each corner, support the thatched roof, 
allowing light and air to circulate freely, whilst affording sufficient 
shehcr from the burning rays of a tropica! sun, or the discomforts 
of a tropical shower. 

The infant and lower classes will he found seated upon the floor, 
each with his or her own pot of sand antl copybook ; the latter formed 
of strips of dried palm-Icaf wilh thu letters of the alphabet scratched 
upon them. The cliild spreads a small quantity of sand upon the 
floor, and traces the character on it, repeating its name in a monotone: 
smoothing the sand it repeats the process, until the teacher considers 
the lesson learned. The higher classes wilt be provided with benches, 
slates, and books; and in a girls' school it will be noticed that a small 
hag containing sewing forms part of the equipment. The black- 
board is freely used in these schools, and the interval tliat elapses 
between writing on the sand with tlie finger, and on a slate witli a 
pencil, is frequently bridged over by chalk and blackboard. 

Simple as these schools are, however, if they are to be in the highest 
degree successful as missionary schools, they need not only to be 
staffed by normally trained and qualified teacliers, but by men or 
women of Christian cliaracter. Gaining the respect and confidence of 
the neighbors by the consistency of their home life, which can not 
fail to be seen and commented on in a heathen village, these teachers 
may truly be likened to " a city set on a hill, which can not be hid." 
In course of time many who have watched them will allow their chil- 
dren to attend the village mission school, although they would not 
listen to a missionary preaching, nr receive a visit from a catcchist 
or pastor. In many cases, where one now finds a flourishing native 
church, the original ?eed may have been a humble primary school 
taught by a conscientious follower of our Lord and Master, whose 
example and conduct led to further inquiry Into the religion which 
produced such results. 

But in addition to all this, the primary school teachers need to be 
normally trained in order to maintain a thoroughly efficient school ; 
and to that end, it is important that a qualified teacher should be 
appointed from the very first. Also, where practicable, a normal 
training school should be established in every district, and its princi- 
pal and her European helpers should control all primary schools in 
such district, and direct their operations. 

The plan of placing the village schools under one head, rather than 
under several missionaries, has been fully carried out in the Tinne- 
velly Mission, and partially adopted in f ravancnre. and has the ad- 
vantage of sectiring continuity in the work. Where missionaries 
share the control of primary schools, the exigencies of the mission 
may call one or another away from her station, and the sdiools thus 



J 



TRR KINDERGARTEN IN 1T>RE[GN MISSIONS 



193 



I 



I 



Ifft may become inefficient, or even have to be closed. A heathen 
teacher is very seltlom einplnvc<i in a Churdi Missionary Society 
school, ard then only for very urgent reasons, sucli as when a foreign 
clan, speaking a different iangiiagc, settles in a village for trading^ 
purposes, and it may be found necessary, for the sake of inspiring 
confidence, to employ one of themselves to teach that language, in 
addition to the Christian teacher. 

As to results, we must remember that the greater number of the 
children taut^ht in our primary schools go back into heathen homes 
at a very early age. Few girls are allowed to stay after ten or eleven. 
TTie children spend the reniamder of their lives amid all the degrading 
surroundings of superstition, ignorance, and idolatry, and it would 
seem almost hopeless to expect to see any result. Yet, many a mis- 
sionary, visiting a village for the first time, must have noticed in one 
house, coldness and indifTercnce, in another, an actual repulse, and 
in a third, a warm welcome. It is more than prnbabic that the warm 
welcome has been given by a woman who was once in a mission 
school, and realize*! that there was nothing to ft-ar, but much to gain, 
from intercourse with a Christian teacher. In one ca.sf, we have 
had distinct testimony that the opening of a girls' school was the 
means of winning an entrance for the gospel messenger Into a heathen 
village, where previously, it had been impossible even to gain a 
hearing. 

The Kiadctgittea in Foreign Missions 

Mks. E. W. Blatchkoko, IVoman's Board of Missions of the 
Interior (Cotigrcgalionai) , Chicaga.'* 

The presentation of this topic has been assigned to me with a re- 
quest for a sketch of the " Glory Kindergarten " in Kobe. Japan. It 
b regretted tliat the limit of time permits allusion, only. lo kinder- 
gartens in other fields than Japan : especially in Turkey, wliere a 
beneficent work has been accomplished at Smyrna, under the faithful 
conduct of Miss Uarllett; also at Adana, Mardin, Cesarea, Marash, 
and Constantinople. Indeed, before the massaert-s. twenty-seven kin- 
dergartens wvTL' in successful operation in that land. 

Friedrich Froebel. in his work for children, always found in wo- 
men his most zealous and devoted disciples. In this fact lies the key 
to the rapid spread of his ideas; his mission was to reveal tlie phi- 
losophy of a kingdom which woman feels to be peculiarly her own — 
the education of little children — a sphere for which slic is adapted by 
her instinct of motherhood, her quick intuition, her sympathy with 
child life, and ready adaptation lo its changing phases. 

That Frocl)ers life purpose was, ahnvc all. religious is not generally 
known. Tn his autobiography, speaking nf his earliest experience at 
school, he says: "On this first day of my attendance the children 
repeated the words of the Lord. ' Seek ye first the kingdom of God 
and his righteousness and all these things shall be added unto yon.* 
The verse was carefully explained, and for the following days of the 
week was repeated again and again by the children in chorus or in 
sections until the sounds, the words, and the sense had produced so 

'Central Pmb)-terian Churcb, April n. 




k 



IS4 EDUCATION AS AN EVANGELISTIC AGENCY 

Strong an impression upon me as to make this verse ihc motto of ra] 
life." 

Frocbel stands fonh in the educational world a reformer as true 
and as great as was Martin Lutlier in the religious world. His great 
genius who unfolded in a Christ-like heart. 

Thirteen years ago Miss Annie L. Howe, after years of singularly 
8ucccs.sful experience, both as kindergartncr and trainer of kindcr- 
gartncrs, felt in her heart a call to carry this gospel of childhood to 
Japan. On arriving there she found already in operation not less 
than fifty government kindergartens; ki?idergartens, introduced into 
the country by that insatiable appetite for foreign ideas which char- 
acterizcfl the earlier period of modern Japanese civilization. Such 
being the fact, why should Miss Howe have made the sacrifice of 
leaving friends, and home, and the kindergarten which had been so 
dear to her for nine years? The answer is found in extracts from 
one of her letters written after visiting a number of the more promi- 
nent government kindergartens. She writes : " They have no sweet 
morning talks, no prayers, no songs ; gesture is an unknown quan- 
tity. The name of God is not allowed, and the kindcrgarlner is a 
teacher, not a loving, synipalhelic friend, so near that she is some- 
times called ' mother.' The height and depth of this sweet work have 
not yet been discovered by the Japanese. On the playground of one 
of these kiiidcrgartcns is a large shrine to the ' Fox God.' and to 
this tilt-' little children bring daily oflFcrings." As a Japanese pastorre- 
ccnlly remarked to the writer; "Those are not real kindergartens. 
They are pictures, imitatiims ; they have no spirit — no life." 

Several years before her arrival the hearts of earnest women in the 
church of Kobe had been moved with the desire to give to little chil- 
dren the best and truest Christian education. These women under- 
took the work of raising funds for a building, and by the middle of 
October, 1889, the money needed (over one thousand dollars) had 
been secured, with much self-denial and earnest work. 

An attractive building was erected, and early in November the 
Sho-ei, or " Glory " Kindergarten and Training-school for kinder- 
gartncrs were opened- 

The Glory Kindergarten is well named. The generous, sunny 
building, beautiful with vines and flowers, opens daily to sixty bright- 
eyed Japanese children. Here, in the plays, and songs, and work, the 
children " learn by doing." The educative value of thLs work Is un- 
doubted. Can we question its direct religious influence? Only 
consider that the workers are inspired from first to last by the spirit 
of Christ, that kindliness and unselfishness arc made the rule of con- 
duct, that prayer is made as natural and real to the children as the 
sunlight, that the love of their Father in Heaven is shown them in 
His leading of Abraham and His care of the birds. Learning by 
doing? Yes, learning God by doing right. What a blessed nurserj' 
of righteousness I 

Tlicre is no need to point out the difference between this and the 
mechanical Government kindergartens. One embodies the life and 
spirit of the kindergarten movement, the other lias the mechanism 




TRAINING-SCHOOLS AND HIGHER EDUCATION 



I as 



I. 



without the soul. That this difference is apparent to the Japanese is 
amply manifested. 

TnJiiia{-4ci»ol> ind Higher Educitlofl 

Ktv. J. Fairley Dalv, M.A., B.D., Prce Church of Scotland* 

The rapidity with which schrwis multiply in some heathen coun- 
tries, once they take hold of the people, may be illustrated by the case 
of Livingstonia. In the year 1875. no schools; 1885. 6 schools, with 
558 scholars; 1895. 51 schools, with 4.501 scholars; igoo. 123 schools, 
with 20,<xio to 30,000 scholars. 

The diflficulty is not to get scholars, but teachers. This difficulty 
was met from the first by setting the more advanced scholars to teach 
beginners. In this work many showed great aptitude and proved 
most successful, and were promoted to become teachers of village 
schools. They had to prosecute their studies alone, and during hoH- 

y time attend continuation classes at the mission center. 

Very soon the village schools, which were periodically visited by 
the missionary, demanded teachers of a higher grade. To meet this 
demand and the general need of the mission, a Normal Training In- 
stitute was started at the central station. Livingstonia. in 1895. 
Picked boys from the schools of the branch stations, representing 
as many as thirteen tribes, were sent in. and last year there were over 
three hundred in attendance. Every term since its opening young 
men and boys have come flocking seeking admission, but barely one 
out of three can be admitted, owing to cramped accommodation and 
want of means. 

The Livingstonia Institute is wisely avoiding the mistake of sur- 
rounding students with all modern conveniences and comforts. Thus 
when they are called to teach in a grass hut for a scliool they do not 
feel hdplcss or discontented. The work in the institute ipproximalcs 
to the conditions of the first beginnings of school work in new vil- 
lages. A shed of wood and grass has been erected along the sides 
of a quadrangle, with a door on one side and an open court in the 
middle, shaded by a tree. Such a school natives can easily provide 
for themselves at most villages, and the teachers who arc under 
training are required to make the most they can of it by their own 
ingenuity. In the training-school itself they have mnre of the con- 
ditions tlic future mav brlnr, and more nf what the teacher may strive 
after. In this way the teacher is kept just in advance of his class. 

If Livingstonia represents the youngest of our normal training in- 
stitutions, Lovedale represents our oldest. In the former case we 
have normal work beginning; in the latter we have such work fully 
developed after more thin half a rfnhirv of experience. Lovedale 
was founded in 1841, by the Rev. W. Givan, in a brave and hopeful 
spirit. As the sphere of mission influence widened, the need was 
felt of a seminary to train agents for the mission and to provide suita- 
ble education for selected nntJ\e bovs. 

The institution started with eleven natives and nine Europeans, sons 
of missionaries. Its aim was stated at the first as fourfold : To 
train young converts to be preachers; to educate native teachers; to 

•Central PrMbytertaa Churcb. April 17. 



^ 



xs6 



EDUCATION AS AN EVANCELISTIC AGENCY 




give industrial training in various arts ; and to give a general cd 
cation to all. Its great principle and grand purpose, ever kept in 
view, was the conversion of the individual, and there was to be no 
distinction of race, but perfect eqnahty between black and white. 

In iS66. when Dr. James Stewart took il up, he added a college 
department, which rapidly increased the numbers. There are now 
over 800 under instruction in various stages of progress, of who 
500 arc boarders or residents in the place. 

In 1871 the system of pa}'mcnt was begun. In that year 150 
students paid izoo; in 1897. 813 paid ^3,544; and altogether, during 
the 29 years, a total sum of over ^43.000 has been paid as 
fees. Eight pounds a year are charged, and for this the student re- 
ceives education and food consisting chiefly of maize and milk. The 
annual average expenditure of the institution amounts generally to 
over iio.ooo. The income to meet this is derived from fees, Gov- 
ernment grants, and the committee of the Free Church, which pays 
£2.400 per year. Since the institute is entirely unsoctanan, natives 
come from nearly ail the missions in the country — Episcopalian, Lon- 
don Missionary Society, Wesleyan, United Presbyterian, French, 
Moravian, Berlin Society, and others. Proud Kaffirs, fighting Zulus, 
quiet Barolongs, and Europeans, all receive the same treatment, and 
are all taught the same simple truths of the gospel of Christ Jesus. 

The normal course in this institute extends over three years. In 
the first year there are separate classes for boys and girls, but in the 
second and third years of the normal class they are taught together 
by Rev. D. D. Stormont, M.A., specially trained for normal wor ' 
In 1878 there were 107 in this department. 

The impression produced by Lovedale on the natives of Sou 
Africa is best illustrated by the story of BI>1hswood, Il is situated in 
the Transkci, 150 miles east of I-,ovedale. It was opened in 1S77, 
being asked for by the Fingocs. It may startle some to be informed 
that these poor savage piL-opk- contributed the large sum of £4,500 in 
three subscriptions of i 1.500 each, that they might secure for their 
own tribe and district the same advantap^s, spiritual, educational, 
and industrial, which Lovcdale gives the Knf^rs. This story belongs 
to missionary romance, but can not be told here. Suffice it to say that 
a handsome stone liuilding has been erected ; that last year they had 
a total of 353 with 6t> in the normal department, of whom 24 were 
successful in securing certificates. 

Heathenism will never be evangelized, far less converted, by 
Europeans and Americans. In all lands it will only be converted by 
native agents.- The spring of a new religious life must be found 
in the soil itself. Already in all our missions we have discovered 
this blessing in the young men and the young women raised up by 
our schools to be preachers and teachers. _ 

Rev. W. S. Sutheri-ANd. M.A.. Missionary, Church of Scot- 
land. India* 

Whenever I go across to India to visit anv mission, and want to 
know the moral and religictis condition in a particular place, whether 



>w^ 

1 



1 



• Central Presbyterian Church. April 15. 




1 



I 
I 



I 

I 



PUSSIBLB I'OWKK Ut-' MISSIONAUIES WtIO TCACH 137 

the tone is high or low, I ask myself, is there a training-school here? 
If there is. I go to it, and get interested in thL' young men a]Kl women. 
I lay my hand upon tlie pulse of that schoo). That is the heart from 
which the blood goes out for the whole body of tlie church. If it 
is weak, the whole church will be weak. 

As the work of any mission goes on the missionaries are forced, 
if they would have their church strong and indqjcndpnt, to put (heir 
strength into a training-institution. I have had charge of such a 
training- institution for the last twelve years on the Himalayas. We 
have felt that it is our greatest work. Out from the institution have 
gone men into the East and into the West, tiUo countries where wc 
are not allowed to go. away into Bhutan on the east and Nepal on 
the west. These young men have felt the call of the Spirit, and have 
gone at the charge of the native church. These are tlie leaders who 
have made the church there independent and strong. 

And women's work is on the same basis. Ladies who expect to 
go to India should not suppose that they will be able to leach there 
unless they Icam here. I have seen ladies come out who have never 
bad a clialk in ihcir hands; they have been set to school work, and 
have felt themselves perfectly helpless. Men and women are alike 
in this. Unless we learn to teach, wc shall not be fitted to take up 
this, the greatest work that wc have. 

To our school come young men of various ages, from 15 to 35, 
and they stay with us from 4 to 5 years, according to their circum- 
stances. 

We begin with the Bible class, in the morning at 6 o'clock, for 
an hour. Our regular schtwl begins at 10.30 and goes on until 4. 
Wc feel in that school that unless these young men, having their 
hearts full of the love, of Christ, have their heads as luU of the 
knowledge of Uis work, they arc useless for the purpose of extending 
the kingdom of Jesus Christ. Tliese young men are sent out to 
preach. From the best of the teachers all our preachers arc chosen. 

Ponible Powef of MJisioauiM Wfio Teach 

Ma. W. Henry Gr/Vnt^ Secretary Ecumenical Conference, New 
York* 

Those who have not been on the forei(>n field may not fully realize 
Ihc extent of our school work. Tf yon had gone a hundred years ago 
from Yokohama across Japan, through China, round through the 
Straits, up through India, across Ptrsia, and down through Turkey, 
you probably would not have found more than two or three schools, in 
our sense of the word. And yet, a few years ago. I went pretty much 
over this route, and there were only two Sabbatlis in the whnle time 
that T was not in a Christian church, except when f was on the steam- 
ship. Of these two Sabbaths, one was whrn I was snowed itp in a 
Kurdish village, and one when I was in China without an interpreter. 
I think there was not a week in all thai period of tmveling from i t.ooo 
to 20.000 miles In Asia that I did not almost daily visit a Christian 
school. So you can get from tliis some idea as to the number of 
schools carried on by the missionary societies of the world. I have 

•Central Prwhytcriin Churcli. April ay. 




138 



EDUCATION AS AN EVANGELISTIC AGENCY 





visited possibly a thousand of these schools. Now not only is the 
number of these schools gjeat, but their possibilities also are great. 

The Sunday-school as an instilution. in its feeblest form, is doing 
an immense deal of good . Tlie same is true of our day-schools and 
station boarding-schools in foreign lands. If you go out into any of 
the villages where the missionaries are at work, and see a child — a 
boy or a girl under fifteen years of age — who has been in one of 
the station schools one, two, or three years, he will meet you with a 
warm welcome and a bright face; he is a missionary in that com- 
munity, where he is bringing new and fresh ideas, ideas of life and 
light, of the gospel, and of the benefits of Christian education. The 
question Is, therefore, how to make these cliihiren most effidenl and of 
the very greatest benefit and blessing to their own people. It is 
found, in many instances, that children have actually been educated 
away from their people; that boys and girls are best left at home six 
months in the year that they may enter into the daily life of their 
brothers and sisters, helping in those ways which are normal to them 
in the farming and harvesting the crops, helping in the sewing; and 
if that part of llieir activity is taken away from their daily life, it 
must be furnished in some other way in the school. 

Now admitting that onr educational work is not all it might be, it is 
still a mighty power, and it is worth while to put into it the very best 
superintending and directing force that can be obtained. 

Much has hren said as to the training of missionaries in teaching. 
The first obstacle that we meet with is in the reluctance of Christian 
educators to go tn the foreign field ; by the time they get the necessarj* 
experience at home they are not easily moved to go abroad. Such men 
need to have the opportunity for leadership and influence brought to 
their attention in tifie strongest possible light. A thoroughly compe- 
tent Christian educator in any of the great fields will soon be known 
to all who are struggh"ng with the problems of educational work 
there. In China I think that we could very easily go over the whole 
field, and find not more than a dozen men sptvially fitted to direct 
Christian colleges. 

This being the case, we first of all limit what we attempt to do by 
ihc number of the men whom we have to do it with. One of the great 
errors of our mission work is in supposing that the extent of tlie 
work is dcpe:ident upon the amount of territory that is covered, or the 
mere numbers of those engaged in it. or the numbers in the institu- 
tions themselves. As a matter of fact, in China, out of the twenty 
to twenty-five thousand students In the Christian schools, there arc 
probably not more than two or three hundred actually in the college 
grade. It is a remarkable fact, that if we were to gather together the 
missionaries who are fitted to conduct higher educational work, and 
the students who are prepared lo enter college classes, we would not 
have much more than a small .American college in that vast field with 
its many schools. I am not advocating one Christian college for the 
whole of China, but I am speaking of the conditions under which 
higher education must be developed, conditions which do not admit 
of many denominational colleges. 



d 



THE CHRISTIAN CUI.LEGK 129 

Ttic ChruU&n CoKefC 

Hew George Washburn, D.D., LL.D., President, Robert Col- 

U'ge, ConstatUinuplc* 

Whether any college can be considered as aa auxiliary lo the mis- 
sionary work depends upcm what sort of a college it is. No one knows 
l>etter than we, who are engaged in the work of education, that neither 
knowledge nor intellectual training alone can niakc good men. 

What i^o we mean by a Christian college? We have two American 
colleges in Constantinople: one for girls and one for young men. 
Both claim to be Christian colleges. The last-named of these two col- 
leges — Robert College — was the first of such institutions founded by 
Americans in mission fields, and it has served as a model for others. 
It was founded in 1863. It has never received any money from any 
missionary society, but is an independent institnlion, governed by a 
Board of Trustees in the city of New York. It has now 300 students, 
representing fifteen different nationalities, and almost as many reli- 
gions. It is not a theological institution, and we do not trouble our 
students even with the results of higher criticism. It is not a sectarian 
institution, and we are not much concerned with the conventionalities 
of religion. The majority of our students are members of some one 
of the Oriental churches, and wc do not seek to make them Presby- 
terians or Congrcgationalists. We do not even ask them to become 
Protestants; we simply seek to make them true Christians, honest, 
spiritually minded followers of the Lord Jesus Christ. We mean 
to do for our students just what a first-class Christian college in 
America should do for its students. 

We hold that the true object of college education is to make men ; 
to discipline and develop character. \Vc are involved in tlie same 
difficulties and perplexed by the same questions which are now agitat- 
ing the educational world as to what means arc best adapted to de- 
velop the faculties of the mind. In America, as we all know, the 
question of college education is in a state of absolute chaos. In France 
it is the most important political question of the day, and even in 
Germany the conllict between gymnasiums and reai-schulcn is be- 
coming acute. In general, our theory is to carry out such a course 
of study as will l)cst develop the diflFercnt mental faculties. And we 
mean to give a more thorough drill and discipline in these branches of 
study than can he had in any other institution in the Turkish Empire. 
We do not follow exactly the curriculum of American colleges, he- 
cause wc believe that every colletrc in mission fields .should be adapted 
fir.st of all to the needs of the people of the country. It dots not make 
so much difference what a boy studies as how he studies. 

We yield to none in the completeness and thoroughness of the 
intellectual training which we give to our students, but wc believe 
that there is something far more important than this, that the moral 
powers stand higher than the intellectual, and are the controlling 
influence in our Hves; consequently, we do all in our power to train 
and develop these faculties, so that our students may become Chris- 
tian men. 

So far as religious teaching is concerned, we do otir best to impress 



*Cc0l»l PresbyterUa Chytcb, April «$. 





IJO EDUCATION AS AN EVANGELISTIC AGKNCy 



upun Dur students the essential principles of our faiths and to lead 
tlicin lo practical Christian lives. All our students are required to 
attend public prayers every day; all those who board in the college, 
about two-thirds of the whole number, are requiretl to attend 
public worship twice on the Sabbath and Bible classes in the 
afternoon. Tlic Young Men's Christian Association holds its meet- 
ings on week days, and is an influeniial society. There are also 
private an<l voluntary mcctiiii<s ul the teachers and students. If it 
is said that preaching the Gospel is the essential thing in missionary 
work, what missionary has such opportunities as we have? The 
young men come under our influence not once or twice, but for five 
years successively we preach to them all the essential truths of Chris- 
tianily as plainly and earnestly as we can. If it be said that the 
most esscniial infiticnce wliich the missionary exerts is in coming 
into personal relations with the people, these young men are kept 
for years under the personal influence of their professors, whose first 
thought is to make them good men. The hcati of one of the great 
Christian churches of the East said to me not long ago that among 
all his people the only young men who really believed in God and in 
Christianity were those who had been educated in Robert College. 
If Christianity is to hold its own in the East ; if the old churches arc 
to be won back to spiritual life; if they are to become instrumental 
in teaching Mohammedans what Christianity really is. it will be 
through the inllnrnce of trained and educated men, men who know 
what they believe and why they believe it; men who have sufficient 
knowledge and training to understand and to meet the arguments of 
those unbelievers who are now flooding the world with their attacks 
upon Christianity and upon all religion. 

The question whether any college established in a mission field 
will be a truly Christian college must depend, not upon constitutions 
and. rules, but upon the personal character of those who arc sent 
out to direct it. The missionary, whether he he a teacher, or a 
preacher, or a writer, must be full of ihe Spirit of Christ, and must 
reflect the life of Christ in his own life, or he will never win men to 
the service of his Master. 

Rev. George B. Suvth, D.D.. Missionary, Methodist Episcopal 
Church, China* 

A college for the higher education, established in any large city 
in China, is a great reconciler, and aflFords a platform upon which 
the leaders among the Chinese and the leaders of the Christian Church 
can stand together. 

I remember, some time ago, an interesting illustration of this. I 
was invited to meet a number of Chinese gentlemen at dinner. After 
the dinner, one of them said that he wished to speak to me about 
the Church. " For reasons which you will understand," he said, 
" I have not joined and can not join the Christian Church at present ; 
but because of the existence of institutions like the one o\'er which 
you preside, I recognize, and many men of my class recognize, the 
fact that the Christian Church is the only disinterested friend which 

*Cmtr»1 PrcafcTterisB Church. April tS. 





TUB CHRISTIAN COLLBGE 



131 



Oiina has; and, I do not hesitate to say. that the time will speedily 
come when large numbers of the men from the class to which I 
belong will join it." Now, he did not say that to flatter, as Chinamen 
often do. I believe that he meant it. 1 have reason to know that he 
meant it. In the condition of things which exists in China, and 
because of the old opposition of the people to foreigners, it is neces- 
sary that a reconciler of this kind slioiild exist. 

Christian institutions for higher leamnig aid largely in the general 
intellectual stirring up which is necessary in China, and which seems 
to be necessary in every country before Christianity is largely ac- 
cepted. Christianity is the religion of the living, and not the religion 
of the dead; and everything thai the Christian Oiurch can do to 
awaken a higher and a more active intellectual life among the Chinese 
will aid them in the acceptance tif the Cliristian religion. 

Now, a word as to the present condition of higher education in 
Oitna, as shown by the schools. 

As to the government schools : There is now a great college estab- 
lished al Tientsin, especially for the study of civil engineering. 
One has recently been established at Shanghai, especially for the 
study of political science and history. And, in addition, another 
great university was established alwut two years ago at Peking. 
These three great govcmmenl colleges of China are all crowded with 
students. Hut the significance of the higher education — the meaning 
and value of it — is shown better by a list of the Christian colleges. 

There is a cf^lcge at Canton, which is the largest institution of 
the kind in that part of the country ; ihc American Roard College 
at Fuchau ; the Methodist univer.sitics at Peking and Nankin, and 
the institution over which Dr. Sheffield presides at Tung-Cho. 
near Peking. There is the College of the American Episcopalians, St. 
John's Cnilego. at Shanghai ; the .Sonthern Methodist College at 
Shanghai; and last and largest, the college over which I have the 
honor to preside at Fnchau. 

Of the more than 300 students at our college at Fuchau, there is 
not one who does not pay his way. And wc have found that it has 
been a great stimulus to study. Of the hundreds upon hundreds of 
students who have passed through that college there has never been 
one who has received one cent from our church or from any other 
church. I think it is the only institution in China of which that is 
true. I do not say that gladly, but sorrowfully. 

These Christian institultons afTnrd and promise no future positions 
of any kind to their students, whereas the government colleges do; 
and the fact that these Christian colleges are crowded with students 
to their utmost capacity is an evidence of the eagerness which the 
Oiinese feci for the acquisition of this learning. 

Now, an interesting thing is. I think, that every one of these in- 
stitutions — the Government college at Peking, the Engineering Col- 
lege at Tientsin, and the one recently foimded at .Shanghai, as well as 
■ all the Christian institutions to which I have referred — have for their 
ft presidents Christian men, and American Christian men. 
B These institutions are striking examples of the great opportunities 

W which arc opening out before the Church in the Far East. But it is 



I 



I3t EDUCATION AS AN EVANGELISTIC AGENCY 

also an indication of ihe tremendous responsibilities and duties which] 
arc pressing upon the Church, which I hope it will rise to meet. 

I believe that the lime has come when there should be speciall 
preparation of the hijfhest kind for educational work in these colleges jj 
that our boards should send out specially prepared men only. Andj 
1 desire to give this as my testimony: That no more consccratcdi 
men have ever come out than those men who have specially prc-l 
pared themselves for what would be called secular work. No menj 
have e^-er shown a more loving spirit, or have given themselves mm 
utterly to the best interests of the Chinese. Special preparation, thel 
highest intellectual preparation, for any kind of work to be done onj 
the mission field docs not unfit a man for the great work of the mis 
sionary — that is. the work of bringing men to Jesus Christ. 

Tlic Power of 'Educated Wonunhood 

Miss Isabella Tuoburn, Missionary, Methodist Episcop 
Church, India* 

The power of educated womanhood is simply the power of skilled] 
service. We are not in the world to be ministered unto, but to' 
minister. The world is full of need, and every opportunity to hel 
is a duty. Preparation for these duties is education, whatever i 
it may take or whatever service may result. 

It was once thought that anyone who knew the three R's coul 
teach little children,, and such work was committed to poor women' 
and untrained girls because they needed the support it broxight the: 
But we now know this instruction of little children to be one of the 
most difficult things In the whole school course. All the way on, 
I will not say all the way up. the trained, which means the educated 
In mind and hand, win influence and power simply because they 
know how. 

Few missionaries have found the expected in the work awaiting 
them on the field. We went to tell women and children of Christ, 
their Saviour and Deliverer, and to teach thi^m to read the story for 
themselves. Rut instead of waiting and willing pupils, we have 
found the indifferent, or even the hostile, to win whom requires every 
grace and art we know. We have found sickness and poverty to 
relieve, widows to protect, advice to be given in every possible diffi- 
culty or emergency, teachers and Bible-women to be trained, 
houses to be built, horses and cattle to be bought, gardens to be 
planted, and accounts of all to be kept and rendered. Wc have found 
use for every faotlty, natural and acquired, that we possessed, and 
have coveted all that we lacked. We have found ourselves pioneers 
to open new paths, and reformers to make straight crooked ways. 
Wc have had to make bricks without straw, and to evolve plans 
•uitable to the place and time, for never will any plan work the same 
way in two places. It is cruel to a work and to a worker, to send her 
to such labors without preparatioiL We have learned this; boards 
are beginning to learn it, and all begin to realize the importance of the 
missionary training-school. 

But it is not only our power over those we go to save that 

*Caniesle Hall. Aorl) b& 





HIGHER e£>ljc:ation of women 



t$$ 



must consider. When saved they must have power over the com- 
munilies in which they live. We do poor work if it does not inspire 
others to go and do likewise. It is not only the missionary spirit 
ihey will need; not only the constraining Uivc which is essential for 
keeping the heart warm and devoted, but the same training which wc 
need, as well as skill for sen*ice. They need this more titan we because 
of thcit harder task. \Vc are trusted and respected. Few doubt our 
right to knowledge or our wisdom in its use. They meet doubt 
and opposition. They have little sympathy, or support, or inspiration 
from friends, and no precedents to follow. They live and breathe 
in the atmosphere of countries where abuses arc crystallized. More- 
over, they are to guard their pupils and converts from the evils that 
come to them from the same lands that send them the gospel. You 
have nc curse here that does not touch some vital part of our work in 
India. Intemperance, divorce, degrading amusements, injurious, 
false, Of impure Iti'.Talure. are all serious hindrances in the mission 
field. Women must know how to meet them. 1 heard Mr. Moody say 
last sunmicr that the principal heresies of the day are led by women. 
It was a startling statement, but sadly true. The lesson for us is to 
sec that the higher education, for whieh our Eastern sisters arc ask- 
mg, be Christian education. Only yesterday Miss Singh was asked 
here in New York if she would nut take training for the stage. Girls 
are being asked the same qnestion in Calcutta and Bonjbay. Shall 
we not make haste and so unite higher education with all that is good 
In hope, and piirjiose, and accomplishment that one shall be identical 
with the other, until each trained student shall go from our schools 
with the vow, " To he the best that I can be for truth and righteous- 
ness and Thee, Lord of my life, I come." 

Htgfaer Education of Women 

Mrs. S. L. Baldwin, Formerly Missionary, Methodist Episco' 
pal Church, China* 

The object of Christian missions to heathen nations is not to found 
schools, orphanages, and hospitals, or even to give better physical 
conditions and aid to self-support, but to obey Christ's last sacred 
command. "Go yc and teach all nations." Happily all these insti- 
ttitions for education and physical uplift quickly accompany, or follow 
as aids and results of the preaching of the gospel, illustrating the 
truth of that word. " Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his 
righteousness and all these things shall be added." Experience and 
observation teach that mere mental culture, from its lowest to highest 
forms, gives not that " new birth " which Christ taught was im- 
perative to salvation. Foundation work is by preaching the gospel. 

The money for support of Christian missions — whence does it 
come, and on what plea is it raised? 

In preparing an article on missponar>' work in our own denomina- 
tion, i had occasion to study the official statistics of the contributions 
of 1.500 churches, and I was most interested in the fact that the larger 
proportion of money was given by the middle and poorer classes, 
and in many cases represented real sacrifice. The "poor widow" 

• Central Prttbperiiin 'fftT.ffTl, April •<. 




c 



X34 EDUCATION AS AN EVANGELISTIC ACENCV 



Still unassumingly drops her " mite " into ihe Lord's treasury. What 
pica is presented to secure money? Chietly and justly that of the 
, spiritual darkness which results in every other form of evil ; wc 
' plead for money to give the gospel, and ask for schools, orphanages, 
and hospitals only as aids to thib main ohject. 

To what extent are we justified in using missionary money for 
education? Thirty-seven years in foreign missionary work, twenty 
of tlicni on the field, have given me strong convictions on this vital 
question. It has been given me to see the terrible degradation of 
our sisters in the chief heathen lands of the world, and I have realized 
most fully thai they could be saved only through Christ. Under 
His command how dare we give luxuries and accomplishments to 
some of our Father's children, and deny, on the plea of an empty 
treasury, the bread and light of life to others in direct famine and 
darkness ? 

In view of tliese conditions, and the chief object of missions to 
heathen peoples, it does become a vital question to mission au- 
thorities as to the purposes to which they may appropriate mission 
money. There can be no question as to its use in the direct giving 
of the gospel. The preaching of the Word, evangelistic travel and 
teaching, training-schools for Bible-women and their work, the pub- 
lication of Christian hterature — all these are in perfect harmony with 
our plea for money. Again, we are justified in using these trust 
funds for indirect aids in giving the gospel ; we have passed the 
time when either orphanages or hospitals are questioned. The rescue 
of little ones from death or worse, to be trained into expert Christian 
workers, justifies always the support of Christian orphanages, while 
the direct teaching of God's Word to those who come to our hos- 
pitals has not only resulted in salvation for the patients, but has 
opened homes, towns, and even great cities to the entrance and work 
of missionaries. 

But whc-n we come to the subject of education, we at once touch 
debatable ground. What shall the limit he of the use of mission 
money for so-called higher ediication ? My growing conviction is 
that wc arc justified in giving only that mental culture that is neces- 
sary to make expert workers in every department; that advances 
the one chief object, namely, to give the gospel to the heathen. It is 
important that our pupils have a good knowledge of their own lan- 
guage and history, and that they have what we would term a good 
English education. T would give such a knowledge of the science 
of the heavens and the earth as will sweep away all superstitions. I 
would have them so well informed as to be able to recognize the great 
Creator and His unswerving laws, by which we have night and day, 
seedtime and harvest, fruits and (lowers. But what of the giving 
of foreign languajjes, music, drawing, etiquette, etc.? When the 
courtesy nf Christ comes, teaching the hearing of one another's bur- 
dens, hospitality, gentleness, meekness, and purity, how gbdly should 
we hasten to teach thrtt through these better forms a releascis given 
from the exacting code of heathen etiquette. Tt does not seem wise 
to use mission money to pay native teachers — not always Christian — 
to leach our pupils such details as hnw low to bow to a guest, how 



i 



^ 



biGHEft EfiUCATrON OF WOMfiN 



U5 



to lift and place a cup of tea, how to arrange a bouquet, etc. Sucb 
leaching, if continued at all. should certainly be wholly supported 
from other sources than the mission treasury. Fnrthcmiore, drawing, 
wood -can- in ^. embroidery, etc., save as indiislrial aids, surdy ought 
not to command the use of mission money. 

Music, to a limited extent, has a most valuable place in the work 
of missions, and such a knowledj^c of it may well be given as to 
enable one to sing the gospel in home, school, and church. I would 
not hes.itate to ask a self -supporting widow, who could not give her 
only child a note of music, to contribute toward an organ for school 
or church in a heathen land; hut classical music, as rqjrescntcd by 
Wagner. Beethoven. Mozart and their confreres, surely has no place 
in mission schools, unless it be wholly at the expense of the pupils,. 
not only for the teaching, but for the traveling expenses and support 
of the teacher. As to foreign languages and methods, usually all 
methods of teaching in mission schools are of necessity foreign, and 
it only remains to measure values and use the best as economically 
as possible for successful work. To the earnest student nf the con- 
ditions of the world to-day it becomes increasingly evident that Eng- 
lish, with its treasures of spiritual and scientific tnuh, must have a 
place in our higher native schools. 

Believing, as I do, in the right of women in all lands to attain for 
themselves the highest mental culture and most decorative accom- 
plishments ; seeing over the world the wide, open door for the gospel, 
and realizing our limited sources of supply, 1 would rejoice to see 
the following principle closely adhered to hy those who administer 
the trust funds of missions, viz. : give nothing for mere accom- 
plishment or mental or personal decoration, hut everything possible 
to make workmen that need not be ashamed in God's service, and to 
contribute to strong Christian character. 

Miss Lilavati Singh, B.A., Professor of English Literature, 
Lueknow College, India.* 

It has been said that money for missions comes from the middle 
classes and the poorer classes, and therefore it must l)e very care- 
fully expended, and not given to higher education. I have been 
traveling nine months in this country, and one day a little envelope 
was handed to me. and there were five dollars in it, the gift of a poor 
preacher's wife. She was crippled, rheumatic, had to do all her work 
herself, and to look .ifier ;i husband who was very sick. Tliat night 
as I knelt beside tny bed, I separated that envelope from the others^ 
and I asked God to bless that money in training workers on the 
other side. Because the money comes from the poorest, and the 
people have to make sacrifice to crive it to ns. ought it not to be put 
to the best use? As a child. I did a great many things that I now know 
were wrong. How do T know it? Rccausc your missionaries have 
established schools where girls can be trained. And we want the 
same kind of trained women as you have in this country to do effi- 
cient service on the other side. 

It has been said that because the gospel ts to be preached, tlwre- 

*CeBiral Preshyieiian Cbarch. Apri] i*. 



136 EDUCATION AS AN EVANGELISTIC AGENCY 

fore energy, and money, and time should not be expended on higher 
education. I plead that because the gtjspel is to be preached, there- 
fore energ;)', time, and money should be cxpeuded on higher educa- 
tion. With all that you have done for us in the past, you will never 
have enough workers for us. The only way to get enough workers 
to meet the demands of the field, is to train us to do the work that 
your missionaries have done, I have been told that when the officers 
of our church have the names of candidates presented to them, one 
of the first questions they ask is. What education has she had ? Now, 
I could not help thinking, that if, with your heredity and environ- 
ment, you require good education in your laborers, how can we poor 
heathen do efficient work without the same advantages? 1 have been 
with missionaries for a number of years, and I have seen them when 
their hearts have been breaking. It isn't the climate that breaks their 
hearts; it isn't the difference of food and the strange surroundings; 
but what is breaking the hearts of a great many missionaries has 
been the failure of character in their converts. From my own ex- 
perience, I want to tell you that failure of cnaracter comes often- 
times from ignorance : because we do not know any better we dis- 
appoint your missionaries. Now. if you want us to be what you are, 
and to be what Christ intends us to be, give us the education that you 
have had, and in time, and with God's help and grace, we will not 
disappoint you. 

When I wanted an education. I did not have money to get it. but 
I had read about girls in this country who were educating themselves, 
and although the missionary in charge offered me a scholarship, I 
did not accept it ; I wanted to do what your girls and boys are doing: 
to get my own education by working for it. And so when the 
scholarship was oflfereH me, because of the inspiration of your lives 
and characters I refused the scholarship. I taught five hours every 
day to get money to pay for my food and for the education that I 
thought would fit me for service for Christ. It was not mere ambi- 
tion. It takes an edncated mind to be ambitious! An educated mind 
that makes you more eager for knowledge is not a thing that has 
come to India yet. The thing which made me want an education 
was a desire for service, because I had read of women in England 
and America who were doing great things for people. 

It was my privilege a few weeks ago to visit the city of Wash- 
ington, and there I saw a statue that I shall never forget as long 
as 1 live. It was a bronze statue of Abraham Lincoln. In one hand 
he holds the Proclamation of Emancipation ; the other is placed upon 
the head of an African slave, whose fetters He broken. The spirit 
of gratitude with which the slave is looking up (0 the emancipator 
has been brought out ver>' beautifully by the artist, and. as I looked 
upon that group, I could not help thinking that we wnmeij of the 
Orient should feel that gratitiiHc toward the women of Kngl;vid and 
the women of America, for they have done and are doing the same 
thing in a measure for us that Abraham Lincoln and his brave men 
did for the African slaves. 

There are decrees of emancipation, and while I do not wish to 
lower the work that is being done by the Bible-women, I am here to 




HIGHER EDUCATION OF WOMEN 



137 



plead for the skilled labor that we need in India. Fifteen years ago 
there was but one woman's college in all Asia, and that was a heathen 
college, although the money for it had been given by a Scotch gen- 
tleman. Now wc have three in India, three in Japan, three in Turkey, 
and besides these there arc a number of high schools in all the mis- 
sion fields. Again, there are now thirty-five girls studying in the 
colleges for men in the Presidency states of India, while fourteen 
years ago. when we wanted a college education, we applied to the 
principal of a Government college, and told him that we would be 
willing to take any scat he would give us. He replied thai if he took 
lis in, the boys would all leave. 

The fact that we have colleges does not prove anything, if the 
students have not responded to the benefits that ihey have received 
by giving service to their country. I want you for a few moments 
to consider what these students have done and are doing: First, 
one of the results that might be called a miracle of modem missions, 
is that great and modem work started by Lady Dufferin in India. 
Consider who were the girls that were ready to study and to take 
the course that was oflfcred by these medical colleges. It was the 
Christian girls, trained in the institutions of your Christian mission- 
aries. One of the governors of North India says that nine-tenths 
of the girls in the medical colleges in India are the girls who have 
been trained in mission schools. What a tribute this is to the efforts 
of your missionaries. 

The daughter of one of Dr. Duff's converts is the principal of 
the leading college in India, and has managed it for fifteen years 
in a land where women were called animals, where woman was called 
" the weak thing " by Sanscrit teachers and philosophers. There 
was a widow and her daughter who sat side by side with me in 
my class, and after their graduation, the mother took a high school 
course and the daughter a college course, and to-day they have an 
orphanage. When the famine broke out they gathered fifty of the 
orphans, and it is their aim to support this home by money collected 
in India. They have what they call a " Daughters of India " school, 
and this school is as well managed as those under your missionaries, 
if yon will pardon me for saying so. 

I have not time to multiply instances. ITiere are girls of all 
denominations scattered throughout India, and everywhere those 
Christian girls are leaders of the people, but they could not have been 
leaders except for the high training which your missionaries have 
given them. 

Consider now the indirect result of this higher education. It de- 
velops the character. The study of the English language is a wonder- 
ful study. Eight years ago I read a little booklet sent from this coun- 
try; it was Drummond's "Greatest Tiling in the World." As I sat 
reading it, the beauty of the thought so filled my soul that I could not 
finish the book, and i went into my room and I knelt down beside 
my bed, and I thanked God for having taught me the English lan- 
guage so that I could read books like that. We need your English lan- 
guage that has such wonderful power of transforming character. 
Scone objections are made against teaching us English, and one of 



1 




138 EDUCATION AS AN EVANGELISTIC Aa;NCY 



them is that it has a tendency to Anglicize us. I ask you to pardon 
a personal allusion. When I was a girl in ihe lower classes and could 
hardly read English, the highest ambition I had was to put on an 
English dress and to pass off for an English lady. When I went 
through the high scliool and the college, my sense of duty and re- 
sponsibility was awakened, and I have lived to be proud of the fact 
that 1 am a native of India and nothing else. 

Then the English language is doing something for us that every- 
thing else has failed to do. It is making one people of lis. India is 
a continent made up of different countries. It is the English lan- 
guage thai is making one people of us, and is drawing us together. 
The English language is the bond between Christian and heathen 
countries. 

There is another benefit from learning the English language; U 
shows us how to work. Four years ago I was in my horac, and I 
look up <!ne of the .-\iiicrican magazines, and I .saw an article headed, 
" If Christ Came to Rostun." And T rcmc-mhcr that article said some- 
thing in a very beaiitiful way about what Christ would do in Boston. 
I remember that afternoon I went into my room and I prayed that 
God would hasten the day when all the charities and philanthropies 
that they were having in this country would be done in India. So 
if we do imitate you and are grotesque at times in our imitations 
of dress and manner, as you have put up with our sins, and been kind 
with us and patient, please be patient with this also, because wc arc 
iu a state of Iransitioi]. Give us this education that will transform 
character, and all the rest will follow. 

And what is our hope for the future? Our hope is, I can not 
help saying it, that a few years from now — it may be fifty years or 
more — ^wc may have a gathering like this in In<Iia. It was my privi- 
lege to be at the annual executive meeting of the Women's Foreign 
Missionary Society of the Methodist Episcopal Church. I had been 
there at several sessions, day after day, and one morning as I sat 
far back in the audience, God gave mc a vision. It may be that we 
Orientals are dreamers, but the vision was this: I would not live 
to see that day, but if God is God, and if He is the God of missions, 
from the other side I shall look down upon just such a gathering. 
The joy that filled my heart as I saw, in a vision. India women 
gathered together to send the Gospel to every land, surpassed every 
other joy that I liavc ever felt. 

A few weeks ago it was my privilege to read that wonderful book. 
"Christian Missions and Social Progress," by Dr. Dennis. I was 
alone in my. room when I finished the second volume, and when I 
got through I had a strange feeling of awe. I have never felt that 
way but once before in my life, and it was when I was reading a 
little review of the discoveries of science in this ninctecntli century. 
This time my feeling wa? of awe, only more intense. I could not 
help thinking that God is in this movement of missions, and that He 
is marching on. and. as T sat there filled with His prpsence. the room 
soon seemed full of God. He is marching on. and He will take us 
to victory, and we will conquer the whole world for Him. 





mcni:B education of women 



139 



Miss Isabella Thoburn, Missionary, Methodist Episcopal 
Church, India* 

There has never been any question on the mission held or elsewhere 
about the propriety or necessity of higher education for men. Dr. 
Duff, one of the great educators, said, " You nnght as well try to 
scale a Chinese wall fifty feet high as to educate the women of India." 
The wall has not only been scaled, but thrown down. Advanced 
schools for women are Christian. The exceptions are the govern- 
ment high schools in Japan, and the Bethune College in Calcutta. 
Elsewhere, among heathen, the indifference or opposition to the edu- 
cation of girls, their early marriage and subsequent seclusion, have 
limited the school course to the lower primary grades. When one 
hears of a lad or his friends asking, with a view to marriage, " Is 
she educated?" it simply means. "Can she read and write?" 

But with the profession of the Christian faith, early marriage, 
seclusion, prejudice, opposition and all the old hindrances are swept 
away at once. And when non-Christians enter a Christian college 
they generally leave their former opinions on these matters at the 
door; not because they are required lo do so, but because they accept 
the conditions as part of their progress; and they also generally 
accept that which made the condition.'t^thc Christian life — liefore 
they complete their education. At Nagasaki Jind Kobe the girls who 
have taken the full course have all become Christians before grad- 
uation. 

The advance has not been made because anyone plaimed it. It 
was the natural outcome of that which must needs grow because it 
tiad life in itself. Any education at all presupposes higher educa- 
tion. The infant school requires teachers who have passed in tlie 
primary standards. The primary teaclicrs must have studied at least 
in the middle or grammar school ; the grammar school teachers should 
be high school graduates, and the high school teacher requires a col- 
lege education. Step by step, led by the necessity of the situation, 
the advance has been made from the lowest to the highest standards. 
Then, added to the demand for teachers, comes the call for medical 
workers. There is nothing to compare with the opening for edu- 
cated women in Asia. Only where women have been simt away from 
the hand of mercy and help can tlie healing Icmch nf such a hand be 
appreciated. The West can not supply this help to the East; there 
are not hands enough. 

All the reasons that can be given for the higher education of women 
in Europe or America hold equally good in Asia, and the reasons 
are the more weighty, because there the qualified women are so few 
and so nmch more exposed to criticism and suspicion while attempt- 
ing the larger work set before them. Mission policy is full of social 
problems, twofold in tlieir nature, because men and women in those 
lands Iiavc lived their lives apart. They will never he solved by men 
alone, though they give their working years to the study. We, as 
missionaries, arc doing poor work for the women if we are not de- 
veloping leadership in them. Asiatic women have proved that they 
arc capable of leadership, not only by their history in tlie past, but 

* Ccatnl FtMbrtcriao Cburch. April 14. 



i 



I40 EDUCATION AS AN EVANGELISTIC AGENCY 

some are proving it to-day. The Empress of China, with Christian 
training, might have h«;n as famous for pohtical reforms as she now 
is for their prevention. The Pundita Ramabai fears no difficulty in 
executing her plans. 

This higher education can not be indiscriminate; it is loo ex- 
pensive (o be wasted; the muUitudc is not yet prepared to receive it. 
The bright girls in all our lower schools should have opportunity, 
tested grade by grade, for going higher. If they pass certain ex- 
aminations, if they are approved by teachers and superintendents, 
if they show a willingness to repay what is expended upon them by 
personal service, then they sliould he promoted as long as these tests 
are maintained. (Generally, the girls who enter the higher schools 
will come from Chri.stian families, and will pay in whole or in lar^ 
pari for tlicir education. Those who pay their way through school 
will follow the same plan in after life, and arc not likely to become 
mission dependents. We must hear in mind all the time that it is 
character we are working fnr, and not examinations or position ; and 
nothing develops character like self-help. 

It has been objected that higher education in mission fields is in 
English, and that this creates foreign tastes in students, and separates 
them from their own people. The whole question is involved in this, 
because higher education can not at present be given in any other 
language. The textbooks do not exist, and it Is a shorter way to 
learn English and use English books than to wait until missionaries 
have time to produce the textbooks in many languages for the whole 
college course. But there is even a better reason than that of economy. 
The books we read influence our thought and opinion, and through 
these channels influence character. This fact has been recognized 
not only by missionaries, but by governments, A Director of Public 
Instruction, who had no Interest whatever in Christian missions, said, 
" If you want to change the habits and lives of these people, teach 
them the English language and give Ihcm English literature." The 
wide use of English and the consequent dissemination of English 
literature seems to he inevitable; it is not left for anyone to decide. 
The results of its study and use are not according to the fears oi 
the objectors. 

It ought to go without saying that this higher education, as well 
as that which begins with the kindergarten, should be full of Bible 
teaching. All through the course of study the supreme object for 
which missions arc founded should he kept in view, as though the 
schools were special training institutions for that one purpose — the 
evangelization of the country in which they are situated. To this 
end libraries should be chosen, young people's associations organ- 
ized, lectures arranged, and every possible religions influence brought 
to bear upon the heart and life of every pupil. 

Rev. John Wilkie, M.A., Missionary, Presbyterian Church in 
Canada. India* 

I think we are all of one mind as to the importance of higher edu- 
cation. so far as our native Christians in the field are concerned. If 

' Central Pmbjncrian Ctiurch, April a(. 



I 
I 



I 





fiELAHVE VALUES IN HIGHER EDUCATION 



141 



we want them to be leaders of the people, we must give them the best 

education that is within our reach. Further, we arc all agreed that 

Christian teachers can leach secular subjects, and in teaching them 

can exercise an influence for good. We all realize that we can not 

teach a geography lesson withuut striking a blow at both Hinduism 

and Mol^animedanism, and without suggesting helpful thoughts to 

kour students. Rut I wish to go further than that. We have started 

four mission college at Indorc for the express purpose of making it 

an evangelistic agent. Wc are teaching secular subjects there in 

(order that wc may thereby have a chance to teach the Bible directly. 

I regard the mission college in India as of supreme importance, and 

especially so in the present state of tilings there. 

In 1888 there were il.ooo students attending the different colleges. 
In 1891 they had gone up to over 14,000, and it is estimated to-Uay 
that there are over 40,000 students in the diflferent colleges in India; 
nearly double the number that are found in all the colleges in Great 
Britain and Ireland, and the number is every day rapidly increasing. 
I The larger proportion of these students are educated in non-Christian 
i^ooh, in which the mind is educated, but nothing is done to edu- 
|.cate the conscience or to meet the spiritual wants of men. The result 
Is that the larger proportion of the students turned out of our gov- 
■ emment colleges are turned out practically infidels, and they are be- 
coming a serious danger in that land. 

Now, the only means of reaching that large class In the community 
in India, or almost the only means, is by means of the Christian 
college and the institutions which have been set at work through 
the Christian colleges. We have this large class in the community 
that can not be reached by the ordinary evangelistic agencies. Be- 
cause we can not reach them by the ordinary agencies, are we going 
to pass thcni by ? We have started our colleges there in order that 
we may influence this large class. Tn the mission colleges we not 
only have the best and almost the only evangelistic agency that will 
reach that class of young people, but we have the best evangelistic 
agency that there is for reaching all classes in the community. 

Rev. J. F. Goucher, D.D., President, Woman's College, Balti- 
more, Md* 

We all concede that the higher education must of necessity include 
the education of the highest: and this is impossible unless we have 
the education of tlie spiritual nature. We also concede that it is of the 
first importance that whatever class of education wc arc attempting, 
it should be of the very best. 

Let me give you a concrete example: In a city of India which we 
will call Diikeshad. a little scavenger boy. the son of a scavenger, 
was passing along the streets, and he heard some Sunday-school 
singing. He was attracted by it, was invited in by the teacher, be- 
came interested, entered the school, and passed from term to term 
until he graduated from the primary and intermediate schools and 
from the high school. He did not enter the ministry, but gave him- 

*Ccotral Pr«»HytcriaB Churchy April rf. 



i 



LIDUCATION AS AN EVANGELISTIC AGRNCY 




self to teaching; and after awhile such was his efficiency that he 
was made the second hcaci niasier of ihe liigh school of Dilkcshad, 
under the management of the Methodist Episcopal Church. 

This man, whom we may call Ibrahim, was a consecrated man. He 
felt that the school should be the very best of tlie class, and he should 
not be satisfied with intellectual culture or with physical discipline, 
but (hat there should be a spiritual discipline as well; the intellectual 
subordinating the physical, and the spiritual served by the intellectual 
and physical both. For two years in succession every youth, who, 
after studying under Ibrahim, went up from the Ditkeshad High 
School to the Government examination, passed. This exceptional 
thing set the Urahman and Mohammedan tcachtrs of the city to think- 
ing, and they said ; '* If this goes on. we will lose our scholars. We 
must do something.'* They had a large poster painted in green and 
yellow letters, to this eflfect : " Teacher Ibrahim is a scavenger, and 
the son of a scavenger. If he corrects a high-caste boy, the boy loses 
his caste. If a parent places a child under the discipline of Ibrahim, 
he is guilty of sin, and lowers the rank of his child." 

These posters were posted all over the walls of Dilkeshad, and as 
the teacher Ibrahim came to the school one morning, he saw this 
description of his low origin posted so that all the boys and all the 
parents that chanced that way might sec it. Ibrahim consulted the 
head of the school, who said to him: "You arc not set for your 
own defense, Ibrahim. You are not to give place unto wrath. ' Ven- 
geance is mine ; I will repay, saith the Lord.' Do your duty. The 
Lord will take care of you." 

Ibrahim had common-sense. Therefore he attended to the work 
for which he was called, and did not undertake to fight his own battles. 
He entered the schoolroom and proceeded as though nothing had 
transpired, and continued thus for a week, not even taking down the 
posters. And the gentlemen of Dilkeshad, the Babus. the Brahmans 
— the high-caste men — said, as they met: " What does this mean? 
The whole town is posted with statements about teacher Ibrahim. 
Who is he?" "Well," said some one; " don't you know? He is 
the second head master of the High School. And don't you know 
that for the last two years every youth that has gone up from that 
High Srhonl to the Government examinations has passed ? " And 
the shrewd men said : " Every boy passed 1 That is what wc need — 
to get our boys passed. And if he passes everybody, we will send 
our boys there." Within a month the school was so crowded that 
from that time to this it has been self-supporting. When I had the 
privilege of visiting it. some time since, there were over 600 youth 
present— Brahman youth, Moh.Tmmedan youth, etc. — and tliey united 
in religious services with ns. They had to endure religious exercises 
in order to get the rest. They wanted the (.Kivemment examination 
successfully passed, in order that they might come to preferment. 
There they were, with this man with tlie common-sense giving such a 
direction of things, that it was a higher education, and not discounted. 

That is what is needed in the mission field as Iicre^that every- 
thing shall be fully up to brand; that our colleges shall be col- 
leges, and not secondary schools: that our universities shall not be 



4 





I 



I 



{•RINCIPLI^S OF MISSION CULLEGE MANAGEMENT >43 

simply named universities. And wlu-n wc can have colleges and 
universities in our mission fields that arc worthy of the name, then 
we will have the efficient agency for the higher education, which will 
qualify ministers who will be efficient for the accomplishment of the 
purposes of God. And if it is necessary (and I helicvc it is not only 
necessary, but ultimately and absolutely so) that we should have 
co-operation in these matters, let us pray God that He will give us 
the spirit of co-operation. 

We need in our mission fields, highest ideals; we need amplest 
equipments; we need largest efficiency; we need perfect co-operation, 
with (jod in the midst, and the problem is solved. 

Principles of Mission College Management 

Riv. U. Stuari Dodge, D.D., Secretary, Board of Trustees, 
Syrian Protestant Culiege, Beirut* 

The discussion in this paper will be confined to institutions of tlie 
collegiate or professional grade, and no attempt will be made to cover 
more than salient and practical points. 

1. The first and imperative condition is that such institutions shall 
be unmistakably missionary. 

This is not simply to be taken for granted. It needs to be em- 
phasized. It is to be the supreme and determining fact. It settles the 
course of study, tl;e selection of instructors, the board of control, the 
internal management, the use of funds, and often tht: location. 

Not that Uie missionary college is to be a theological seminary ur 
a Bible institute, or necessarily denominational ; but it must be some- 
thing more than an institution where the study of the Hibic is only 
optional and attendance upon religious services not obligatory. The 
one distinguishing feature of the missionary college will be that the 
Word of God shall have the place of honor. It will invariably be 
made an integral and indispensable part of the daily course of study. 
It will never be allowed to seem subordinate to science, or history, or 
philosophy. The students will be taught to regard it as a divine reve- 
lation, the source of rational faith, and the law of true life. If tlie 
claim is that other religious influences can be depended upon in nomi- 
nally Christian countries, this does not hold true in lands where mis- 
sions exist. 

2. All regulations must be framed to enforce the uncompromis- 
ingly evangelical character of the institution. 

Attendance upon daily prayers, Sunday preaching, and other reli- 
gious exercises, should he compulsory. Uonbtless this may deter 
many from entering; but a departure from the letter or spirit of this 
vital requisition will not only inevitably entail deterioration in the 
religious life of the institution, but in the end will forfeit the true 
respect of the native community. The i>eople look fnr rigid adher- 
ence to avowed principles. Ultimately, although perhaps slowly, 
there will he the desired increase in numbers. 

3- In colleges on mission grnimd, far more even than at home, the 
personality of the teacher is a chief factor. Unless he is a man of 
evident spirituality, with a positive desire and purpose to bring his 

"Central Prnt>rterian Church. April a6. 



i 




p 



EDUCATION AS AN EVANGELISTIC AGENCY 



Students to a clear apprehension and an honest confession of the 
truth, he will be a failure. However brilliant and magnetic he may 
be in the classroom, if his daily life is not the best lesson he gives, if 
he does not show that his ability and learning all the more make him a 
believer in Christ, his influence will not serve the cause he is there to 
represent. No one should be appointed to the foreign field, either as 
professor or tutor, for temporary or permanent duty, unless he goes 
distinctly as a missionary. 

4. Shall natives who are not recognized members of some evangel- 
ical church be employed as teachers? Rarely; and then only until 
Christian men can be obtained. Even if adherents of a native religion. 
by being allowed to teach, might draw more pupils or diminish popu- 
lar opposition, their influence will not promote the true object of the 
institution, and may, covertly at least, neutralize or paralyze it. The 
staff, individually and as a whole, must be positively and conspicu- 
ously on the evangelical side. 

5. What shall be the literary character and functions of such an 
institution? 

In some instances the curricidum may practically be equivalent to 
that of similar institutions in Europe or America. In most cases it will 
start at a lower stage, and gradually be extended as the capacity of the 
students and the wants of the country shall indicate. The vital point 
is that it shall be adequate and exacting up to tl^e limit from time to 
time proposed. 

6. There may be, in the vicinity or country, Government colleges 
or universities, which either profess to be neutral or are distinctly an- 
tagonistic. Such institutions ntay have ample resources and extended 
influence. It may be impossible for Protestant institutions to com- 
pete with them in eijuipnient or numbers ; but superiority can be 
made clear in the scholarship required and in the character of the 
instruction given. Protestant institutions will thrive only as they 
exhibit manifest leadership in every branch they undertake to teach. 
In time this will become a sourer of power. Their graduates will be 
seen to possess qnaliEics not found among students from other institu- 
tions, and this wilt be facilitated and insured by strictly maintaining 
a high standard of scholarship. 

7. As to location, case of access, cost of material, economy in main- 
tenance, sanitary conditions, nature of the surroundings both physical 
and moral, size and character of the proposed institution, supply of 
students — these have all to be taken into account ; but for colleges and 
universities it would seem indispensable that they .should be planted 
at or near great centers. In populous and important cities they are 
apt to find more students, better facilities for practical professional 
study, the stimulus that comes from being in the midst of vast num- 
bers, as well as wider opportunities for the exertion of direct Chris- 
tian influence, particularly among the leading classes. At points 
where the local or national government has already established insti- 
tutions of a high grade, well equipped and able to meet the reasonable 
literary and professional wants of the neighborhood or country, il 
may be that missionary organizations can accomplish much by simply 



PRINCIPLES OF MISSION COLLEGE MANAGEMENT 



MS 



providing homes or board tng-placcs where Christian students, and 
any others willing to join them, may be protected by helpful religious 
influences. 

8. It is a matter of undeniable importance that all the higher insti- 
tutions should cultivate the acquisition or use of sonic language be- 
longing to a prominent Christian nation. The English language is 
now widely spoken throughout the world, and it brings the student 
into contact with a literature marvelously rich and diversified. Sonic 
institutions have adopted, with marked profit, the English as the lan- 
guage of instruction, although insisting also upon proficiency in the 
vernacular and such other languages as the circumstances require. 

9. Should missionary institutions receive Government aid? Only 
when the conditions of the grant do not hamper the one purpose for 
which they are established. It is an unquestioned advantage, espe- 
cially for these higlier institutions, to enjoy public official recognition. 
Their prestige will be greater and their resources in important direc- 
tions will be increased. In some cases it will Iw almost indispensable 
to prepare students to pass entrance examinations for Government 
technical or other schools, and to compete for positions in the public 
service. 

10. How far should native control in these institutions be deemed 
desirable? The probability is that the higher institutions should be 
among the last to be placed entirely under native management. While 
learned and capable natives may well occupy important positions in 
the faculty or on the boards of directors, the ruling element, for a 
length of time at least, must consist of those who directly represent 
the founders and supporters of the institution : and this, not simply 
because missionaries can not be released from financial responsibility 
to the patrons at ho'»ie, but also because the very conception of such 
colleges and universities involves carrying to the foreign fields the 
best results of the literary and professional culture enjoyed in lands 
which stand at the front in Christian civilization. 

11. In many foreign fields more than one missionary organiza- 
tion is at work. It would seem the part of wisdom that all should 
combine in promoting this most advanced type of education. But this 
would necessitate a non-sectarian institution. In addition to the 
accepted fact that denominational rivalry is never more out of place 
than on missionary soil, the expense of equipment and of instruc- 
tion in such an institution is so burdensome that even the largest mis- 
sionary bodies hesitate to undertake it. The united contributions of 
two or more might make it easily possible. It would likewise be, in 
the eyes of all. native or foreign, a singularly happy illustration of the 
direct advantage of missionary comity and co-operation. 

12. A still more desirable method may be to have an independent 
organization. 

A corporation can be duly fonncd, which shall inspire public con- 
fidence in the reception and administration of funds, and with a char- 
ter clearly affirming the missionary character of the institution, and 
containing provisions to insure the permanency of this fundamental 
feature. The board need not be large, and should he composed chiefly 
of business men of reputation, all active members of evangelical 




.ical ^H 



i46 



EDUCATION AS AN EVANGELISTIC AGENCY 





churches. They would be charged with the care of the finances, and 
have final jurisdiction in all the affairs of the college or university. 
A local body, appointed by this board and subject to its authority, 
should have the direct management of the institution, with power to 
adopt a suitable course of study and to appoint and oversee the 
faculty. In selecting, however, the more prominent officers, such as 
president and professors, Ihcy mi^ht have only the right to nominate. 
This board of managers would properly consist of the leading mis- 
sionaries of the different societies represented in the country, with 
perhaps a minority from among Christian merchants and other resi- 
dents, and sometimes the official representatives of the nationalities of 
the missionaries. A necessary stipulation would be that the directors 
at home should conduct the aflfairs of the college solely through the 
agency of the local board of managers. 

13. Whatever the teaching force, self-support will long be unreal- 
ized. We can not expect that canditions will appear on the foreign 
field which do not exist in our own countries. An institution of 
higher learning upon a distinctly religious foundation can not be sus- 
tained anywhere without a liberal endowment. Governments will not 
often be free to make sufficient, or perhaps any, appropriations to it. 
Private gifts must be relied upon, and from those who are in sym- 
pathy with its special object. Moreover, it is to be remembered that 
the higher its sphere the greater the cost of sustaining it; the revenue 
from tuition can generally do little more than help toward current 
expenses. 

14. A wholesome lesson for both students and people is usually 
that assistance given in securing an education should entail some form 
or degree of work on the part of the student himself. It may be that 
industrial labor of some kind will frequently be advantageous to the 
institution and to the individual. If for no other reason, the prac- 
tical assertion of the dignity of labor Is worth much. 

15. Where circumstances permit, the most satisfactory results will 
generally be secured when students can be retained continuously un- 
der the personal supervision of the instructors. On this account it is 
advisable to have a carefully organized boarding department. Sepa- 
ration as far as practicable from outside influences gives larger oppor- 
tunities for profitable study, and especially for religious impressions 
and the molding of character. 

16. Tn some countries and circumstances it has been found desir- 
able, if not essential, to provide educational privileges for Protestants 
only. This, however, can hardly he advocated for the higher institu- 
tions. Here the students are older, and those who have accepted the 
Christian faith need, for their own good and the good of others, to 
leani to confess it before their associates, while those who still ad- 
here to the native religions arc Ircncfitcd by living in close contact 
with both the forms and the practice of a pure Christianity on the 
part of their instructors and fellow-students ; and even when no pro- 
fession of a change of faith is made while in college, prejudices arc 
removed, and these men arc apt to be found hereafter more friendly 
to evangelical views, and are often led ultimately to accept them. 




CHAPTER XXIX 

I>fDUSTRIAL EDUCATION. 

Industrial Training as Character Building— Industrial Training Schools tq 
Variottt Fields — ^The Industrial Question in Asia a Burning Question To-day. 



Indfotrial Eclucatioa 

Rev. James Smith, Missionary, ^American Board of Commis- 
sioners for Foreign Missions, India* 

I do not propose to raise the general qiiesUon of tlie value of in- 
dustrial training in llic education of the youth of Western lands. As 
a missionary to India, I confine my remarks to education in India. 

We have in India traditional educational methods, venerable and 
hoary. These may he characterized in a word as devices for cramp- 
ing the intellect and preventing ptipils from thinking. I refer to such 
bdigenous schools as Vcdashala and Patashala and the more mod- 
ern schools where native arithmetic and accounts are taught. Our 
schools are veritable oases in the desert. No ray of light, civiliz.atinn, 
or knowledge shines in the home, tlic street, the field, or the town. 
When our pupils leave their school they plunge into intellectual dark- 
ness. Haw important, therefore, that there should be something in 
the curriculum of our Indian schools which can not be merely com- 
mitted to memory, and that we deal with things rather than with 
words and sounds. 

Again, there is the popular contempt for manual lalx>r which 
prevails among thost? who consider themselves educated. It is not 
laziness so much as a deep-seated conviction that work nf any kind 
is dishonorable. The condition of Indian industries does not tend to 
uproot this prejudice, for while the products are sometimes artistic 
and well finished, the processes of labor and the methods of work 
are of the crudest description, and the workman is generally without 
intelligence or culture. To sec a joiner, for example, seated half 
naked on the ground, holding liis wood with his toes, sawing or plan- 
ing, with a boy pulling at the nos*- of the plane or saw. does not in- 
spire one with a sense of tlic dignity nf labor. I have been publicly 
acaised by Indian Oiristians of lowering the social status of the 
community because I advocated manual training. 

Again, among the grave problems wdiich present themselves in 
some of the older missions in India is suitable employment for the 
Christian community. This question derives special importance from 
the fact that the majority of our converts come from the backward 
classes. It is neither possible nor desirable for the children of such 

■ UoloB Hvtboditt Church. April 37. 



1 



X^ INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 

converts to gain their livclihoorl as their fathers did. To these chil- 
dren we have given the elements of an education which hitherto has 
been the exclusive birthright of the upper classes of Indian society. 
We have also taught them the religion of Christ, and they have drunk 
in enough of its spirit to thirst for something better than the con- 
dition of social parasites in which they were born. 

But it is not mainly to find employment for Christian converts that 
I advocate industrial training, but what is far more important, to 
further the development of Christian character. As paupers and de- 
pendents, which the converts are when they come to us, they can 
rarely develop the higher Christian virtues, and can never become 
a self-respecting and respected community. We do not find beggars 
in the West taking prominent positions in the work of the Church. 
What right have wj to look for more in the East? There never was a 
community of people who have more to overcome than the poor Qiris- 
lians of India. VVe are bound to give them a helping hand, and the 
only way to help any man is to help him to help himself. 

During the past four years India has been visited by the plague 
and two unparalleled famines. Many missionaries have given much 
thought and time to " relief " measures, and it has been home in 
upon such men that no effective means can be found for preventing 
famines or removing the conditions which induced the plague, until 
the style of living prevailing among the poor is improved. Poverty 
is caused by overcrowding the tillers of the soil. When the rains 
fail, not only do the farmers starve, but those also who have been in 
the habit of manufacturing their few simple articles of domestic use. 
The farmer, having no crops, can get no money ; having no money he 
buys no clothes, builds no houses, and orders no tools; hence the 
weaver, the carpenter, the mason, and blacksmith starve, too. 

Now, in any industrial revival that we may bring alxjut, the Hindu 
neighbors and relations of our converts are bound to share. It is bet- 
ter for both Christian and Hindu that they should share the blessings 
of our enterprise. It affords the Christian the opportunity of bridg- 
ing over the gulf thai separates the foreign missionary from the 
orthodox Hindu, and the Hindu on his part has an opportunity of 
witnessing the practical character of Christ's teaching. I speak from 
experience when I say that relief of such a character brought by a 
missionary to a suffering community of Hindus is most keenly appre- 
ciated and has an influence that can not be overestimated, not only in 
disarming prejudice, but in drawing men to Christ as the Saviour. 

I have mentioned a few of the reasons why manual training and 
technical instruction should form pari of tlic curriculum of our 
schools for Indian youth. 

In recent years many have seen all these reasons clearly enough, 
and attempts have been made with more or less success to meet the re- 
quirements of the case. I regret to state that the majority of experi- 
ments made have been failures, and hence abandoned: while what is 
worse, others that are also failures, have been continued nevertheless. 
We have had schools conducted on what may be called native Indian 
methods, with pupils taught indigenous trades by illiterate native 
workmen, with the result that the so-called masters did little work, the 




INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 



149 



'so-cal!ed pupils none at all, while the expense for salaries, scholar- 
ships, tools, and materials was heavy. We have had another experi- 
ment which consisted in apprenticing a number of pupils to Indian 
mechanics, giving a scholarship to the pupils and a monthly bonus to 
the mechanic. The result was again nil. In a third case a mission- 
ary, with such failures before him, and with the echoes in his ears of 
the achievements of technical schools abroad, imports a quantity of 
expensive foreign machinery and gives inslruction in the manufacture 
of foreign goods. I have visited one such school, under an Indian 
superintendent, where the only impression left upon my mind was 
indescribable confusion. Another school is a model of order, and as 
to methods is beyond criticism. It gives instruaion according to 
Western methods in carpentry and blacksmithing; but it is situated in 
a village of about i.cxm people, where one good carpenter would glut 
the market, and ten such workmen could not find employment within 
one hundred miles. 

The ijrinciple that I wish to emphasize by such illustrations is that 
technical education must be imparted upon lines that arc adapted to 
the circumstances of the people^ and as the circumstances vary in dif- 
ferent localities, these must be most carefully studied and the school 
adapted to the local conditions. As the mountain will not come to 
Mohammed, Mohammed must go to the mountain. 

The exports of India consist mainly of " raw materials," The only 
manufactured exports of importance are art wares, such as enameled 
gcx)ds in gold, silver, and brass, hammered metal wares, carvings in 
wood, horn, and ivory, and rugs or carpets. These exports find a 
ready sale all over the West, and the sale would be readier and prices 
higher if steady production could be relied upon. Such exports sug- 
gest the lines upon which technical instruction may be successfully 
imparted. (1.) We must give instruction in the manufacture of 
goods for export, as India is too poor to provide a good market for 
anything beyond the barest necessities of life. (2.) Our manufac- 
tured goods must be such as are in demand abroad. (3.) These 
goods must not be too bulky to bear the cost of transportation ; hence 
the finest and most highly wrought articles only should be produced. 
(4.) The plant must be inexpensive so as to be within the means 
of Indian workmen. Machine tools should not be introduced until 
manual dexterity has been attained and the people have acquired the 
means to pay for them. (5.) We should not introduce an industry 
that is out of harmony with the genius and traditions of the people. 
I would lay down ti:e above as axioms. The people of India have 
lived from time immemorial in small villages rather than in cities. 
T^ey have no instincts for sanitation or the management of large 
cities. Let us encourage therefore village hand industries as opposed 
to city factories. 

In the high school at Ahmednagar ihe Marathi Mission has en- 
deavored to put the foregoing principles into practice, giving at the 
same time full recognition to religious instruction and the ordinary 
literary work of such a school. 

There arc three distinct courses: First, the high school course 
proper, with entrance to the Bombay University as its goal. Second, 



I 



ISO 



INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 



the university school final course, which is intended for tijose whose 
stu<lies will end with the high school. The standard is as high as 
for matriculation : Botany, manual training, and drawing being sub- 
stituted for classical stud;es and geometry. Third, the technical 
course, subdivided into three departments, all included in the Sir D. 
M. Petit School of Industrial Arts, so named from the Parsi baronet 
who founded the school. T,he first department of this industrial sec- 
tion provides instruction in woodwork, including carpentry, turnery, 
and especially wood-carving'. The second department gives regular 
instruction in repousse metal work, including copper, brass, alumi- 
num, and silver art work ; while the third department is the carpet or 
rug-making school. The entrance examination to this school of indus- 
trial arts requires from four to seven years of previous study at a 
good school, and the course in each department covers three years. 
The products of the school arc *' not things, hut men," and those* who 
pass the final examination in either department are qualified to lake 
charge of a similar school or to manage a factory. 

The school was not fully equipped before its value as the supplier 
of skilled labor attracted the attention of Mr. H. W. Fry, a merchant 
of London, then on a business visit to India. Mr. Fry came to 
Ahmednagar to survey the ground for himself, and on his return to 
London formed a company, " The Indian Mission Industries, Lim- 
ited." for the express purpose of establishing factories at Ahmednagar 
for the manufacture of rugs, metal w^ork, etc. We have also supplied 
headmasters to other industrial schools as well as foremen in large 
workshops elsewhere. A second factory has been opened at Ahmed- 
nagar by a former teacher of the school, and the school itself has been 
full to overflowing from the beginning. 

The cost after deducting sales of work produced was, in iS^g. about 
$1,250, one-half of which was paid by the Government of Bombay, 
leaving us a balance to provide for of $625 a year. Tlie initial outlay 
for buildings and appliances was about $9,000. Though the Ameri- 
can Board has never contributed to the support or the foundation of 
the school, the merits of the school have been so evident that its wants 
have been provided for hy sj-mpathetic and intelligent friends of 
India. But above all. our hopes have been more than realized in the 
steady growth of sturdy, manly Christian character. Manual labor is 
no longer considered dishonorable, and the workman can look the 
whole world in the face, for he owes not any man. 




Rev. J. E. Adbott, D.D., Missionary, American Board of Com- 
nmsioncrs for Foreign Missions, India.* 

I have had a good deal of experience in the matter of dealing with 
those young men who have been trained at the industrial schools, 
and therefore it may be of advantage to you if I say a few words 
from that side of the tpicstion. I have in Bombay a "home" for 
young men in search of employment. Twenty young men in the 
last two years have passed through my " home." Every young man 
who has come to me in Romhay in search of employment, if he has 
been properly instructed, has had no difficulty in finding employment. 

VUnlon MeihadiM Chnrch, AprH aj- 




INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 



'5« 



£vcry young man who has had a high technical education, such as 
lis given in the school of Mr. Smith, has found work at once in Bom- 
bay at a good salary. An ordinary workman, a carpenter, for example, 
might not get more than three, four, or five dollars a month. Those 
young men who have passed through Mr. Smith's school, and go to 
liombay. have the prospect of getting anywhere from fifteen to twenty 
and fifty dollars, and even more, a month. I want, therefore, to 
plead for these young men of India, that you give them, or help to 
give them, a sound education. The day has passed when the people 
of India, or employers or officials in such a city as Bombay, can lift 
the finger of scorn against the Christian young men. Every young 
man of good character can get employment. Furniture factories and 
other institutions have given me a standing order for young men to 
be sent them. And this is because of their Christian character. They 
are reliable, and that reliability has, of course, been given to them in 
this Christian sense. And now I want to plead for help to give in- 
dustrial education to more Indian boys and girls. The famine has 
left thousands of children destitute. If we can have help to .do it, 
ihey will be sent through industrial schools and they will come out 
■with a higher type of manhood tlian India has yet seen. 

Mr. Watson Grace, Secretary, Friends' Foreign Missionary 
'Associaiiott. London* 

As a great part of human agency is occupied with work for those 
things which are necessary for the body, it is needful for the Chris- 
tian missionary to consider the industries of the people amongst 
whom he labors. The practical truth which he teaches finds its 
Scriptural authority and counterpart in ihc carpenter's shop at Naza- 
reth, the fishing-lwats of Gennesaret. and the Corinthian home where 
the occupation of tent-making was carried on. 

The history of the early days of missionary effort a century ago 
shows that the first leaders were impressed with the idea of industrial 
missions. William Carey supjMJsed that missionaries could sup- 
port themselves by trade and agriculture in the countries to which 
they went, and a large proportion cjf the earliest laborers sent forth 
by the London Missionary Society were artisan missionaries. A 
pioneer in semi-civiltzed and uncivilized lands requires to have prac- 
tical industrial training, so that his needs may be supplied. The suc- 
cess of many individual missionaries, in widely differing fields, has 
proved conclusively that if this agency has not been so actively 
prosecuted as at one time, there is no reason whatever why the in- 
dnstrial side of missionary work should not be much more widely 
used than at present is the case. 

The industrial schools which are established have already done 
nohic work. In colonies or dependencies nf European powers, and 
I have no doubt that the same is true nf the United States, the Gov- 
ernments are often willing to give financial assistance to mission- 
aries who organize industrial education. 

To provide work for native Christian converts who are ostracised 
by their profession of faith, is of great importance. Too often the 

■ Uaioo UethodUt Cburcb, April 17. 





153 mOUSTRIAL EOUCATIOK 

tendency has been to make preachers of these. The need for teachers 
is so urgent in many fields thai perhaps missionaries may be ex- 
cused, though the results are often disastrous. Industrial work may 
become a useful training for one wlio may afterward devote himself 
to pastoral or evangelistic work, just as a business training is no un- 
important part of a missionary's equipment. To provide honest oc- 
cupations for necessary uses still needs to be taught to Christian 
converts as in apostolic days. 

It is when we consider large industrial and commercial enter- 
prises that greater difference of opinion and difficulty will be found. 
We may divide industrial work into two classes : ( i ) Schools which 
arc equipped to teach and use Western industries; and (2) those 
which confine themselves to the trades and occupations of the par- 
tictilar locality. These two classes are often intermingled, and jt is 
not possible to define too closely, but the danger of the first lies largely 
in attempting to impress Western practices too hastily upon Eastern 
minds and habits of thought. 

To illustrate, I may mention the industrial work of the Friends* 
Foreign Mission Association in India. At Hoshangabad there is a 
workshop well equipped with English machinery for working in wood 
and iron, its chief output is in carriages and furniture, but build- 
ing contracts are also taken with the Government, and our own and 
other missions. The necessary capital, over £1,500 {$7,500), has 
been specially contributed by interested Friends in England, and 
valuable gifts of machinery have also been received. 

In connection with the mission orphanage at Sioni Malwa, where 
some 400 boys are cared for, mainly orphan waifs who were taken 
in charge by the missionaries after the famine of 1896-97, we teach 
native trades, agriculture, weaving, tailoring, shoemaking, etc., and 
a market is found for the products in the native bazaars in the neigh- 
borhood. 

To show how these agencies strike sympathetic observers, an Eng- 
lish visitor, himself a large manufacturer, expressed his approbation 
of the appearance and work of the mission's industrial works with 
English tools and machinery, but on seeing some Christian weavers 
sitting before their hand looms, he criticised such methods as entirely 
beneath the dignity of the Friends* Mission. On the other hand, 
Pundita Ramabai, who visited the mission, took little account of the 
well-equipped workshops, but expressed her delight with the instruc- 
tion given in native industries, bought cloth from the native Chris- 
tian weavers for the orphans under her care, and asked for one of 
the weavers to go to Poena to teach hand-loom weaving to the 
orphans there. 

The great difficulty in the way of missionary societies embarking 
upon industrial effort, appears to mc to be the same as in other de- 
partments, viz., the siipply of men and means. An industrial mis- 
sionary needs not only the qualifications which other missionaries 
require, but special training and aptitude for his special work. The 
means supplied to societies for their primary objects are all too scanty 
for the great work in hand, and properly equipped industrial effort re- 



4 




INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 



153 



quires no stinted supply, especially in its initial stages, and it also 
calls for patient persistence in its maintenance. 

I may here mention an auxiliary society established in London for 
this purpose. The Industrial Missions Aid Society purposes " to 
develop the industrial element in missionary operations by associating, 
where practicable, agriculture and other industries with the ordinary 
work of foreign missions, financially separate but linked in close 
fellowship." This Society is precluded by its regulations from re- 
ceiving any profit or advantage whatever ; all profits, after payment 
of interest and expenses, being applied in furtherance of the objects 
of the Society. 

It is in these directions that we took for a development of in- 
dustrial missionary work. The missionary societies are already oc- 
cupied with their present agencies. Arc there not men of honest 
report amongst us who may be set over this business to-day? Arc 
there not business men, who, in this day of commercial activity, will 
consecrate their talents and experience to the service of Jesus Christ ? 
Rigorous inquiry needs to be ntade regarding the industrial schemes 
which are proposed, and most careful tests applied to the agents 
who may be sent out. Men of spiritual power need to be specially 
trained, so that they may go out and teach useful occupations and 
conduct honest business in the power of Jesus Christ. A board of 
directors representing various Church interests and commanding full 
confidence in business circles, working closely in harmony willi the 
missionary societies and taking charge of industrial niissioias. would 
render as valuable service here as the Industrial Missions Aid Society 
is doing in England. Such an agency would often become a means 
of interesting and practically informing a class of Christian business 
men who arc too much influenced by misleading talcs of travelers 
regarding the failure of foreign missions. 

In conclusion, we say that an immense field for industrial missions 
is opening before the Christian Church. There are dangers in carry- 
ing on right work in a wrong way, but with the prayer. " Establish 
thou the work of our hands upon us, yea, the work of our hands 
establish thou it," we desire to see the forces of Jesus Christ move 
forward in His name. 

Rev. George Scholl, D.D., Secretary, Board of Foreign Mis- 
sions {General Synod), Evangelica! Lutheran Church, U. S* 

Early in the history of our work on the St. Paul River, on the 
west coast of Africa, our missionary, the sainted Dr. David A. Day, 
recognized, and the board was not slow in recognizing too, the fact 
that it was not sufficient in dealing with the naked savages of the 
jungle to preach the gospel to them. Somethinir more was to be 
done, and. accordingly, schools were nrtranizcd for their intellectual 
training, that they micht not only be Christians, hut intelligent Chris- 
tians. And that was not enough. Out of the savagery and barbarism 
of their jungle life a new civilization mu<it be created. Accordingly, 
industrial operations were introduced. We soon had a farm of five 
hundred acres, wc had a carpenter shop, a blacksmith shop, a ina- 

•Camegie Hall, April tj. 




'54 



INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 



chine shop, and all of the boys that were brought into the schools 
were required to leani one or the other of those occupations, and 
these boys have been trained in all the useful arts. They have been 
made first-class mechanics, antl, with machinery purchased abroad, 
they have constructed a slea:n launch and steamboats. For several 
years now there has been running up and down the St. Paul River 
a little sidewhccl steamboat, made by these natives, making three 
trips a week. A missionary can now make a journey for fifty cents 
that formerly cost him five dollars. 

About fifteen years ago there came out of the jungle a boy. naked 
as the day he was born, and as i^nrant as an animal. He was clothed, 
put into the school anil taught ; he became a member of the church, a 
teacher and Sun<Iay-schfK)l snperinlcndent, and a deacon in the church. 
He married, and went oiit into the jungle and opened up a tract of 
land and settled do\^'^. A short time after tliat. I received a well- 
written letter — the spelling correct and ideas expressed in good lan- 
guage—stating that he wanted schoolbooks. since he was going to 
start a school. The books were sent to him, and he paid for them. 
Tben I heard no more from him for seven or eight years, until one 
day I received a bill of exchange on a London bank for an amount 
sufficient to pay for a steam engine and some other machinery, and 
I wondered what in the world Aleck Harris wanted of a steam 
engine out there in the woods. It seems he had a coffee plantation 
and a rice plantation, and he wanted machinery and the steam engine 
to run his mills with. 

A noble-hearted business man, seeing that these people were try- 
ing to help themselves, sold the machinery for 40 per cent, off, and 
the engine and machinery were sent on. Some years later I received 
a letter from a missionary in the neighborhrKx! who said: " We have 
just dedicated a new church over in Aleck Harris's neighborhood 
which grew out of the school that he organized some years ago. He 
has built it all himself, and he sent to England to get corrugated iron 
to make a substantial roof and sides to the building, so that it would 
the better stand the weather." 

If time permitted I could give you many more instances of this 
character, all testifying to ^he good work inaugurated through the 
Muhlenberg Mission. 

Miss Irfne H. Barnes. Secretary, Church of England Zenana 
Missionary Society, London* 

Eastern women are acknowledged to be capable and to be pos- 
sessed of natural dignity of character; but for centuries tlicir lives 
have been blighted by the foul miasma of corrupt creeds; they have 
been crushed by cruel customs and fettered by the adamantine cliain 
of caste. We maintain therefore that we shall fail of our object in 
building up Christian character if we confine the education of our 
converts to a knowledge of books and attendance at .school classes. 
There is a danger of unsatisfactory results if the curriculum of the 
mission school or college does not include training in hnu.sehold duties 
and occupations es.sential to the health, all-round ability and general 



•Ceotnl Presbrlcrian Church. Aprl 9*. 



J 



UANUAL TRAINING FOR GIRLS 



»55 



" fitness ** of those who will shortly become the Christian wives and 
motliers of their country. 

We must attack and demolish first of all the traditional pride which 
scorns and taboos manual and menial work. There is something piti- 
fully wrong in the Indian High School, where, for instance, a Chris- 
tian girl, asked to hold a basin while the missionary nurse bathed the 
injured foot of her fellow pupil, refused with tlie scornful remark^ 
" I am not an ayah." 

We arc conscious that the advocate of compulsory manual training 
for the girls of our mission schools has to encounter opposition, and 
most of all sometimes on the part of the parents. The old caste sys- 
tem of India, for example, has imbued the people with llic notion that 
he who reads must be waited upon by him who docs not. Hence the 
schoolgirl claims exemption from manual labor. And frequently the 
pupil of the mission boarding-school. who:c meals have been prepared 
without her assistance, and whose garments have been provided by 
the work of others, has had a grievous, though unintentional wrong 
committed against her. But this prejudice can be overcome. 

May I now delineate the features of a girls* mission boarding- 
school in India which seems lo me at least to approach very nearly 
the ideal ? Some twenty or thirty girls, ranging from four to six- 
teen years of age. make one of the healthiest, happiest groups of 
little people wliicb can be fnund the world over. T.he school is a large, 
well-ventilated building with an airy compound, and surrounded by 
its own fields. In those fields are grown the cotton which is planted, 
gathered, carried, combed, spun, dyed, and woven by the girls 
themselves. The simple native garments they wear, even lo the but- 
tons and tapes, are made by their own fingers. The cakes and bread 
they eat are made by tlieniselves from grain ground by the same busy 
hands. The food is prepared and cooked on fires kindled with wind- 
strewn wood of llicir own collecting. No luxuries are needed. The 
children learn that if they want fine clothes, they must spin fine 
thread; and if they want good dinners, they must cook carefully and 
make the best of the village produce. 

To each girl above eleven years of age is assigned the charge of a 
small child for whom she is responsible in every way. She weaves, 
and makes, and mends its garments. She washes and dresses it every 
day, prepares its food, and hears its prayers as they kneel together 
beside its cot placed next lo her own. It is the elder girl's ]>lace to 
tend the younger in sickness as well as in tiealtli. and in short, to ex- 
pend upon it a mother's solicitude. Thus she gains for her after life 
invaluable experience in the art of cooking in small quantities and in 
sick nursing. The housework of this boarding-school is performed 
entirely by the pupils according to a schedule changed three times a 
year, and so arranged that the whole scheme is carried nut by earh 
girl during the twelve months. The tiniest scour the copper eating- 
vessels with earth. Others sweep and dust; older ones cook, spin. 
and work in the fields. Each older girl washes her own garments 
and those of her charge, in native fashion, at the little stream which 
runs through the compound for this purpose. 

The studies are according to the Government code, and daily the 





>S6 



INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 




upper-class girls are trained in tea,ching by becoming pupil teachers 
to practicing classes formed of the children. And here the question 
might naturally be asked : Do not all these varied duties and the strain 
of manual labor prevent the advance of the children in their studies? 
Precisely the reverse. This school has a higher percentage of its 
pupils pass at the Government examinations than any other school 
in the same district. A five years' course of study has been completed 
in three years by a girl who never had time for preparation unless she 
hurried in her grinding. School hours mean physical rest, and it has 
been proved without controversy that the constant change of occupa- 
rion and muscular exertion sharpens the pupils' wits. 

With such a well-balanced proportron of outdoor and indoor oc- 
cupations it is not surprising that the school enjoys an almost 
unbroken record of hcaltli. Quarreling is not indulged in. for there 
is no time for it I These busy lassies have so many kinds of work to 
do that they do not get tired of one employment before ihey have to 
do something different. The outcome of all this is that the girls of 
the school are sought for in many directions. Chri.stian farmers 
know that their prosperity depends on healthy, hardworking, happy 
wives. Mission hospitals are always demanding girls who are strong 
to lift and ready to turn their hands to anything, as well as able to 
give a Scripture lesson in the wards, or point a dying patient to 
Christ. Schools beg for teachers who can give elementary instruction 
in a bright and winning manner, and who are not above cooking their 
own dinner or washing the babies' clothes. And so from that school 
in the Punjab there is passing out a file of girls who will leaven the 
surrounding villages with Christian homes, wherein daily toil is sanc- 
tified and God is glorified. 

" Do you ask for practical results of Christian training?" wrote a 
missionary a few days ago. " Some of them rise before me as I 
write: clever, all-roimd. sympathetic, large-hearted girls and women, 
ready to do anything for the Master's sake, because of wisely trained 
heads, and hearts, and hands. I know of a strong little Oriental hand 
that did everything for eight motherless brothers and sisters ; of an- 
other skilled and tender in nursing the sick; of another helpful 
among ail others in whatever duty lay nearest. Only Christian train- 
ing could produce such results. The touch of Qirist only can lead the 
women of India to arise from a sleep as of dcatli to minister to Him 
and His." 

Rev. Charles S. Morris, Missionary, National Baptist Con- 
vention, Africa* 

It seems as if common-senile was afraid of .salt water, and it is 
not likely to get over to the mission field without a bitter struggle in 
the churches here at home. TJiere was a struggle to get women into 
the mission field, and after we got them there we found that we had 
been fighting the battle of missions " with one hand tied behind us." 
Then there was a strxiggle to get medical missinnarics in the field. A 
great many were skeptical about the rosnit of it. and we began to 
look at the New Testament and we found that the Founder of our 

■ Union MeUnodUt Cburcb, April 17. 




THE BASEL INDUSTRL\L MISSIONS IN INDIA 1 57 

religfion was a medical missionary. And when wc, too, sent out med- 
ical missionaries, we found they do a magnificent work that reaches 
a class of heathen we never could reach otherwise. Now we arc 
getting to the battle of industrial missions, and we find there is a 
great disposition on the part of the people to discredit them as if they 
were secular and entirely disconnected with religion, forgetting that 
Jesus Christ said : Seek ye first the kingdom of heaven and its 
righteousness, then all things shall be added unto you. There the 
man is naked. How is he going to clothe himself? It is an anomaly 
to sec a naked Christian. He does not know anything about making 
clothes or about working for money. Unless the missionary teaches 
him he will remain naked. 

Wherever you go in a great raw coimtry like Africa tlic first thing 
impressing itself ujx)n you is the fact that you have to clothe those 
people and teach them how to feed thcm.wlves. Two-thirds of the 
people of Africa are hungry simply because they do not know how to 
feed themselves. 

It is a matter which we sometimes forget, that the first missionary 
to the Gentiles was an industrial missionary, who made tents and sup- 
ported himself. The first missionary of modern times to India was 
an industrial missionary, for Carey supported himself. 

But we may say let the people learn from the merchants how to 
work. If wc depend on commerce to give these people their industrial 
training wc will find we will make a grievous mistake. The savages 
who come down from different parts of Africa go into the cities and 
commerce gets hold of them. The merchant.*; overreach them and 
try to grind the life out of tliem, and the result is that those savages 
who live through it are so disgusted with what is called the civiliza- 
tion of Christian nations, that they go back into the interior, vowing 
never to have anything more to do with either Christianity or civiliza- 
tion. But if one of these same men is taken to Lovedale and trained 
to make those great Boer wagons, trained to make incubators for 
ostriches, and chickens, and geese, and trained to make furniture and 
chairs, then when he goes out as a sort of an apostle of industry, how 
proud he is of the fact that he is able to work I 

rbe Bud lodustrtd Mbdou In India 

tMR. L. J. FbohnmeveRj, Missionary, Basel Evangelical Mission 
Society, India* 

Necessity alone will lead a missionary to interfere with the secular 
affairs of the adherents of his mission. India, with its caste system, 
tends to make every convert to Christianity a penniless beggar. The 
question, IIow converts are to be supported, has to be faced by every 
mission, and the more successful the mission the more urgently does 
this question clamor for solution. The Indu.-^trial Mis.sions estab- 
lished by the Basel Evangelical Mission in India are an attempt to- 
»ward the solution of this problem. The first attempt in this direction 
was made by the ordained missionaries. From an industrial point of 
view these attempts must prove failures. Want of funds, absence of 
technical or mercantile training with most of the missionaries, want 

(* Rccdred too Ute to be read u tbe Confef enccO 



I 

I 

I 




158 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 

of experience and of continuity as long as ihe matter is left to the oc- 
casional taste or aptitude of an ordained missionary will easily ac- 
count for such failures. 

The Home Secretary of the mission, Rev. Josenhaus, after his visi- 
tation tour to India (i85o-i85t), relumed to Europe with the two- 
fold conviction : first, that in our young mission industrial training 
must form part of the missionary work, and, secondly, that the work 
could be done in an efficient manner only if the whole business were 
placed under the direction of a competent separate commission, and if 
the scn,-iccs of lay-agcnts trained for their peculiar work were se- 
cured. This led, in November. 1852, to the formation of an Industrial 
Commission. In a circular of the year 1854 the principles of this 
commission arc laid down as follows : " The object of the operations 
intended by the Industrial Commission is twofold ; first, to lessen, and, 
if possible, to remove the social difficulties which the caste system in 
India puts in the way of our missionaries whilst they are endeavoring 
to establish Christian coiiprcgations. The second object may be called 
a mission work in itself; evangelization, not by preaching or direct 
promulgation of the Gospel, but by the p<.>wer of example; by Chris- 
tianity in its practical every-day life. It is evangelization by practical 
illustration of Christian diligence, honesty, and respectability." 

The flourishing trade produced by some successful industrial es- 
tablishments led, in 1859, to the foundation of a separate mercantile 
branch, which, in addition to keeping u]j mercantile sbojis, provided 
the industrial establishments with the raw materials and bought their 
products. However, both branches were amalgamated into the Mer- 
cantile and Industrial Commission, as it was found necessary not only 
to enlarge the funds of the company, but also to connect the indus- 
trial establishments as closely as possible with the mercantile branch 
in order to conduct the whole work on sound mercantile principles. 

The funds necessary for this kind of mission work arc kept quite 
separate from those of the mission proper. They are not raised in the 
form of donations, but by a joint stcKk comiiany of friends of the mis- 
sion. The shareholders are satisfied with five per cent, interest on 
their invested capital, whereas the rtTnaining surplus goes to the mis- 
sion as a donation toward direct mission work. The establishments 
arc cxpcetcd lo be self-supporting; if necessary, a more remunerative 
establishment or branch of the work will make up for the deficiencies 
of another. 

The business is transacted by a select committee only comiccEed 
with the Committee of ttie Basel Mission Society by the fact that 
some of the members of the Industrial Committee belong also to the 
Committee of the mission, and that some of the members of the Gen- 
eral Mission Committee belong cx-ofTicio to the committee of the In- 
dustrial Mission. In spite of this careful and necessary separation 
between the two corporations as to funds and the management of the 
two departments, the whole organization of our mission must needs 
appear to those outside and inside as a body in which the members 
work for one common and great aim. 

Our lay-brethren, we may say. are subject to the two committees, 
viz. : concerning their special work in all questions of technics and 



THB BASISL INDUSTRIAL MISSIONS IN INDIA 



«59 



merchandise, they are only responsible to the industrial and mercantile 
directors or their representative in India. As to their personal rela- 
tions, however, they are subject to the General Committee of the mis- 
sion. The manager of one of these establishments is expected to be 
not only an expert, with the capacity to adapt himself to quite diflfcr- 
ent circumstances and materials; he ought also to be acquainted with 
the subsidiary arts in connection with his own trade, and a match 
for cases of emergency, as they will not unusually occur in a country 
like India. But as he will have lo do mission work within his sphere, 
above all he must be a spiritual man, filled with the earnest desire lo 
serve his Lord and Master amongst the ignorant and poor. I pre- 
j Slime we could not get young men of this description without placing 
them on an equal footing in almost every respect with ordained mis- 
sionaries. As to their personal allowance, leave, pension, etc., they arc 
treated like the ordinary missionary ; of course, with the ditTcrence 
that the Fndustrial Mission is charged with their expenses. Our lay- 
brethren are members of the missionary conferences and presbyteries 
under similar conditions as the missionaries in holy orders, and on 
the whole we have every reasMi to be satisfied with this arrangement. 
Perhaps the m:mber of lay-missionaries who have not answered to 
the expectations entertained of mission workers has luren greater than 
that of ordained brethren, but this partly finds its explanation in 
the fact that lay-missionaries, as a rule, conic ont very young and in- 
experienced, and we can not give them the benefit of a trial of five or 
six years. 

A few important principles will now be set forth. The help our 
people receive can be compared in no way to alms. The wages are 
honestly earned, in most cases by hard work. They are in proportion 
to the real market value of the work. We have already pointed out 
that the establishments arc expected to be self-supjx>rting, to say the 
least. If people are really in need of alms, the poor fund of the con- 
gregation has to meet this, the industrial establishments being gen- 
erous enough to give every year a considerable donation toward these 
poor funds. Our people arc trained to think, in lime, of sickness and 
old age. Brethren in charge of congregations and of probation- 
ers sometimes confoun<l industrial establishments with poorhouses; 
expecting that the blind, the lame, and halt can be admitted 
and receive full wages, or that people can be paid not aerording lo 
their work, but according to their needs. While fully undcr.standing 
the feelings of these brethren, it stands to reason that .such a sys- 
tem would he neither businesslike nor just, and, furthermore, would 
be demoralizing. Our lay-brethren, who at present experience great 
difficulty in standing their ground against a keen competition on all 
sides and a general depression, can not be expected to yield to such 
extravagant expectations. On the other hand it has always been our 
opinion that it is our duty not only to help our Christians to keep 
soul and body together, but also to assist ihem to rise from an un- 
worthy poverty to a position of comparative superiority in the midst 
of the non-Christian population, so as tn /mable them to exert, by an 
enhanced power of life, a wholesome influence on the whole nation 
and to demonstrate to such as are still inaccessible to the tender in- 




l6o INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 

vitations of the gospel, the fact that Christianity is also the perfec- 
tion of national economy, and that wheresoever it has been implanted 
and nourished it has been conducive to the development of culture 
and to the transformation of all conditions of [ile. Whether this 
aim can be reached on a larger scale by means of industrial missions 
seems to be doubtful, still we must keep it in view. 

A point closely connected with this matter needs a little explana- 
tion. Our Christians can not live on the wages of the ordinary na- 
tive laborers. Some people find fault with our Christians on account 
of this and ascribe tt to their idleness and more expensive mode of 
life. I feel no sympathy whatever with the pecuniary troubles of 
Christians, if I am convinced that they are the natural consequences 
of eating too much sweetmeats, drinking too much coffee, and trying 
to outshine the collector's family as to dress. But on the other hand. I 
must protest with an equal emphasis against unfair comparisons. In 
most cases the wages of a non-Christian laborer arc only part of his 
income. A Christian has nothing but liis wages ; he is disconnected 
from his former relations, has no longer part in the joint property of 
the family, is no longer attached to his former soil. Moreover, it is 
partly on account of the beneficial influence of Christianity that our 
people can not longer be content with their former style of life. By 
the help of God they have come to know something of spfritual needs, 
to whicli we train them to pay not less attention than their bodily 
needs. We expect them to go to church on Sundays decently dressed, 
we hope they will want a few Ixioks, we urge them to contribute to- 
ward the expenses of the church, pay school fees for thtir children, 
and so on. The mission expecting all these things from them, and in 
addition to all this on many occasions appealing to their Christian 
liberality, can not well ignore this in valuing the work of a diligent 
Christian workman in Its establishments. 

As to the question of success, in order to approach the subject in a 
humble spirit, I should like to say, first of all, a few words almut our 
failures, which perhaps are not less instructive than our successes. 
It has been our experience, proved by many experiments, that we 
have never succeeded in any trade without a qualified manager sent 
out from Europe. As a matter of fact, we have not succeeded with 
any article in regard to which we had to compete with native manu- 
facturers or with goods imported from Europe. Our establishments 
have been able to pay their way cither by producing quite new articles 
(tiles) or articles of superior quality (Basel Mission cloths). How 
long we shall be able to compete successfully with English firms, God 
only knows. Patterns of our mission cloths are sent to England, 
are imitated there, and the country is flooded with cheap versions of 
our products. Some of our successes have caused a formidable com- 
petition, and T am sorry to say that it is a great German firm which 
at present greatly endangers the existence of our tile works. 

Now all this refers only to financial success or failure, and although 
up to this time GotVs Messing upon our Industrial Mission has not 
been wanting, still the nuestion remains, how far we have succeeded 
in those ideal objects with which this work was started. It is some- 
what humiliating that we have to admit in this respect also, tint there 




THE BASRL tHDUSTRrAL MfSSTONS IN INDIA 



I 



I 



I 



are not so many well-to-do Christian artisans as might be expected 
after such an amount of help on the part of the mission. The wages 
in most of the establishments arc so liberal that almost all of the peo- 
ple working in weaving establishments ought to do very well. We 
must continually keep in view, however, the conditions in which these 
people were before they joined us. Economy and other new habits 
are not acquired in so short a time. For others the new light seems 
to have been too dazzling. In consequence of their having risen too 
suddenly to a higher social position, frequently they have lost their 
balance of mind, they live above their circumstances or they mean 
to raise their children to a position of still greater comfort than that 
enjoyed by the father, whether fit for it or not. After having ex- 
pended their money on a rather barren soil, the son has lost the habit 
of manual work and the father has nm into debt. 

However, our success is not only financial. Taking into considera- 
tion the class of people from which our Christians come ami the un- 
favorable circum.stances under which we have to carry on this work, 
we have every reason to be thankful for what has been achieved by 
God's help. As to the question of self-dependence, our carpentry is 
in the hands of a native Christian, who, in addition, may serve as a 
testimony to the educational effect of these establishments. He is 
not only a very able and painstaking carpenter, he is a man guided 
by Oiristian principles. Here we have a missionary industry which 
has reached its aim. Amos, the man to whom I refer, gives employ- 
ment to many of his fellow- Christians. Cut he is not the only car- 
penter earning his bread, independent from the mission. We meet 
with carpenters here and there, even outside of our mission field, who 
owe their comfortable circumstances to the carpenter's shop at Cali- 
cut. The position of tailors and mechanics is very mnch the same. 
Having undergone training they will easily find work everywhere. 
Our bookbinding establishment in Mangalore is not only independent, 
it has become a large establishment, employing many hands. Of 
course in some way it is dependent on our press at Mangalore, but I 
should like to raise the question whether bookbinders in Europe and 
America are independent of presses or not. The majority of our 
people are employed in tile works and weaving establishments. What 
about their se! f-dcpcndencc ? Of course, the sclf-dqx'ndcnce of a 
tradesman living outside of the establishments can not be expected 
from a coolie working in a tilc-raaking cstabhshmcnt. People em- 
ployed in ibis way will be found all over the world. Besides there are 
in Europe and America also tmvns and villages whose inhabitants 
chiefly live upon one industry. People in a similar condition in Eu- 
rope and America consider themselves by no means inferior to other 
laborers. If the objection lies in their being dependent on the mis- 
sion. I have explained above that it is not the mission proper on which 
they are dependent for their livelihood, but let us say, rather, they 
arc dependent as workmen on a Christian firm, the shareholders of 
which are enthusiastic friends of the Basel Mission and conduct their 
business chiefly with the intention to strengthen the hands of the mis- 
sionaries. H these people must work in some factory in any case, I 
consider it a great blessing that they are not competled to work " in- 



H con side 



1 63 



INDUSTIUAL EDUCATION 



dcpendenlly of the mission " in the establishment of some Hindu, 
Mohanmiedan, or Parsi. >Iowevcr, if the latter is considered to be 
a progress in ihe right line. I may add that at Caliait many of our 
Christians are employed in the works of our German competitor. Of 
course, as these workmen have to live far away from the Christians 
in the neighborhood of our works, we have had to station a caiechist 
there in order to attend to the spiritual needs of these people ; and in 
this effort we have been kindly assisted by the present representative 
of that firm. At Hubit {South Mahratta) the majority of our Chris- 
tians are employed in cotton mills conducted by ftindns. Is this the 
self-dependcnee which our critics think preferable to what in our so- 
ciety is called the Industrial Mission? The point for objection does 
not consist in the fact that so many people find work in a Christian 
establishment, but it consists in this, thai such a large proportion of 
our Cliristians in Mangalore. Calicut, Codacal, and Palghat must 
cam their bread as coolies in tile works, where, as a matter of course, 
the wages, though sufHcieut to cover absolutely necessary expenses, 
can not be sufficient to raise them from their poverty to a status of 
relative respectability, so desirable in India, for the representation of 
the Christian cause before the heathL-n world. 

As to the weavers in our mission they are so well paid that we may 
fairly say if they are not prosperous it is their own fault. A good 
number of them have their own comfortable houses and compounds. 
They have been helped in this by their employers in the way of loans. 
We have heard of a weaver who has got his house free of debt, and, 
in addition to this, R. 125 in the savings-bank; another one living in 
his own house and compound has deposited R. 460 in the savings- 
bank. A weaver at Tellicherry who was apprenticed there has saved 
nearly R. 100 within two years. Most of the weavers at my station 
(Tellicherry) live in their own houses. 

At the Bangalore conference it was felt as an insoluble difficulty 
that the industries of the Basel Mission, though self-supporting, are 
of no use to individuals, in so far as they will not enable people to 
earn their livelihood independent of the mission. Apart from book- 
binders, carpenters, and tailors. I may now state that at every sta- 
tion there are some weavers, who, quite independent from the Mis- 
sion, have taken to house industry. Both Europeans and natives have 
taken to our articles, so that they find a ready sale. A fair competi- 
tion we do not obiect to in the least; all these weavers have been 
helped by our estab!ishments at the beginning in one way or the other. 
As a rule they do very well ; they earn much more than they ever 
could by producing the common Indian cloth with Indian looms. If 
our cloths have a good sale and the European loom is better than the 
Indian, I think the sympathy with what is national is carried loo far 
if we are asked to persuade our people to dig a hole in the ground, to 
use the Indian loom, make saris, and to starve. It is cliaractcrislic 
that cur independent weavers in g-eneral that, as soon as they go be- 
yond their capacities by aiming at somethm.i; like an establishment, 
they fall into trouble. 

After all. we feel no hesitation in admitting that there is something 
artificial and perhaps unnatural in the present conditions of our con- 



J 



TUE BASEL INDUSTRIA^L MISSIONS IN INDIA 



»63 



I 



gregation. Take away these industries and the bulk of all these con- 
izations will be in a most pitiful condition. Something of this kind 
perhaps might be said wilJi reference to every community on this 
earth. Still we ourselves feel that the provision made for the tempo- 
ral affairs of our people hitherto has become inadequate to the pres- 
ent need, and in spile of all that has been done, the social problem 
stands before us as tremendous and as perplexing as ever before. 
Multitudes of people had to be admitted to our congregations during 
the last year, and only in a very few cases were they in a position to 
retain Iheir former business, or to save part of their property. At 
Codacal most of the people belong to the rural population, but only a 
few of them could be provided for on some land the mission for- 
tunately possesses there. The greater part of the people had to go 
to the lile-works. If there are no industrial establishments at a place, 
the missionary will have to send his inquirers to some other station. 
An enlargement of the Industrial Mission seems to be out of ques- 
tion. The present depression must needs turn our mind into another 
direction. So our thoughts luni back to agriculture, which would be 
a far more natural thing and would attach our people to the soil. 
We have never entirely lost sight of this in spite of our failures at 
the beginning. In connection with our orphanages at Mulkl and 
Paraperi, agricultural work has always been carried on. Some five 
or six years ago an agricultural school was established at Paraperi 
with the intent to train a Christian peasantry in course of time. How- 
ever, the new project is beset with difficulties on all sides. These 
tiifficulties seem to be even greater than those we had to encounter 
when commencing our Industrial Mission. It will be a work re- 
quiring great patience; first of all to overcome the zhs incrtiw of our 
people and their want of encrg>' and perseverance. To provide a 
man with a piece of land, with a pair of bullocks, and some money 
to start with, will not do. As long as there is money he will not work 
at all, then he will .«;ell the first bullock, and as one bullock is a use- 
less thing, he will also sell the second, and the agriculture will come 
to an end. Then there is the difftculty of getting land. 

Al.so with rcfercnre to an agricultural mission, it is our firm con- 
viction that we will not succeed uiUil some European expert, who 
must needs be a heaven-sent man, takes up the matter. Agriculture 
suffers under great disadvantages in India. It is greatly neglected, 
or is carried on as 3,000 years ago. We want a man equipped with 
what Europe could teach him practically and theoretically nn the sub- 
ject. In India he will give a patient and unprejudiced hearing to 
what India has to teach him on agriculture, and so find out how thing-t 
could be improved. Such a missionary — for a missionary he must 
be above all — will, I am sure, confer a great boon on our native Giris- 
lians, and his labor would go far to solve the social problem. The 

■ trial must be made sooner or later in our mission, for our congre- 
gations, isolated as they are in this land of castes as to their outward 
affairs, will be based on a solid foundation only if a fair proportion 
H of their members to a reasonable extent " shall inherit the earth." 
I Meantime we can not expect our people to sit with empty stom- 
H achs at the feet of Christ and hear His word ; at any rate not as long 



I 

I 



l64 INDUSTRIAL EHUCATION 

as it is within our power to appease their hunger. It is cheap wis- 
dom to advise: Send this multitude away and leave them to manage 
their temporal affairs. Doing- so, the word of the all-merciful Saviour 
would ring in our ears. They have no need to go away; give ye 
them to eat I 

The Opportuaity for lodostHal Trainlne 

Kkv. J. O. Si'fciNCLK, I'h.U.. Missionary, Methodist Episcopal 
Church, Japan." 

The lime was. and not so long ago, that the only training which it 
was thought necessary to give to those born from heathenism to the 
new life of the gospel light and privilege, was a knowledge of the 
Bible, the catechisms and fomiularits of the Church, and, perhaps, the 
abihty to read. Even this last was sparingly imparted as likely to 
make the convert know too much. Now, as we face the great, the 
absorbing problems of a new century, as we pause on its threshold, it 
is pertinent to inquire what forces are at work for the uplifting of 
those whom God has placed in our hands as pledges to the final con- 
quest of the kingdom of righteousness. 

Let us never forget that the first step to rising is repentance, a turn- 
ing from the old. Then comes the new heart. Tlic new heart mcana 
the new life. The new life means new conduct, new training. " Old 
things have passed away, and behold, all things have become new." 
Nature becomes new. Instead of being a tnachine to thwart, and 
dwarf, and destroy humanity, nature becomes a mighty engine of 
power, and the expression of the Father's will working for good to 
them that love God. So when the man feels the divine thrill of God's 
love in the soul, the lower and more abject he is the more certainly 
does he feel a great material uplift. Can you think of a band of 
naked savages becoming Cliristian and remaining naked? Poverty 
there may be, and will be, in connection with Christianity, but the 
poverty that was ; that grim, blank, hopeless poverty can not exist 
with true Christianity. 

There was an idea that the one object of Christianity was to save 
men from an eternal hell in the next life. May that sublime object 
never be absent from Christian effort, but is it not possible to be- 
come so very other-worldly that we shall forget that the way to steer 
straight fnr the heaven of the sweet by and by, is to get into the road 
here? There is no heaven worth the having that does not have Its 
counterpart here. "The kinedom of heaven is within you," was the 
profound teaching of the Master. 

Whether we like it or not. we live in an industrial age. This in- 
tensely active age will not pause to recognize the artificial barriers of 
nations or the natural ones of races. Hence the bright men in Japan, 
China. India, and Africa and among all the backward races, begin to 
see that their only salvation in a political sense, and. perhaps, in a 
racial sense as weil. depends upon mastering the instruments of activ- 
ity that have made the Western nations great. Schools founded for 
the purpose of teaching the industrial arts and sciences are the de- 
mand of the hour in many parts of the world. Such schools open the 



* U&lon Hctbodiu Cburcb, April t?. 



i 



way for teaching many important lessons : First, they teach the les- 
son of helpfulness and of self-lielpfulness. Much of the so-caJled 
charity v( tlic world is worse than wasted. But no such peril sur- 
unds the dcvclupnient of self-help through the multiplication uf in- 
iustrial training-schools. 

But, again, such schools disarm prejudice. It has been the curse 

i many religions, and some types of Christianity are not free from 

,e suspicion, that the priests and religious teachers are but spies in 

,e garb of religion. The man who comes into the country with the 

tools of industry excites no such fears. He gets at the heart of the 

people, the great middle classes who are cverywliere the backbone of 

nations. 

Third, such schools exalt manhood. It is the incarnate life of good- 
ss. purity, and love, lived in the very surroundings of Che real life 
of the people, that works the miracle of transforming society. We do 
not directly aim, perhaps, to transform society, but we do that which 
inevitably brings it to pass. Wc say to the man in squalor and mis- 
ery, to the one in vice and crime, to the one more affluent but equally 
fczy, that there is a path of true nobility. But in marking out that 
path we must see to it that his material wants arc uplifted, his do- 
mestic ideals purified, his low animalism di.'iplaccd by spiritual things. 
t is useless to say to men, " Be clean," while leaving tliern to wallow 
filth. 

As wc might expect, the industrial spirit that is abroad in the world 

affected the growth of industrial schools in mission fields. Up to 

ic year 1880 there were but twenty-nine industrial schools and 

sses reported as established in the mission fields of the world. 

Between 1880 and 1890 some twenty-six more were added. From 

l>j8go to the end of last year ninety-one more were established. There 

■tre twenty-one reported " unknown " as to date of establishment, most 

of which, doubtless, are of recent origin. The total number reported 

in the mission world is 167. 

Doing and knowing, knowing by doing, is nature's method of 
caching. To train hand and eve, to develop all the physical, mental, 
tnd spiritual powers into the full stature of manhood is, or should be, 
le lowest ideal that the missionary teacher sets before him in his 
rorld-wide crusade for righteousness. It can not be denied that the 
evelopment of any one of this trinity of powers to the exclusion of 
le others will produce monstrosities in education. The great aim 
lould be to so train the child that he will be in perfect harmony with 
he life that he is to live. In the sense that we may do something 
Isc, over-education is not only a possibility, but a peril. There can 
e no over-educalion in the all-round sense, but in the partial onc- 
ided sense there may be. Any system of education that arouses am- 
litions but does not furnish some means of satisfying the aspirations, 
dangerous. But the education that creates aspirations and then 
mishes the tools to carve in imperishable forms the image held up, 
safe, progressive, expansive. The object of all foreign missionary 
ucational enterprise is to make men good men. and constantly bet- 
men. This is only possible by harmonizing the educational process 
ith the highest national ideals of the people, all the white purifying 




1 66 



INDUSTRIAL EDUCATIOK 




and elevating them till men shall sec, and feci, and know, the match- 
less power and glory that exalts him who was created but a little 
lower than the angels. This gives him a dominion over nature and 
self — 3. dominion that shall spread, and deepen, and ascend, till all cre- 
ated things shall join with all the human race in proclaiming the tri- 
umphs of redemption. 

'ihc time has come to raise the question as to whether an advance 
may he made in the scope of industrial and technical training, Thu 
Christian nations have no copyright, no monopoly of the world's 
knowledge. Be sure if the Christian does not go with the Christian's 
interpretation of nature and of nature's God, some one else will. The 
world stands on tiptoe to catch the glints of the morning of science. 
It will soon be a full-orbed day to millions in Asia and Africa. To- 
day the one institution added to those already in existence that would 
give the missionary prestige and power in Japan, Korea, China, India, 
Africa, Persia, and Turkey would be powerful institutes of tcchnol- 
og)'. the latest in science, the best in equipment, the warmest in 
Christian love and helpfulness. Their halls would be immediately 
filled, their classes would be enthusiastic, their influence profound and 
far-reaching. 

It is hardly necessary to urge an audience composed largely of 
British and Americans to hasten in getting rich. Cut certain nations 
of this world but just out of paganism are straining every ner\e to be- 
come rich and powerful. Their creed has for its first article, get rich 
honestly if you can, but anyhow get rich. The second article is a 
corollary of the first, get power peacefully if you can, but, if it must 
be, get power at the moulh of the cannon. I low far men here with all 
their lust of wealth are held in check by the per\'ading spirit of Christ 
only God knows and heaven will reveal, but the East is not restrained 
by such sentiments. In a mad rush for wealth, power, prestige, she 
may be ground beneath the wheels of a new industiial Juggernaut 
more pitiless, more relentless than that of old. Industrialism can not 
be prevented, it must be redeemed and enlightened. All honor to the 
Carnegies, the Helen Goulds, the Rockefellers, who. to some extent, 
are mitigating the severities of industrialism and making it possible 
for men to enjoy more and be more. All honor to those who, having 
no millions to give, are giving what is more precious than gold : ten- 
der, loving service to soften the rigors of an age that has come upon 
the naked children of the East. But there are few wealthy philan- 
thropists in Kastern lands. The Iniilding. the eqnipment must come 
primarily from the missionary ; yet the Industrial Institute will be one 
of the first institutions to he liberally supported by the people among 
whom it is planted. It will incite to giving both in money and serv- 
ice more quickly than many forms of educational effort. It will 
bring to the door of the religious teacher the brightest minds; those 
that are breaking away from tradition and are willing to receive new 
ideas. That the Far East will become inilustrial is as certain as that 
she will continue to exist. The question is, shall she become ma- 
terialistic, hard, defiant, hopeless, hcavenless. and godless, with noth- 
' 'f to soften and mitigate the severities of her life, with hundreds of 

w York East Sides and London East Ends in her cities? Be sure 



J 



THE OPPORTUNITY FOR INDUSTRIAL TRAINING 167 

that ultimately your West Sides and your West Ends become what 
your East Sides make them. It is a way that God has of avenging 
wrong and neglect, that the very multitude of the East Siders make 
them a social, political, and moral peril to the West Siders. 

The Oriental East Sider is submerged and utterly powerless to lift 
himself out. His help must come from without. But the multitudes 
have responded to the invitation to better their condition up to the full 
limit of power and willingness on the part of the Church to provide 
facilities. There are men to-day in the pulpits of China, Japan, 
Korea, and India, the fruits of the efforts of the Church. There are 
men in high political position whose thirst for knowledge was first 
aroused by the presence of the mission school. He whom we now 
call Marquis Ito of Japan, one of the foremost statesmen of the 
world, in company with a friend once worked his way as a common 
sailor before the mast to England to study the conditions there. Now 
that great man, in the fullness of his powers and the ripeness of his 
experience, after drafting a constitution and establishing representa- 
tive government, stands before his people of reactionary tendencies 
and pleads for civil, religious, and industrial liberty for all men who 
come to the shores of Japan. Such ideas never die. They live and 
grow and multiply till they fill the whole earth. Thus the industrial 
spirit when properly directed becomes the champion of liberty, the 
handmaid of education, the auxiliary of the Gospel. 



CHAPTER XXX 



IDEAS FOR MISSIONARY TEACHERS 

Necessity for TrainJnf in Teachiog — CoDtrollinff Ideas in ScbtwlCurrlcuU — 
Relation of Expression to Impressloa — WiU Training. 



Necessity (or Tn^nins in Teaching 

Rev. Joun W. Conklin, Professor, Bible Normal College, 
Sprmgdcid, Mass* 

Two-thirds uf this world's people can not read a word. In India 
less than six per cent, of her nearly three hundred millions arc 
readers, and among the women only one in tlirec hundred and thirty. 
In the still larger population of China, Rev. Dr. W. A. P. Martin es- 
timates the readers as about six millicois. In Africa, Muslim lands, 
South America, and the islands, conditions are still worse. It is. there- 
fore, well within the truth to say that of the billion and a half of 
people in the world, one billion can not read. Illiteracy is an impor- 
tant evidence of comparative, if not of absolute ignorance. 

Even of the readers, many are the victims of the most puerile 
superstitions and endowed with a pitiful emptiness of mind. Dr. 
Martin, in his Hanlin papers, analyzes the actual condition of what 
is called the educated mind of China, and gives a striking exposure 
of what may be called " learned igjiorance." T.he millions, wliom we 
call savage, are far more deficient. Here is a gigantic problem of 
education. Looking at It on the economic side, these people must 
become able to read the advertisements of soap and shoes; they must 
come to appreciate newspapers and magazines. On the religious 
side, they must learn to read the Christian's Bible, if Christianity is 
to come to its full fruitage among them. 

Missionaries have, as a rule, planted the school alongside of the 
church. Often the two are in the same building. Dr. Dennis, in his 
standard book " Christian Missions and Social Progress," estimates 
the number of pupils in all Protestant mission schools at one million. 
These are gathered in 22,000 schools. Probably there are at least 
40,oc» teachers. Of these schools 112 are universities and colleges, 
546 theological and training-schools, 1,087 boarding and high schools, 
and 17.773 *'^y schools. Now you who have been on the field or have 
carefully studied mission operations will agree with the statement that 
at least half of the students, male and female, in these 1,700 higher 
schools are expected and expecting to teach. Many of them will be 
preachers, but even of these the most will devote themselves partially 
to school work. Here, then, at least, are 50,000 teachers in process 
of preparation. 

* Caraef Ic H*U, April aj. 



1 



4 





TRAINING IN TEACHING 



169 



I 



I 
I 

I 



I 
I 



The question that I am to discuss is not whether too much or too 
little mission strength is given to education, as that term is com- 
monly used. My contention to-day is simply that however many 
schools we missionaries conduct, and to whatever heights of grade 
ihey reach, these schools should be the best possible. The voiceless 
claim of these submerged and long-neglected millions to the besi 
preachers, the best physicians, and the best editors — men and wo- 
men — is at last being indorsed and ratified throughout the Church. 
There will, therefore, be no one to dispute any claim that they should 
have the best teachers and scliools. My question is — whether they 
have these. 

Missionaries have been the pioneers of education in many districts. 
Their schools have been and arc far superior tu those indigenuus to 
the country, if such there were or arc. But this comparison stops too 
short. The standard must Ik; the best schools in Kuropc and this 
country. Never mind now the disadvantages of lack of apparatus, 
teachers, and hereditary pupil l)niin-power. We are examining the 
ideals and the forces now operating to reach those ideals. 

To go back to our 50,000 embrj'o teachers ; how many of them are 
being specifically instructed in the science of education and the art of 
teaching? Those who arc to preach arc being taught homiletics ; those 
who are to practice are studying anatomy and medicine. How are 
the teachers being fitted for their work? Dr. Dennis, in his report 
above quoted, mentions no normal schools.* Now this does not mean 
that American missions have no normal schools. I have received state- 
ments from each of the four largest boards in our land. One reports 
five; another none, but five colleges with what may be called normal 
departments ; another claims thai all colleges that turn out teachers 
are normal schools. The last gives a key to the situation when it says : 
" Perhaps the largest number of our higher schools and colleges have 
(he distinct aim of the pupils in time becoming teachers, but are not 
dignified by the name of normal schools in the sense of teaching peda- 
gogy as a science." All of which means, I think, that multitudes of 
teachers are launched every year, but that comparatively few have 
learned their business. I submit to you a guess that in all these 546 
theological and training-schools, homiletics, the art of preaching, is 
taught, but that in not one-tenth of them is pedagogy, the art of 
teaching, a part of the curriculum. And yet at least three-fourths of 
the graduates will be teachers. But then " anybody can teach school ! " 

Many people do not know the object of a normal school, and would 
class pedagogy with paleontology or perhaps astrology. We mission- 
aries ought to rally around those two words " normal " and " peda- 
gogy." Normal is what ought to be. Ninety-eight and two-fifihs de- 
grees is the normal temperature of health. Normal teacher-training is 
right training, the training of a teacher to he what he ought to be. It 
is not a veneer or a system of mechanical art. 

In the report of the committee on normal schools, made at the last 
meeting of the National Educational Association, the qualifications of 
the members of the faculty of a normal school are given as : ( i ) Char- 

* Esccpitn^ the aaEnificcst MortTlans. 70U will tcArcb the ublea In the rcporu of all the 
StMson bo«rdi in ttii* country vaI.iW, I (hliilc. tat mention ot normal ichool*. I ferret ttuc I An 
aot bctttr laforcaed &• to Ibia work la Europeaa mis^toriB. 




170 



IDE.\S FOR MISSIONAKY TEACHERS 



acter. (2) Teaching ability— that is, the ability to adapt self and 
Mibject to the pupil. (3) Scholarship. (4) Cuhure, or the develop- 
ment of the finer self. 

Now the first of the seven famous laws of teaching is : " Be what 
you would have your pupils become." Here, then, is the normal plat- 
form: Character, teuching-abilily, schoj.'trship. culture. Pedagog>' 
aims mainly to prcxlucc or increase the second of these qualifications — 
teaching ability. Teaching is not giving or pouring knowledge. Dr. 
McMurry well calls it " matdilng " — matching a piece of truth to a 
corresponding piece of capacity in the learner. To do this in the best 
manner there must lie a thorough study of mind or soul. That i« 
psychology. There must he accjuaintance with llie history of teaching 
theories and experiments. There must he practice in the methods of 
teaching each separate branch of knowledge. 

Very soon after 1 began work in India, nearly twenty years ago, I 
organized a normal school. 1 had never been In one, did not know 
the meaning of pedagogy, but had an instinctive feeling that my 
fifty native teachers could not teach what they appeared to know. I 
secured a head master who was a bigoted Brahman, but a graduate 
of a teachers' college, and knew how to teach teachers to teach. His 
Brahmanism did not appear to hurt us: his pedagogy greatly helped 
us, and education in that field took a step forward. 

The call, then, seems to be not for more colleges and training- 
schools. In some fields there is a superabundance of these, and con- 
solidation would increase force. But in these schools already estab- 
lished let normal training, as thorough as possible, be compulsory. 

But who will train these mission native teachers? In most cases 
the missionaries must do it. Arc they prepared for it? T,he board 
in this country that is foremost in educational work on mission soil, 
reports that among 539 missionaries, 33 have taken distinctively nor- 
mal courses of training; that is, about i in 16. Others of those 
missionaries have undoubtedly pursued the study of pedagogy to 
some extent, but only 33 are registered as normal trained. Almost 
all of the 539 either leach in schools or manage and inspect schools. 
The showing of other boards in the matter of missionaries Irained to 
teach is still less favorable. Missionaries have not been able to get 
such training in theological seminaries or in the majority of the 
colleges, and the normal school has been beneath their horizon. 

Professor Laurie, of Scotland, says: " The whole solution of the 
problem of educational reform lies in the trained teacher." 

Do not forget the four chief qualifications — character, teaching- 
ability, scholarship, culture. Will you withstand me when I claim 
that the solution of the problem of educational improvement in mis- 
sion schools lies in the trained native teacher? And, further, that the 
solution of the problem of training the native teacher lies in the mis- 
sionary trained to train te.ichers? 

Dr. Nicholas Murray Butler, in his report on the educational prog- 
ress of the world,, says : " Now it has come to pass that that university 
which docs not pursue education as energelically as it pursues physics 
or classical philology, is no longer upon a pinnacle." Shall we not 
adapt that statement and say : It must come to pass that tlie mission 




TRiVIKIN'G IN TEACHIKG 



1?I 



board which establishes and encourages schools with the money of 
the Church, and does not require a training in pedagogy for its teach- 
ers as strictly as il requires a training in theology and horniletics for 
its preachers, and in medicine for its physicians, is not keeping pace 
with the march led hy the Light of the World ? 

But there is another argimient in favor of this pedagogical training 
for missionaries. It is conducive to the most effective preaching. 
The religion of the Christ is presented to minds mostly in dense 
ignorance ; they are mostly babes in years or capacity ; they need 
milk, and oftentimes it needs to be diluted. But in religious training 
there is no approach to a settled or graded course. 

Dr. A. Caswell Ellis, in an article on the " Philosophy of Educa- 
tion " in the i'edagogical Seminary, makes this statement: "The 
provisional arrangement growing out of the abuses of religion and the 
other necessities of the time by which religious training has been 
divorced from tlie schools and considered beyond the pale of peda- 
gogical science, must soon give place to the inevitable demand of 
nature. Pedagogy must accept and own her whole field, and face Its 
problem of religious training squarely. The grave question of train- 
ing religious teachers, and of what and how to teach at the various 
periods of child growth, are still to be solved by pedagogy.'* Mis- 
sionaries, as a rule, give Christianity a large place in the schedule of 
daily duties. But while they have mapped out a regular course of 
study for each grade on what we call secular subjects, there has been 
no such course worked out for the teaching of religion. 

About two years ago I made a slight attempt to ascertain some 
facts bearing upon the formation of such a curriculum. I sent out 
to a number of missionaries in various parts of the world the follow- 
ing questions: i. In teaching the Bible to wholly illiterate adults have 
you used pictures or object-lessons, or other methods usually called 
primary ; and if so, with what result ? 2. In what degree and in 
what respects do such persons differ in mental development from 
children in the primary grade? 3. In beginning to teach Ihcm, do 
you use more the Old Testament or the New? 4. What element of 
Bible tnith have you found best for beginners, and in what order 
do you present other elements? Stale reasons for your choice. 

The replies were not very numerous, but from tliem I gathered 
these conclusions : First, that almost all had found primary methods 
adapted to illiterate adults. Second, the majority asserted that the 
mental development of such adults differed but little from the chil- 
dren in the primary grade. Most of my correspondents began their 
religious teaching with the use of the Old Testament, and most found 
the creative element, or what we might call the thought of power, to 
be best for beginners. 

These details are given simply to suggest that there is a great range 
here for investigation, and to raise the question whether such investi- 
gation should not be pursued. If the curriculum of our day-school has 
been greatly revolutionized by the study of children's interests and 
capabilities, is it not possible that there is an excellent way which all 
missionaries have not yet fully disco\'ered ? It is my firm conviction 
that the best teachers will be the best evangelists on the mission fields. 




I}S IDEAS FOR UISSIONABY TEACHERS 



4 



Other things being equal, h is very suggestive tltat Jesus Himself 
taught more than He preached, and mentioned teaching oftencr tlian 
preaching; also, thai boards and missions are constantly increasing 
the preponderance of women missionaries who arc teachers rather 
than preachers ; also, that the Moravians, who have been in the van 
of missionary enterprise, place tlic emphasis of their work on teaching 
and catechctics. I submit to you, therefore, that the missionary as an 
evangelist will be greatly aided by the best modern normal training. 

You agree that the best is none too good for missions and mis- 
sionaries in their work against stupendous odds. We want to teach 
reading, history, mathematics, if at all, in the best possible way. We 
want to be " apt to teach " Christianity. 

In closing, suffer three practical suggestions. First, a course in 
pedagogics is desirable for all missionaries. Second, normal depart- 
ments should be considered a necessity in mission seminaries and col- 
leges whose aim is to prepare teachers. Third, a graded curriculum 
for religious teaching should be outlined. 

GmttoUioK Idcu in CurrkuU 

Frank Morton McMurry, Ph.D., Teacher^ College, Colum- 
bia University, New York* 

There is at present a widespread dissatisfaction in regard to the 
course of study in the public schools of this country. The reasons for 
this dissatisfaction are several. We believe much less than formerly 
in a curriculum that aims mainly at useful knowledge, taking the 
word useful in its narrower sense. Also, the value of study, pri- 
marily for the sake of the mental exercise, or the mental discipline 
received, is now much less credited. On the other hand, we believe 
far more heartily than ever in child nature and, in fact, in human 
nature; and these changes are calling for corresponding changes in 
our curricula. 

The selections of subject matter are now primarily determined by 
four heads : 

The first controlling idea is character building; but this has been 
only nominally the aim up to the present. In the estimation of a ma- 
jority of both parents and teachers, little children have been going to 
school primarily to learn the three R's — that is, for knowledge. Char- 
acter has been named as the aim only when these elders have dropped 
into a temporarily serious mood, and have reflected on what ought to 
be. However, we are gradually dt-fining our aim by stating some of 
the essentials in the development of character. A good child is still 
one who is not bad — that is, he does not lie, nor cheat, nor steal. 
He reaches school in lime, Icams his lessons, and causes compara- 
tively little mischief. But wc arc aiming at something more than the 
negatively good, and more than a merely intellectual receiver. Char- 
acter building includes the development of activity and industry. 
Industry is simply activity controlled and persistently applied. The 
moment the child leaves the school for the street and the home, he is 
to be called upon to be an actor; as also in adult life he must be an 
actor. In both cases he is required to execute ideas, as well as to 

■Ccatnl PmbytcrUn Church. April rj. 



I^• CURRICULA 



IM 



I 
I 

I 
I 



possess ihcm. The world calls that child or man, who can not carry 
his ideas reasonably well into practice, a thcorisl. arid has no high re- 
gard for him. Much oX this activity is for self-interest or profit, but 
much of it also is demanded fur the sake of other people. The boy 
should be of assistance to his parents and associates ; anil the crying 
need of adult society to-day is that men and women shall perform 
social duties willingly and with energy. Since the school is a social 
institution it must meet exactly this demand, and train pupils to per- 
form deeds for the good of themselves and for the good of others — 
in other words, to do or act abundantly. Goodness, therefore, in- 
cludes ability and tendency to execute. TTie school can no longer be 
an institution merely to encourage learning and thinking. Doing 
must constitute a good part of the work. Thus the aim of the school 
demands a curriculum that includes cooking, sewing, work in wood, 
iron, clay, sand, and paint ; also some care of the school building, the 
surrounding trt-es, grounds, streets, and, what is still more important, 
much work for the sake of animals, school companions, home asso- 
ciates, and slranKer.s, both singly and in the mass called society. The 
way is not yet clear to make all of these kinds of work regular parts 
of the school programme, especially the last. But here and there an 
hour of the school period is boldly devoted to the theoretical consid- 
eration or the execution of plans for self-government and for the 
community good. The kindergarten has been a constant encourage- 
ment in this attempt to develop the executive habit. Thus the more 
fully accepted social aim of the school is one cause of innovations in 
the school programme. 

The second idea is perhaps equally influcnlial on the coiirsc of 
study, namely — our new conception of the child nature. Formerly 
childhood was considered of little value in itself. We have been in 
the habit of regarding adult life as the valuable part of life — the fruit- 
bearing period. Accordingly, in making out the curriculum we have 
directed our attention mainly to what we desired the child to become. 
It was his business to adapt himself as best he could to the plan 
mapped out from this adult point of view. Now our respect for him 
has increased to such a degree that we are willing to look to his na- 
ture as the guide, and to ask what he is fitted to become. Several 
important points arc involved here. Not only i.s he conceived as hav- 
ing an abundance of native tendencies, but what is partially new, 
tendencies that can be trusted. Emotion has an important function 
among animals, enabling the frightened deer to run away faster than 
he otherwise could, and the angry bear to defend himself with his 
claws with special vigor. What is true of other animals in this re- 
spect is likewise probably true of man. The native impulses or 
tendencies of children, and the interests and desires into which these 
develop, have a function. Some of these tendencies or impulses arc 
bad, no doubt, and should be checked, but in spite of the fact that 
we are a fallen race, not all of them arc bad. The kindergartner as- 
serts that most of them arc good, that they arc part of a child's na- 
ture for a purpose. They are the means given to him for the begin- 
nings and continuations of growth, and for the overcoming of ob- 



174 



IDEAS rOR MISSIONARY TEACHERS 




stacles in the attainment of valuable aims. Therefore, they must 
encouraged. 

Note the ciTect upon the course of study. The child from the bc- 
ginnint^ is attracted to\var<i beautiful objects, as pictures and statuary, 
because bis nature cries for such tliiuKs: art sbouhl. therefore, occupy 
a place in the schools. The very yuunj? pupil Rreatly enjoys fanciful 
stories, the elder pupils love stories of adventure, and other kinds. 
Hence. literature and history in the schools. Young persons are gen- 
erally drawn toward plants and animals, and nature study is given 
a place in the curriciilvim. Interest grows hy means of such mental 
stimulus, and since the direction and amount of one's energy are de- 
pendent upon the direction and extent of his interests, it is highly im- 
portant to have a course of study that appeals to pupils from these 
several sides. Staling it differently, strong motives are the condition 
of work, and the interests that grow out of the native impulses mean 
an abundance of motive for life-work. 

Again, children do not spend all their time quietly thinking. To 
be sure, they often surprise and please tlieir elders by their bright 
Ideas; but they also surprise them by their striking love of activity. 
Little children are never lazy. They are continually using most of 
the muscles of the budy in experimenting, constructing, destroying, 
and executing. They may even refuse to think out a plan clearly be- 
fore acting, for very often, possibly as a rule, they do their thinking 
about a given plan after its execution has actually begun. It is not 
human nature, therefore, for children to sit still throughout the schod 
day, and bok at a book. Instead of chastising ibeni, with the hope 
of reforming them, we have now concluded to let nature have her 
way, and to reform ourselves. From this point of view we again have 
a demand for cooking, sewing, manual training, and social work of 
many kinds, including self-government. 

Two controlling ideas in the selection of a curriculum have now 
been considered, the aim of instruction and the nature of children. 
Together these determine the main lines of study to be selected, and 
to a large extent also tiie actual topics in each line. Some topics may 
be inchided that the chiki nature does not greatly long for, as spell- 
ing, but in must respects these two ideas are seen to be in harmony 
with each other In the demands that they make. 

The third controlling idea in the selection of a curriculum is the 
peculiar conception that is hdd of the nature of each study, or the 
princi])le of the subject, as it is called. For example, geography deals 
with the inter-action between man and the earth, and, acconling to 
this definition, it is difficult to sec why the religions of the earth, the 
governments, the distribution of the races, and so much location of 
places should find a place within it. In fact, the principal reason 
why such topics have heretofore been accepted as a part of geography 
is that they were supposed to be desirable, and a better point could 
not be found at which to wedge them in. 

Likewise if reading or literature signifies classical literature, room 
can not be found in the course in literature for llie ordinary supple- 
mentary reading that aims simply at information. Many schools to- 
day have almost crowded out the English classics for the sake of such 




IN CURRICULA 



»7S 



I 
I 
I 



I 



mfonnation. Further, if history means a sludy of the main lines of 
institutional growth, il must include inucli more tlian the wars and 
other leading political events. It must describe the common methods 
of worship, the kinds of schools that prevail, and the customs in fam- 
ily lile. Until very recently these matters have been very largely 
omitted from history textbooks. 

The fourth contrulUng idea is correlation. After the most desirable 
subject matter lias been SL'Iccted in accordance with the three above- 
mentioned ideas, it still remains to adjust the parts of each term's 
work to each other, so that a close relationship among them may easily 
be established in the pupils* niintls. Without definite plans for cor- 
relation the teacher may, as expressed in a Massachusetts report, 
" lead her pupils to learn the commercial cities of Europe, the history 
of Mexico, the names of the planets, and the distinguishing char- 
acteristics of the orchid, to conjugate the verb ' to be,' to write a com- 
position upon perseverance, to read about the exploits of John Smith, 
to perform problems in partial payments, and to spell the names of 
the diseases — all to be studied and recited on the same day." Such 
an aggregation of subject matter is little conducive to permanence 
of interest, thoroughness of understanding, retentiveness of memory, 
utility of knowledge, or unity of personality. In such confusion a 
genius only can fully preserve his identity. 

One important relation of studies is largely agreed upon and prac- 
ticed in the better si-hools. Such formal subjects as written English, 
writing, spelling, illustrative scntc-nccs in grammar, and beginning 
and supplementary reading, arc made to draw their content primarily 
from other school subjects and from interesting home experiences. 
Some are inclined to make the same requirement in regard to articles 
made in manual training, sewing, and cooking. One class of chil- 
dren that I have known in manual training has recently constructed a 
canal lock, a grain elevator, and a water-wheel, showing the trans- 
ference of power ; each of these topics having been suggested by 
geography. A few teachers are opposed to solving " made-up " prob- 
lems in arithmetic, 'i'hey greatly prefer actual quantitative expe- 
riences arising out of concrete conditions that are suggested by other 
studies and by life. For example, history states that before the in- 
vention of the cotton gin, one laborer could clean only two pounds of 
cotton per day. After its invention, one laborer could clean too 
pounds per day. Tlien how nuich money was saved on too pounds, 
considering labor worth 50 cents per day? How much was saved 
per acre wheti the yield per acre was 180 pounds? In such a case 
the pupils would not need to work the examples for mere mental ex- 
ercise, but because the answer is wortli finding. In other words, 
there would be sufficient motive for menial alertness and accuracy. 
But how far correlation should be planned, to what extent it should 
determine the selection rind arrangement of topics, is still unsettled, 
although this is one of the great school problems of the future. 

Of course, other factors are also influential in determining the 
airrictdum. as the number of children under one teacher, and the 
special community in which the school happens to exist But the 
four ideas already mentioned are the chief ones. 





176 IDEAS FOR MISSIONARY TEACHERS 

What is the outcome? While tliflFcrcnces are strikingly present 
different localities, uniformities arc even more striking ; and the course 
of study now most commonly accepted varies radically from that of 
ten years ago. In the first place these fonr ideas arc being actively 
applied as a standard for tiic exclusion of topics. For example, the 
social aim of instruction makes little demand for the location of all 
the State capitals, also of small towns, capes, bays^ gulfs, and State 
boundary lines. Child nature makes less demand for it, and the 
nature of ReogTaphy makes almost none. It is probable, then, that 
in the near futxire not more than one-qtiartcr as much time will be 
given to these matters as was given a few years ago. 

Many important thoughts are involved in the determination of the 
curriculum. Every study should culminate plainly in the present 
time. Literature does it by creating a love of ideals that are imme- 
diate guides for practice. Geography does it by showing how pres- 
ent physical conditions are determining our industries ; and history 
should do It by dealing with institutional life in the past in such a 
manner as to throw light continually upon the institutional life of to- 
day. A study of topics that docs not lead into the present life and ac- 
tivity fails of its full effect. Theory and practice should go hand 
in hand ihrout^hout childhood, if they arc to remain companions 
throughout adult life. It is psychologically wrong to theorize for 
ten or twenty years with the idea that the next ten or twenty years 
will be spent in applying the theory. Habit is strong, and the second 
len or twenty years will be spent largely as the first ten or twenty 
were spent. The best way to prepare for adult life is to secure real 
self-expression during each day of school life. As Dr. Dewey ex- 
presses it in substance, we teach the child to write, not primarily be- 
cause of the demand for that ability ten years hence, but mther be- 
cause he wants to scribble now. and, by allowing him to scribble un- 
der supervision, he is giving such expression to an inborn tendency as 
will secure his best growth. 

Relation of Exprcssioii to Impresrioni 

Rev. Myron T. Scudder, Ph.D., Normal School, Nerv Palis' 
N. Y* 

Tn a certain home a girl fourteen years of age is employed to help 
care for a baby and to do some up-slairs work. She is just an aver- 
age girl, but that is equivalent to saying that she is accustomed to 
work, is capable, willing, uncomplaining, and thorough. She can 
see when things need to be done, and, without waiting to be told, she 
will go and do them. She has had a .whnoling that drew out the ac- 
tive side of her nature and eventually enabled her to contribute ma- 
terially to the happiness and comfort of the family with which she 
lives; indeed, of people wherever she goes. This illustrates the ad- 
vantages of an education where motor activity — expression — is em- 
phasized. Her immediate predecessor in this position, of about the 
same age, was exactly opposite in every respect. Although she was 
imusually attractive, ladylike, and bright, she was as useless and 
helpless as so many girls are when it comes to the actual doing of 

• C««nl Preihyteritn Churrh, AprJI »j. 




BELATION OF EXPRESSION TO IMFR£SSIO^fS 



«77 



r 



things, particularly in a home. For nine years, during the formative 
period of her life, the school had kept her at her books through morn- 
ing and afternoon in search of information that was supposed to be 
useful, but most of which, as the event proved, was useless for mental 
discipline, inspiration, or utility, and did nothing to enable her to 
orient herself with r^ard to her duty to herself or to her fellow-be- 
ings. During these years, the school had served in a measure to 
prevent her from gaining useful experiences elsewhere, fur it had 
taken her away from the home during ihe very hours in which it was 
possible to get training in household duties. 

This case illustrates the disadvantages of an education where 
motor activity^^xpression — is ignored, but where there are impres- 
sions galore from books. 

In our theories as to what a school should be, we are shifting over 
from a basis of " hew much do you know ? " to " how much can you 
do?" from an education that emphasizes information, passive listen- 
ing, and bookishness, to an education that gives one a masterful ac- 
()Liaintancc with action, with things, with human nature as well as 
with the treasures of thought that we inherit in books. Learning by 
doing is the thought that is gaining ground so rapidiy. Professor 
James gives us the following maxim; "No reception without re- 
action; no impression without correlative expression." " An impres- 
sion," he says, " which simply flows in at the pupil's eyes or ears, and 
in no way modifies his active life, is an impression gone to waste. 
It is physiologically incomplete. Even as a mere impression it fails 
to produce its proper effect upon the memory, for to remain fully 
among the acquisitions of memory, it must be wrought into the whole 
cycle of our operations." 

An awakening appreciation of the fact that education ought to 
deal more directly with tlie immediate interests of children, led same 
years ago to the introduction of object-lessons in teaching; but "no 
number of object-lessons." says F'rofessor Dewey. " got up as object- 
lessons, for the sake of giving information, can afford even the 
shadow of a substitute for acquaintanci: with the plants and animals 
of (he farm and garden acquired through actual Jiving among them 
and caring for tlicm. No training of sense-organs in school, intro- 
duced for the sake of training, can begin to compete with the alert- 
ness and fullness of sense-life that comes through daily intimacy and 
interest in familiar occupations. Verbal memory can be trained in 
committing tasks, a certain discipline of the reasoning powers can be 
acquired through lessons in science and mathematics, but, after all. 
this is somewhat remote and shadowy compared with the training of 
attention and of judgment that is acquired in having to do things 
with a real motive behind and a real outcome ahead." 

Now the changes in school administration called for by the above 
considerations will extend not only to the curriculum, but tn school 
government, and to what we have come to call the outside interests 
of pupils, namely — their sports, athletics, amusements, home-read- 
ings, collections, etc. 

First, as to the curriculum; This must be characterized bv less 
bookishness. This does not mean that we should do away with the 



J 





178 IDEAS FOB MISSIONARY TEACHERS 

Study of books; on the contrary, many more books will be needed 
than the scliools use now. But instead of the use of books as an end 
in itself, or for the mere sake of nienlai training or of information, 
the emphasis is placed on the use of books as an incident in education. 
A child when he leaves school is not going to spend his waking hours 
in reading, writing, and arithmetic, but largely in motor activities, in 
working, eating, and amusing himself. How important that some of 
the work of the school should have a direct bearing then on health and 
living. As a preparation for everyday life, the curriculum, particu- 
larly in the earlier years, but in a measure up into the secondary 
schools, must emphasize the industrial arts and domestic sciences ; 
making an intelhgent programme of drawing, painting, modeling, 
shop-work, weaving, sewing; of making beds, ventilating, cleaning, 
cooking, kitchen and window gardening, beautifying house and 
grounds, caring for the sick, first aid lo the injured, and other arts 
that pertain to home comfort and happiness. 

It ought to be an indispensable requirement that some of the sub- 
jects in every course of sCudy should bear directly on the home- 
making and bread-winning side of life. Mrs. Alice Freeman Palmer 
is absolutely right when she says; " It is sheer cruelty lo send our 
sons and daughters out into the world to gel a living without first 
having learned the use of their hands." In this connection, too. Miss 
Conro. of Pratt Institute, ought to be quoted. She says: " It is a 
matter of common observation that a purely intellectual culture has 
failed to accomplish the needful preparation for the many sides and 
serious demands of daily life. No one believes that the culture is at 
fault, or that it is superfluous; it is felt rather that something more 
is necessary. If, then, to a broad culture we add special instruction 
bearing directly on health and living, the desired end is perhaps 
attainable." 

There is a fiber that comes into character as a result of doing things 
for one's self, that rural boys and girls get, but that is not unlikely to 
be lacking in the young people of cities and villages. These, with no 
chores to do, or other opportunities for work at home, and with no 
provision in schools for giving play to the motor activities, are in dan- 
ger of falling far short of their possibilities. " Education knocks the 
hustle out of bfjys," said the mayor of one of our large cities, and 
there is altogether too much truth in what he said. Many people 
seem to feel that in order to train the mind and moral nature, books 
alone will suffice. Yet xt may be questioned whether a book is of 
more value for this purpose than a properly handled tool. Industrial 
work has great disciplinary value for the mind. It develops the pow- 
ers of observation and attention; it trains the eye, ear, and hand to 
precision ; it produces order, neatness, and accuracy ; it inculcates 
habits of industry and thrift; thus it givrs a boy more tlian a trade; 
it gives him power lo succeed at any trade or in any walk of life. Btit 
it does even more than thi.";; it leads one into a wider, deeper sym- 
pathy with all manual laborers. For if a man's muscle and mind 
have by practice been adjusted to the nicety requisite to produce a 
finished piece of work, then will he appreciate a well-constructed ar- 
ticle wherever he sees it and enter at once into sympathy with its 
maker. Thus manual labor dignified by intelligence and by high 



J 



RELATION OF EXPRESSION TO IMPRESSIONS 



179 



ideals, not only aids in life's struggle, but tends to obliterate class 
distinctions and to promote general conteiitnicnl. Motor activity as 
developed by proper schedules of manual training, has its influence 
on character as well as on mind and budy. 

Dr. Scripture, of Yale, poinis out that by exercising, say, tlic right 
hand or arm the left hand or arm, though not exercised, gains in 
straigth ; and that by practicing on the piano willi the one liand only, 
the other hand gains in speed and skill almnst to the extent of the 
piacticed hand. It is, therefore, clear that the effects of practice in 
one part of the body arc extended through the medium of the brain 
centers to various parts of the body, " and that if the development of 
voluntary power (will-power) in one direction brings about a de- 
velopment in other directions, why can we nut expect that the devel- 
opment should be extended to the higher fiirms of will-power that go 
to make up character? '" The point is made that sports, games, and 
manual occupations arc among the lic^t developers of character. 
Many instances are on record where the character-building qualities 

■ of a well-planned scheme of industrial work have Hone a redeeming 

■ work in what might have been supposed to be a hopeless case. 

Mr. R. R. RnADER, Ph.D., Teachers' College, Columbia Urn- 
I'ersity, Nero Vork.^ 

One of the great educators of this country has made some such a 
statement as this: " Give me a chart of the range, power, and skill 
of a man's hand, and I will tell you what tlcgree of brain develop- 
ment there is there." Put that alongside of the statement made by a 
good many who have studied tlie conditions of labor in the South. 
The reason that colored labor can not be so successfully employed in 
the new cotton mills is because of the fact that they have not 
brains in fheir fingers ; that the varioiis delicate activities that are re- 
quired, manual dexterity, etc., arc beyond tlu-m : that they ran perform 
only the grosser kinds of work. Several years ago T was in charge 
of an American school in which a number of pupils each spring were 
obliged to leave school to work on famis. T never hesitated upon 
their return in the fall to put them in the same cla«5 they were in 
when they left. Although there was three months of additional in- 
stniclion for the pupils wlio remained during that time, those who 
worked on fanns vcrv soon caught up with the rest nf the class. 

All these facts would seem to indicate that certainly industrial in- 
struction is mr>re educative than simply intellectual instruction, or the 
imparting of knowledge. We all know that the home as an educa- 
tional institution has deteriorated within the last fifty years. Tt has 
become a place simply for tating and sleeping and a little social good 
time. We do not extract from It the educational vahre which we used 
to extract from it. The result is a lack of motor activity in the child. 
Deprive a home of all sen'ices for the children in it. and you have 
taken out of it one of its greatest educational factors. The increase of 
wealth which has resulted in the nudtiplication of servants has very 
lai^ly brought about this result. The school now is trying to fight 
its way back to the conditions that were fupiished fifty years ago, 

* Ccntnl Presbyterian Cfaurcb, April 15, 



1 



I 



tSo 



IDEAS FOR MISSIONARY TEACHERS 




and so we are introducing all kinds of manual training and domestij 
art and science into our schools. 

Rev. CLEt^ND B. McAfee, Ph.D., D.D., Park College, Park- 
vUle, Mo* 

One thing that Professor Dewey has called our attention to — Be- 
yond a certain stage you do not dare to give a student something to 
do simply that lie may be doing it. With a child you can do that, but 
not with mature people. Some of you know what has been done in 
Park College. Its success has been in being able to say to the stu- 
dents : You do this work, not for the sake of learning how to work 
onJy. but for the sake of jnaking your education possible. We have 
many letters from the foreign field, asking \vhat is the method? Is it 
possible to provide such a means of self-support as shall call for per- 
sonal training? 

Ill some colleges in this country the boys are taken isUo a room and 
are shown how to build a brick arch. Then it is toni down and built 
up again. I would not like lo ask the students of Park College to do 
that : I would have them build thai brick arch over a door in a build- 
ing in which they are afterward to live. There is no reason I can 
bCC why we should not carry this principle of manual training up to 
a point of manual labor for the building of the institution. 

Dr. Browning, the President of the Institute at Santiago, Chile, 
wrote me some time ago about introducing some such method there. 
*' The trouble is," he said, " we do not see where there will be profit- 
able or satisfactory employment." By profitable he means labor that 
can be carried on by the smdents for their own good and for the good 
of the institution. I wrote him that if he could not find something of 
that kind, he had better not try manual labor at all. I have watched 
for twenty-five years the working of this plan, and it will work when 
there is something worth while for a student to do, but not simply 
as an exercise in doing. 

Aim* of IVIaaual Tniiring 

Mrs. Mary Sceienck Woolmak, Teacher^ College, Columbia 
University, New Vork.f 

The child must be trained to act. To provide him with culture 
alone will not accomplish this. If we listen to the voices, it seems as 
though the whole world were ringing with this thought. It has come 
to us through the Middle Ages. It has been spoken by sage after 
sage — that there must be a training in activity if efficient work is to 
be done — but we do not heed. Those w!io are studying the develop- 
ment of races tell us that primitive people were raised by activity 
linked with ihought. It is when thought and expression are combined 
that the best results come, but still the world does not listen, and wc 
even yet cling close to the three R's. 

We must consider carefully the studies we give the child; whether 
there be the possibility of real activity in them or not. They must 
touch his interests; be connected with the life of the present, and lead 
to immediate action. Eacli study must have two sides. It must be 

• Cenml Pre»b)rteri«n Church, Apriri5. 
t Centnl PretbytcrUo Cbofcli, April •;. 





t 



I 
I 



I 



I 



AIMS OF MANL'AL TR.MNING iSl 

Strong in thought, and it must also give some means of expressing 
this thought. Do all the studies in the present curriculum give us 
!)oth? I fear not. Those studies which combine both thoUf:;ht and 
action are of most worth in the curricuhim. Expression other than 
oral may take the form of writing, drawing, sewing, or any other 
kind of manual work. Manual training was placed on the curric- 
ulum with only a partial grasp of the idea of combining thought and 
expression. I'he mechanical side was entphasize<l, but the thought 
side was the teacher's rather than the child's. The curriculum can 
not do without manual training. Bui if manual training is to do for 
the child what it is fined to do, wc must plan the work so that it shall 
require executive thought from the pu])il, so that his own self-activity 
shall come into it, and the whole curriculum shall lead to efficient 
action. 

The simple home tasks may be educative in a high degree, if the 
children are taught to reason from cause and eft'ect. Cooking and 
sewing may develop deep thought; they may be valuable in the field 
of education if the activity follows the results of the child's own 
thoughts and plans. These two home tasks may also be strong in 
their training for social service. The child may be led to feci her con- 
nection with the working worUI around her; may learn that she can 
do for others, or may be led through simple tasks at first to the incli- 
nation to help in greater ways in the world. I have said " may be " of 
value in education and social service. Unfortunately they often are 
not. For instance, in sewing we have thought that a course of pre- 
scribed models made in exact fashion would accomplish the best man- 
ual training results; we have even given these same models in cer- 
tain parts of the mission field where the pupil could have little or no 
use for such lines of work. There was no thought for the interest of 
the children or fur future social service in the work. Every part of 
the world has characteristic handwork of its own. The Mission Ex- 
hibit shows many of these interesting evidences of constructive 
thought. Thc.w very articles in countries where they originated 
might prove valuable in manual training for the children, 

It is not so all-Important that a child do a piece of work per- 
fectly at first. The child should be so interested in the artick as to put 
his whole heart into it, and execute the idea to the best of his ability ; 
Iiis own will power acting. To-day T listened to a class of children 
who were considering a question of patching. They were to decide 
what to do in a certi^in case. For nearly three-quarters of an hour 
these children worked hard. At the end of the time, with quite 
a sigh, one of the girls said: " I have not thought so hard for a 
year." The whole thought of ways and means of repairing a gar- 
ment had been put before iheni and they tried to solve all points con- 
nected with it. They had really a knotty point in hand, and its soHi- 
tion meant not only hard thought and executive ability, but also re- 
quired skillful handwork in carr>'ing the ideas into effect. 

Miss Margaret C. Davis, Missionarv, Presbyterian Church, U. 
.?. A.. India* 
Wh en I went to India the first thing I had to do was to prepare 

'Central Pre«b]rtrria[i Ctiurcl),. April n. 




_l 




l82 IDEAS ?DR MISSIONARY TE:ACHERS 



girls of fourteen or fifteen to pass Government examinations. One 
of the tilings 1 had to prepare those girls in was " Domestic Econ- 
omy." Thai sounds all right, but it was not domestic economy for 
those girls. It was leaching them how to scrub floors. They had 
never seen a scrubhing-brush, and one day they came to me and said: 
" We will go and scrub the floors of our rooms with our hair- 
brushes." 1 said : " You will wear them out. That will not do." 
They said : " Well, we can use our clothes bnishcs.*' I said : " You 
can't scrub floors with a clothes brush." Then they said : ** Let us ask 
the man who takes care of the horse for the currj'combs." They 
were determined to put in practice what they had learned. At every 
turn there was a desire for working out problems, and yet there was 
not the time for it. nor the means for it. 

As I passed the little children's Titom each day, I saw them adding 
up, " 2 and 4 makes 6," without having any idea what 2 and 4 were. 
I knew that up in their dormitories they probably had kittens, or par- 
rots or other birds hid in drawers or washbasins. They had a pas- 
sionate love of life, tliat I have never seen equaled in any other chil- 
dren ; but no use was made of it. If they caught spiders, they were 
thought naughty, because we American teachers were not used to 
spiders of that size. But it was the love of nature that made them 
gather up caterpillars, and spiders, and little lizards; and that, of 
course, was where we American and Enghsh girls could not sympa- 
thize with them. 

I have seen often, that the missionary, if he only had the teacher's 
training, would find his work much easier. The natives are children! 
There is the educated class of natives, of cotirse, in India, to deal 
with whom you need all your menial training and the kci-nest power 
of thought. Rut they, after alt, arc the smallest part of the people. 
The missionary would often find, had he the teacher's training, that 
he has thought people stupid or rebellious, when they have only been 
bewildered; they have not understood, and have been given to know 
that they have not come up to what is expected of them. I think the 
missionary would find, among the small villages in the interior, that 
what he often takes for obstinacy is merely a lack of understanding; 
and if the principles of teaching were used in presenting the gospel to 
these people, the natives miglit understand more quickly, and this 
woidd make the work more efficient. 

And there is another point concerning India. Manual training can 
be used there to great advantage. They are very deft with their 
fingers, and all the beautiful things which we get from those coun- 
tries have arisen not from a desire for outward ornamentation and 
decoration, but from need. You take some of the embroidered cloths 
which we bring home ; they have been first embroidered not merely 
to hang up as a piece of drapery, but they were used for the women's 
head dresses. You find the brass vessels which they use very beau- 
tiful in form, but they were not made because they were beautiful 
in form. Tliey were made because Ihcy needed brass vessels, or metal 
vessels of some sort^ — because they can cleanse metal vessels in a way 
in v,*hich they could not cleanse clay ones. Tlietr water jars are made 
porous, of a sandy clay, because they allow the water to cool by com- 




J 




WILL CULTURK BY MANUAL TRAINING 



tSs 



tng to the outside and evaporating^. They are of exquisite form some- 
times, but yet the form has not been the first idea. They are circular, 
because there has been first a need. 

Rev. Robert Laws, M.D., F.R.G.S., Missionary, Free Church 
of Scotland, Cctttral Africa.* 

During the past twenty-five years we have had in our mission more 
or less uf industrial training, ahhough it is only in recent years that 
we have been able to carry it out fully. 

Coming to deal with the pupils, there is one peculiarity I should 
like to bring before you. Much of the rect-ptivity of the pupils de- 
pends upon the age that we get them. If we get a pupil who has 
never learned to read or never been in school, until he is twelve or 
thirteen years of age, we can teach him a little reading and writing, 
but further intellectual development along book lines will stop when 
he is fifteen years of age. When he is thirteen or fourteen years old 
he crystallizes. If we get a pupil earlier than seven or eight years of 
age that pupil will learn from his books until he is eighteen or twenty. 
Those who have not had education in letters until the later years will 
proceed with manual training, but they will not have the same deft- 
ness with manual labor as those who get their fingers trained earlier 
b life. Such is our experience with it. 

Then I quite agree that in seeking an education regard should be 
had to the place a pupil is to fill, what he is to do in actual life after- 
ward, and that the thing is, after all, to build up a Christlike char- 
acter, which shall fit them to do this work well. I hold most de- 
cidedly that doing can only go the length of being. A man must 
first be what he can do. 

Reference has been made to the need of the preacher to have ability 
to teach. We feel this so much in Central Africa that we have a rule 
now that all who are to be theological students and become the pastors 
of the future, must take the training of our normal department. 

▼m Culture by Manual Tniiliag 

Mrs. H. J. Bruce, Tuskcgce College, Alabama.'f 
The negro question is to-day a question of education and of econo- 
mics. In the school at Tuskegee we are making that education largely 
industrial, and some description of our aim may be of use to others 
dealing with similar material. The educational needs of the blacks 
of the South, great as they arc, can be summed up. I believe, in 
a very few words — healthiness of will, and personal initiative. The 
question I shall ask you to consider is whether the industrial train- 
ing meets these needs. 

The first need. I have said, is healthiness of will. The man whose 
will is weak is an uneducated man. The man whose will has not 
been influenced toward virtuous purposes is an immoral man. Now 

Iwe know that the will may be made strong by de\'eIoping the capac- 
ity for sustained effort and the capacity ifor prosecuting a compli- 
cated series of means leading to a distinctly conceived end. And it 

fis precisely for these things that the industrial training is adapted. 

•Central Preibiriefian Church, April as. 
tCcDtr*! Pre*bTttflan Churcb, April 34. 



d 




184 IDEAS FOR UlSMONARY TEIACHEBS 

That training creates in the pupil an initial interest in the end pro- 
posed, because the successful completion of each step in industrial 
work is in itself a stimulus, and because the completion of the whole 
work is in a peculiar sense rewarded with the joy of achievement. 

Consider the matter of initial interest in the end proposed. Says 
Dr. Felix Adier : " There are plenty of boys who do not acquire 
the habit of sustained effort in school for the simple reason that they 
lake no interest in the end proposed, be it the mastery of arithmetic or 
the study of gec^raphy, reading, or spelling. To arouse the will, the 
boy must have a strong interest in the end proposed. There arc very 
few boys indeed, who are not at once alert and interested if the thing 
proposed be the making of a wooden box, or to handle tools to pro- 
duce some other fine result in the shop." 

Not only dcx's industrial traimng arouse the pupil's Interest at the 
start, but it keeps that interest alive. The work of the shop is per- 
fectly tangible. Having completed one step, the student sees with 
his own eyes precisely how mudi he has accomplished and how well 
he has succeeded. Spurred on at every step by increasing success, 
the pupil is ultimately rfwarded with the glory of achievement. Says 
Doctor Adler again : " The box is in procf ss of making for weeks ; 
the object upon which the pupil toils is kept steadily before his eyes. 
He can not become distracted, and allow his fancy to wander; for the 
object is ritrht before him. He must buckle his will down to it. The 
series of means is prolonged and complicated. When the box is com- 
plete the pupil is rewarded by his success." In the words of Presi- 
dent Eliot, of Harvard University, manual training " trains the mind 
through success, through achievement, through doing something 
tangible and visible, and doing it well." You see, then, the pupil is 
interested at the start; as he completes each step, he is spurred on 
to the next ; he is abJe to put forth the maximum of energy for a 
maximum time, to go on through a prolonged and complicated series 
of efforts, because his first effort was crowned with success. It is in 
this way that the will is made strong. 

So, then, we have strengthened the will : but mir task is yet un- 
finished. We must yet influence the strong will toward virtuous pur- 
poses. In this matter the industrial education has advantages pecul- 
iarly its own. Not only are the ordinary educational processes car- 
ried on simultaneously with manual training, so that the brain shall 
be taught through the printed page, so that there are set before the 
pupil for careful reading the lives of the world's men of genius and 
the great things of literature, hut the industrial impulse is in itself 
moral. It is constructive; it brings into existence what is good, and 
useful, and beautiful. 

Moreover, shopwork is eminently calculated to bring the child of 
ignorance, hitherto nnlouched with the iipliflinjj power of a noble ex- 
ample, into personal contact with high-minded and whole-souled men 
and women who are more than instructors. In the shop the pupil is 
not separated from the teacher by the gulf of the printed page. Says 
the president of Harvard ; " Manual training and laboratory teaching 
are alike, in that they must be addressed to the individual. They 
break up class-work ; tliey break up a routine which tends to become 




I 



WILL CULTURE BV MANUAL TR.\IKINtt 185 

crushing', and they bring the teacher directly into contact with the 
individual pupil." To the vitalizing power of example is added the 
spirit of co-operation. There are industrial processes, such as the 
building of a wagon, which are best carried out by a number of stu- 
dents workmg to^'cihcr. Mutual helpfulness and valuable habits of 
industrial organization are the fruits of this co-operation. Then, too, 
industrial training does no little to create in the pupil habits of hon- 
esty in word and in deed. The heavy, flat luaf of bread convinces the 
girl in the cooking-school, as no other argument could, that careless- 
ness is a material sin. In tool-work rude approximations and hasty 
measurements arc uttterly useless. Ill-made joints bring on one the 
laugh of his fellows, ridicule, shame. If the pin does not fit the 
boring precisely, the conspicuous dishonesty of the workmanship is 
painful. Now the pin and its boring arc the physical expression of 
the student's mental conception of an ideal. If he be ashamed from 
very pride to express himself inacairately, that is to say, dishonestly. 
in terms of wood, will he not likewise be ashamed to express himself 
dishonestly in the symbols of a less palpable language.'' Will he not 
strive to make word and fact fit as precisely as pin and boring? 

If the exactness of industrial work teaches honesty, It also leaches 
that scrupulous care for minute details which we call neatness and 
orderliness. And neatness and orderliness make the personal liabits, 
and make the home clean and sweet. 

I have tried to show how well industrial training meets the primary 
need of a people like the negroes of the South : healthiness of will. 

And now I pass on to consider the matter of directive intelligence 
and personal initiation. Prof. O.scar Pcschel. in his " Races of Man," 
remarks the " power and the inclination of inferior races to adopt the 
benefits of foreign civilization." but adds that " on the other hand 
they are extremely deficient in inventions of their own." Here, too, 
is a. great educational need. 

Now industrial training develops directive intelligence — an intelli- 
gence which, when self-directive, we call personal initiative. A mo- 
ment's reflection discloses the conditions of directive intelligence to 
be two, the power to grasp mentally the conditions of new problems, 
and executive ability. No man can intelligently direct the activities 
either of himself or of others, unless he can firmly grasp the concrete 
conditicHis of an untried case, and can then vitalize his thoughts by 
action. How does industrial training meet these conditions? 

Consider first the question of conception. Future conditions we 
can not conceive unless we possess a keen perception of present con- 
ditions, unless wc can think in terms of things, unless we have an 
instinctive disposition to trace the operation of cause and effect. 

Keen perception, I say, is the first requisite. The very genesis of 
knowledge is perception. The progress of perception depends very 
largely upon the growth of visual and of tactual discriminalion, Now, 
as Mr. C. H. Ham has pointed out. " The purpose of manual educa- 
tion is primarily the training of the hand and the eye." Hence, draw- 
ing, as a mode of cultivating visual perception, is made one of its 
prominent features: and the introduction of tools in connection with 
wood, iron, and other materials is " for the purpose of so cultivating 



4 




lB6 IDEAS FOR MISSIONARY TEACHERS 

the hand as tc enable the mind to attain to a larger and more exact 
knowledge of things as they exist in nature and arc used in the arts/' 
That manual training sharpens the perception is beyond question. 

The second requisite of conception is the puwer to think in tcnns 
of things. The painter can not conceive his painting unless with the 
eye of his mind he can sec the forms and the colors he would throw 
upon his canvas. By no means sliouUi the educator neglect training 
in language, the most perfect of our vehicles of expression ; but the 
educator sliould remember that the tiling and not the worcT is the re- 
ality, that conception is in very large part dependent upon how far the 
thing forms the material of our thoughts. This ablh'ty to think in 
terms of things, it is the peculiar province of industrial training to 
develop. In the shop, in the sewing-rnom, in the cooking-school, 
things and not words arc the objects of study. The store of per- 
ceptual experience is made large, and conception is made to gain in 
accuracy, iu truth, in ntilily. 

Industrial training aids conception in another way; by creating in 
the pupil an instinctive disposition to trace the operation of cause and 
effect. The student plans his own work, and he can not plan it intel- 
ligently unless he fully realizes the strength of the materials he is 
to use. the manner in which his materials may be most effectively 
combined, why one arrangement is. for a given purpose, better than 
some other arrangement. Here, yott see, the understanding of the 
connection between cause and effect is imperative. 

Then. too. effects are conspicuous ; they can not be escaped. Here 
is a boy putting hoops on a barrel. For this particular barrel the 
hoops shoidd be very strong. The boy uses hoops of the ordinary 
strength, Hardly is the job finished when the hoops burst and 
the barrel is a shapeless pile of sticks. His neglect of the causal re- 
lation is immediately and inevitably punished in a perfectly tangible 
way. An instinctive disjrosition to trace the operation of the law of 
cause and effect is the result. 

But even here our task is unfinished. To endow the pupil with 
directive intcUigence and initiative, we must go one step farther and 
develop executive ability, the power of doing things as distinguished 
from thinking, or talking, or writing about them. " Education," 
someone has sald^ " is the development of all the powers of man to 
the culminating fxiint of action. . . . Theoretical knowledge is 
incomplete." Now in manual training, theory is made complete by 
actual practice. Thought precedes action, hut action is always the 
last link in the chain. Here is a boy drawing the plan of a wagon: 
his work is not complete until his wagon is an accomplished fact, until 
his thought has been vitalized by action. And so it is in the shoe 
shop, in the cooking-school, in the sewing-school, in the blacksmith 
shop. Neither thought without action, nor action without thought 
is tolerated. Everywhere the plan and the act are so bound together 
that the pupil comes to feet that they are integral parts of one and 
the same process. Such training can hardly fail to develop the 
executive faculties. 

By developing the student's perceptive powers, his capacity to think 
in terms of things, and by creating in him an instinctive dJspositit 




>positioa_- 



BREADTH OF INSTRUCTION 



«87 



to trace the operation of cause and effect, wc give him the power to 
grasp the condition of untried problems. Executive ability the stu- 
dent gets from the general character of industrial work. We aim 
to make men carpenters and io make carpenters men. The indus- 
trial ideal and the educational ideal are in alt essentials one great ideal, 
inseparable, indivisible, harmonious. 

Rev. W. T. A. Barber. M.A., B.D., Cambridge. England* 

It is not the wisest thing, surely, to set boys to practice identically 
the thing they are going to do as men. It is the wiser thing to fur- 
nish them with independence of character, breadth of instruction, and 
also ability to use their minds, which will enable them to ttim to any- 
thing when they become men. 

The whole of the British public school system aims at individuality. 
Wc arc not like the Continental nations, nor the American nation, 
with its system of educational thought. 

The way we manage discipline is this : The school is governed 
by boys whom I choose. I choose them for general influence for 
good in the school, occasioned in various ways — their size, or excel- 
lence in books, or in any other way. I choose a dozen or so boys 
most influential, and the whole of tlic discipline of the school is in 
their hands. They govern ; they punish ; they are responsible for the 
things that go on. If anvthing goes wrong, I say; This hurts the 
school. You must put that dtnvn. 

We all know what ;jLiicksilver people boys are. We must make 
provision for tliat perpetual motion, and we do it largely through our 
games. .\s T suppose you have in your American schools, we have 
in our English schools, carpenter shops and metal workshops, and 
other shops, as well as the games. We have our elaborately con- 
structed scientific buildings, in which there is a great deal of manipu- 
lation. The hoys can even make capillary tubes there and burn their 
fingers. 

But we have on the other side, as the alternative, the classical side, 
where there is scarcely any natural science. If I take two boys and 
put them on these two sides, at the end of the year the boy who is 
developed most roundly is the boy on the classical side. I am not a 
classical man myself. I am a scientific man. I have asked others the 
same question, and have got the same answer. I believe you arc 
likety to make a man better fitted for his work if you stick to book 
learning. 



1 




'Central I^ibjln^ifi Chttreh. April if. 



J 



CHAPTER XXXI 

MEDICAL MISSIONS 



The Physician as an Evangelist — Qualifications of the Medical Missiouary- 
MospttaL and Dispensary — Trainingo! Native Assistants — Troiaing Other 
Natives in Mediciae. 




J 



The Pfiyiidaii as an Evajaffdllit 

F. P. LvNCH, M.D., American Baptist Missionary Union, 
Africa* 

It is my purpose to show how, among the primitive people ot 
Africa, the toiifh of medicine can have an inHucnce in opening the 
heart, in breaking down superstition, and in giving a wider range 
for the entrance of the Word and the Gospel of Light. Think of 
these millions of men, in the far outposts of progress, far from civili- 
zation, surrounded onSy by superstition, whose nerves arc as keenly 
sensitive to pain as arc your own. who have no knowk-dge of any 
power or any opportunity of rcHef ; and who, when jiain touches 
lliem with its iron grasp, must needs He helpless and struggle in its 
fearful agony until the pain has spent itself, or is forever stilled in 
the touch of death. When a medical man comes with his fine science 
amongst these people, he seems to conic as a worker of miracles. He 
opens up a new realm, he breaks down doors of superstition. So 
is often the first herald of the Cross in the places of pioneer miss! 
work throughout the world. 

There came to our station once an old man who said, " My daugh- 
ter is sick. If I bring her here will you cure her? " " What is the 
matter?"' I asked. He replied, " She can not walk." " How Ion 
has she been so ? "' " Five or six months." " Where do you live ? 
*' Three days from here." " How will you get her here if she can 
not walk? *' " We will carr\* her. Will you cure her? " " We can 
not say about that, but bring her here and we will see." ^ 

She was brought, and remained for four months. Wlien she went 
she walked. She went back to her town, passing through a country 
that had always held a closed door to our missionaries. The people 
had always kindly but positively refused to receive visits; but when 
that woman went along that journey of three days she carried a new 
message, a new hope. She said, " We have not understood the peo- 
ple at God's Station. They are for our good. See me. I was carried. 
Now I walk." And a few months after that, when my colleague and 
I went through that country, every door was open. In almost every 
place there had been those who had heard of the medical work, or, 

*Caraecie ll&II. Acirlljo. 



m 





THE PHYSICIAN AS AN EVANGELIST 189 

had seen it, and at the end of tlie three days' journey the entire town 
seemed to come out to give us a royal welcome. 

One day there came to us an object, crawling like an infant on its 
hands and knees. It was a woman, who had been slowly crawling 
over the burning sand for two days and a haU. She had once been m 
our hospital. She had improved, and had gone back to her town. 
But again she became sick and helpless. In all the land there was no 
hand to reach out and help her. And then there came into her heart 
the thought. " If I can only reach God's Station, there will be help 
for me! " And so with a bravery bom out of stem necessity, she 
started on this fearful journey, crawling for two and a half days. 
But at last she won the desired end. and was it not a blessed thing 
that her hope was not disappointed? She found in the name of Go<i, 
at " God's Station," food and shelter and medicine. Before I left 
she stood up again, healed in body, helped in soul, going back into 
the country vvith a new hope In her heart, with a new sense of the 
far-reaching love of the Great Physician. 

And so, my friends, the medical missionary to-day stands on the 
advancing line to break down superstition, to open a way for the 
ministers of God, to bring these people nearer to the great hope of the 
world, the Love of Christ. 

Mrs. Ida Faye Levering, M.D., Missionary, American Baptist 

Missionary Union, India.* 

To have you fully appreciate the woman physician's onpnrtimities, 
I shall have to introduce you into the homes of some 01 the women 
of India. 

I will first take you into the home of some Mohammedan women 
because their lives, of all lives in India, arc more dcsiitate than any- 
thing you can imagine. 

Wc first enter a court, through a door in a blank wall on a side 
street. It is quite a large court, paved, and on one side of it arc the 
men's quarters. If wc should enter the rooms we would find that 
the men have caqiets on their floor, one or two chairs, and. perhaps, 
a chandelier, but no other furniture to speak of. Tlicy know nothing 
nf books and pictures. On the opposite side of the court you will 
find the animals stabled. Just opposite to where we stand there is a 
little door which we are bidden to enter. We go through it and enter 
a narrow court, made crooked so as to prevent the women from see- 
ing through the gate of the men's quarters. There we are ushered 
into the court of the women. It is a barren paved court, where you 
find old women and young women, and sen-ants. In that court the 
servants are all women. Two women, reclining languidly on cush- 
ions uix>n the floor, are the ladies of the house. They are covered 
with jewels, because they expect us. and want to impress us with 
their beauty. But oh such faces \ \\''omcn whose desires, and hates, 
and griefs have eaten into their hearts, until the hardness of their 
faces makes the heart ache for them T They have nothing to do ex- 
cept to gossip and visit each other. M^ien they go out they must go 
in closed palanquins to visit their friends and talk about the latest 

• Cvnegle Hall, April sC. 



i 





X90 MEDICAL MISSIONS 

Styles in dress. They may not see the face of a man, and they suffer 
and die with only what care their own women folk can give them. 
For this reason a woman physician is welcomed most cordially. 
They IcU her what ihey will teli nobody else in all the world, of their 
sorrows and pains, and they will allow her to do what they will allow 
nobody else, and they will listen to the gospel from her. And as they 
listen to words about the Lord Jesus Christ, they are glad, and say, 
" Oh, if there were only such a hope for us ! " 

Next 1 will take you to the home of the Hindu \vomen of India; 
the women among whom wc work principally. Among these Hindu 
women there are many classes. There is the beautiful, light-footed, 
fine-looking, graceful Brahman woman, to whose home we enjoy 
going. Of course, a Brahman has to regard us as unclean, and when 
we go into the sickroom the family will not touch us. But in those 
Brahman homes we feel that our best work is going to be done. 
Those women, too. may never see a man physician, and they greet a 
woman physician most joyfully. Their lives are very sad. A Brah- 
man woman must he married before she is twelve years of age. 
Sometimes she is married when she is five or six or seven years of 
age. Until this great event the one thought is to be married, and 
after it the one thought is the children that shall come. If children 
do not come, life is sad, and if they do come, life is hard. The wife 
is not old enough to be a mother, and the children's lives show the 
effects of this, and so it goes on througli generations. A woman. 
after birth of her first baby, is put in a small room in the darkest. 
dirtiest part of the house. She has nothing to eat and nothing to 
drink for several days. She is given drugs to keep her quiet, and she 
stays alone in that dark room, lying in a sort of stupor until the 
eighth day, when she is brought out into the family. 

We also go into the homes of the poorer people, the oul-casic wom- 
en, who are like beasts of burden. They go to their work in the early 
morning, and the mothers who have little childaTi. have to give them 
opium to keep them asleep until they return. The woman who 
has to do this that she may work, gets four cents a day. If she is ill. 
unless her husband is a better man than usual, her children must do 
without food. In fact, when a woman is sick, the whole family — 
Ifflhics, larger children, and mother — fall upon the doctor's hands to be 
fed and cared for untif the mother is able to work again. That is one 
reason our medical work can not be self-supporting. 

As r entered these different homes. I longed continually for a good 
hospital. When we got a hospital for women our hearts were very 
grateful. Think of going into a one-room mud hut without any fur- 
niture, and trying to perform an operation, and then compare that 
with the same operation performed in a place fitted up as a hospital. 

Miss Rachel Benn, M.D., Mixsionary, Methodist Episcopal 
Church, Ticn-Tsiv, China.* 

The root of China's redemption must be in her heme life; but who 
is to reach that secluded circle ? Not the minister, be he ever so faith- 
ful, lie can preach to the women until they wiggle, and twist, and 

• Madlfion At»uc Reformed Cburch, April i*. 



J 




OPPORTUNITY OF THE WOMAN PHYSICIAN 



191 



I 



turn to their neighbor with. " He says what? I do not understand," 
just as the women did in Paul's time, tilt he had to command them 
to keep silence in church, and ask their husbands at home; but the 
good brother might be hard at work in China for ten limes ten years 
— if by reason of great strength he could endure that long — and not 
sec anything of the home life of the Chinese women, because by rea- 
son of his sex he is debarred from entering where it is to be seen. 

There is one way, however, of becoming acquainted with the Chi- 
nese home hfe as it is. The woman physician can penetrate the 
farthest corner of her sister-woman"s seclusion. Slie goes, too. as a 
friend, taking with her hcaHng for soul as well as body. She knows 
the domestic life, because her work takes her everywhere, from the 
yamen, or Government House, to the most abject mat hovel; into the 
inner circle of the Mohammedan, Buddhist, Taoist, Confucianisl, and 
Roman Catholic homes. She sees the prayer-room ; the boy-baby idol 
dressed and cared for as though a real bahy ; the paper idols in their 
straw shrines in the homes of the poor, and the bronze idols in those 
of the rich; the mystic characters on slips of red paper on the wall 
under the table with sticks of incense burning before them; the 
charm worn round the neck 10 ward off the devils; the family shrine 
with its ancestral tablets^ costly vases, and incense burners ; and the 
image of the Virgin Mary in the shrine formerly occupied by the 
Mother-of-God of idolatry. She is brought into direct contact with 
the concubines, the mothers-in-law, the slave girls, the victims of 
opium or alcohol, with drunken husbands, with suicide, infanticide, 
and foot-binding; the awful harvest of suffering reaped by wives and 
children from the immorality of the husbands. Occasionally, loo, 
she ccmcs in contact with a real man, who in spile of customs, and 
power, and ridicule, loves his wife and shows her every mark of kind- 
ness. To the woman doctor comes the little slave girl, almost mur- 
dered, the childless wife whose husband is about to discard her, Che 
thirteen-year-old daughter-in-law, whose mother-in-law has beaten 
her eye out, and the child whose poor little crushed feet, intlamed and 
suppurating with decaying bones, appeal to her from the cruel band- 
ages. To the woman doctor these come, and pour into her sym- 
pathetic ear the story of their lives. 

Various reasons had been given for the fiendish custom of foot- 
binding, none of which were potent enough t(5 explain the hold on the 
matrimonial prospects of Chinese girls which foot-binding pos- 
sesses. At last a patient unwillingly revealed to the woman physi- 
cian its unutterable, vile meaning, which makes it the foul seal set 
upon the womanhood of China by Phallic worship. Foot-binding 
they call " only a fashion, like the style of dressing the hair, or the 
cut of a garment." Foot-btnding is the private badge of that Anti- 
christ which is undermining the kingdom of God the world over. It 
must be utterly, ruthlessly blotted out. if we are to see the Christian 
Chinese home established. Without tliis there can be no redeemed 
China. 

A missionary agent brings both grace and knowledge to the up- 
lifting of the people. The woman physician in China, as such an 
agent, presents many important qualities, but I will mention but the 



J 




»9» 




UEDICAL MISSIONS 



three most important, viz. — as a door opener ; as an educator ; as an 

evangelist. . ^ . . . 

As a breaker-down of prejudice, medicine in Cnina has been so 
successful that this oflficc has ecHpscc! all else, and has come to be 
considered, both at home and here, as the main object of medical 
missionary work. No one at all acquainted with the history of mis- 
sion work in North China, but knows what a prestige and security the 
friendship of Li Hung Chang has given. His friendship was se- 
citrtd by the professional help rendered Lady Li and himself by Dr. 
I^onora Howard King and Dr. McKensie. While in the United 
States, Li Hung Chang spoke in the highest terms of mission work, 
and said, "Send us more missionaries; especially doctors." This 
was published everywhere. Not long ago tlie Chinese Minister at 
Washington spoke to one of our leading workers in the Methodist 
Woman's Foreign Missionary Society in the same high praise of the 
work of that society's representatives in Tien-Tsin. Mrs. Wu was 
our patient when hving in Tien-Tsin, before going to Washington. 
Such testimony coming from sucli representatives of China goes a 
long way toward making friends for missionary work, both at home 
and abroad. However, it is an egregious mistake to suppose that to 
" open doors that the gospel may follow " is the province of medi- 
cine. The physician, especially the woman physician, does open doors 
Indeed, but she walks through tlicrn herself into the most inaccessible 
stronghold of heathenism, the home, taking the gospel with her. 

Those who say, " Give the Chinese the Western education, and they 
will then be able to receive the truths of Christianity," arc wrong. 
That would be the body without the soul. Equally w-rong are those 
who say, " Convert the Chinese to Christianity, and the rest will take 
care of itself." That is the soul without the bo<ly, and life is only 
sustained by keeping soul and body together. Education is. then, as 
important a missionary agent as wc have, and must go hand in hand 
with the preaching of the gospel. 

Of all the Western education which is coming to China, there is 
none of such far-reaching results as the profession which does battle 
with the microbe; the profession which is to introduce sanitary meas- 
ures that shall do away with the filth diseases — typhus, malaria. 
cholera, anthrax, and plague. 

To help establish and maintain the medical profession on a right 
basis is the duty of every woman physician in heathendom, for unless 
we arc careful, the future medical profession of China will be a cu- 
rious compound of sorcery, dried lizards, and powdered lion's teeth, 
with a sprinkling of foreign medicine; whose sole aim will be to 
make money, and from the practice of which woman will be most 
carefully excluded. Every time the woman's professional title is ig- 
nored, or she does shoddy work, or some one pretends to be a doctor 
who is not one, or poorly prepared natives are graduated from our 
mission schools as doctors, the time is prolonged when Chinese 
women will continue to die of eclampsia because a breath of pure 
air reached them, and to give birth to devils, and to feed their new- 
born babes en chewed walnuts. 

The woman physician is an educator along: another line. To the 






THE PHYSiaAN AS AN EVANGEUST 



193 



I 



I 



Chinese she is aii astonishing rcvclalion. She coracs and goes as 
she pleases. She has no old vvuinan tf» watch lier. She reads books 
and talks Chinese, and is not obliged tu have a niotlicr-in-law 
'■ whether or no." She icHs of the most wonderful stale of existence, 
where the girls arc educated the same as llie boys, and a woman can 
be a merchant, a lawyer, a teacher, or a doctor, and is not obliged 
to be dependent on someone else for food and raiment; where the 
husband has but one wife, does not live with his mother, and docs 
not beat his wife. AU this is su alluring that one poor dying woman 
when told of the hereafter, and the glories of hcHven, exclaimed, 
" Don't talk to ine of heaven. 1 don't want to go there, I only want 
to come back to earth a foreign lady, and ride down street with my 
husband by my side, resting his hand on the side of my jin-ricksha ! " 

The work of the woman physician often brings her into positions 
of prominence and authority, which heathenism has never dreamed 
of as belonging to any but men. and teaches an object lesson indeed. 
Of this class was our connection with the Red Cross work during the 
war between China and Japan. It is doubtful wh«=lher among the 
war experiences of llie soldiers from Ilo-nan and Shan-tung there 
was anything more astoni.shing than their finding two of the hospitals 
in which they were treated presided over by women. It was no less 
a surprise lo the ofTicials who came to inspect tl:e work; and when 
the war was over, and mention of the service rendered was made at 
the highest court, on the hsl were the names of two women. 

My homeward journey happened to be part of the way on the same 
ship in which Li Hung Chang sailed to Russia, and one day he sent 
his scr\ant to bring me to him, where he was sitting on deck sur- 
rounded by his retinue. As I approached he rose, gave me his hand, 
invited mc to sit down and remained standing till I did so, then sat 
down, and conversed %vitli me about the Red Cross work, and my 
home country, which he expected to visit. As I rose lo go, he also 
rose, shook hands again, and remained standing till 1 had gone quite 
a distance down the {leek. Was it nothing that in a land where llie 
rulers are worshiped : where foreigners arc devils : where idolatry 
and superstition are the "'ery heart's blood of the jwoplc: and where 
woman is a chattel, that a h'igli official leaving his country amid the 
booming of guns, and received with great honor at every port where 
his ship touched, should thus in the presence of peoples of many na- 
tions honor a foreigner, a teacher of the Christian religion, a woman, 
and an unmnrried woman ? 

It is not, however, as a maker of frientls, nor yet as an educator. 
but as an evangelist that the woman physician can wield the greatest 
power as a missionary agent. Who like her has the opportunities for 
personal work with those who welcome her to their homes? Others 
have to seek or make their opportunities; her opportunities come of 
themselves, as may Ik? seen from what follows. 

The wife of a great man lies at death's do<jr. All native resources 
have failed, even burning incense, and placing in the patient's hair 
shps of red paper, upon wliich mystic symbols have been written by 
a holy priest. Consternation reigns. One last forlorn liope remains — 
the foreign doctor. She is sent for and received tn the lady's cliam- 



J 



194 




MEDICAL MISSIONS 



ber, where foreign feet never before have entered. The almost ex- 
hausted patient puts her hands together and lifts her beseeching eyes 
to tlic doctor. The eldest son rvishes in and throws himself at her 
feet, bumping his head on the floor, and begging for the life of his 
mother. The great man makes a low obeisance, and promises great 
reward and great fame if she will but save his wife. Fortunately, in 
spite of the ravages of Qiinese medicine and the follies of an ignorant 
midwife, the doctor is able to save both llie mother and child. Joy 
and astonishment take (he place of the former consternation. To them 
it is a miracle. " This is not a woman," ihey say, " no woman could 
do such wonders. It is one of the gods in the form of a foreign 
woman come to help us. It is our living Buddha!" Then the 
physician tells them of the true God who has blessed her Christian 
country, giving her the opportunity to learn how to save life, and of 
Christ His Son. who came to earth to help the suffering and teach all 
men of the Father's love. 

The next day the doctor is welcomed most cordially, and is soon 
sitting in the midst of an eagerly listening congregation. And there 
in the stronghold of the false gods, who occupy the elaborate shrine 
in the next room, she preaches the Gospel o£ Christ. Why, in all rea- 
son, should it be supposed that the Gospel thus preached In a friendly 
atmosphere will not reach the heart as directly as when preached 
from t!ie pulpit, or taught in a " woman's meeting " ? 

The woman physician has many such homes in which to preach. 
"When will you come again, doctor?" " The second day after the 
worship day," is the answer. This involves an explanation of the 
term. So there is a sermon on the Creation, the Creator, and the Sab- 
Irath. " I will give you a calendar and mark the day," and a Chris- 
tian calendar is taken from the medicine bag, the clay marked, and 
the Scripture lesson read and explained. When the doctor returns, 
the women beg: "Will ynu please give us another calendar? my 
great man wanted that for his room," Before the visit is over the 
great man himself, in his silken robes, comes in and asks the woman 
physician to explain the Scripture lesson on the calendar, saying that 
his friends had asked him the meaning, and he could not tell them. 

Again : In the home of the city too-ta.}, or mayor, grouped about a 
table covered with cakes and teaaips, at which the doctor is seated 
with the little boy. the pet of the family, in her lap, may be seen the 
iao-tai's two wives and several friends, while not far off the tao-tai 
himself is seated, listening as the doctor explains the Christian belief 
and form of worship. \Vlien she comes to the singing, she sings, 
" Jesus Loves Me." To her astonishment a voice from the court 
without joins in. " It is one of the servants," they explain, and call 
her in, and she tells how once when she was sick .she went to the 
Isabella Fisher Hospital, and while there learned the "Jesus doc- 
trine." An ignorant serving woman, she was wiser than her betters, 
and standing there, encouraged by the doctor's presence, she preached 
to her masters the gospel of love. 

Here is another case: " Doctor, if you can read Chinese, will you 
explain this hook," savs the scholar husband of the doctor's patient, 
putting into her hands a Methodist Hymnal, " Why, this is oi 





I 



THE PLACE OF MEDICAL WORK IN MISSIONS 195 

worship song-book! Are you Christians? " " No, hut wc ard learn- 
ing. You see we have no shrine, and no idols. Wc took tliem all 
down and gave them to Kai-nai-nai. She gave us this book and told 
us of the true God." Kai-nai-nai was a poor old widow, deaf as an 
adder, and half bent over, who niontlis before had been brouglit to the 
Isabella Fisher Hospital all broken up in an accident. We had lost 
all track of her after she left ihf hospital, and here she was in the 
house of a Chinese scholar, converting him to Christianity. 

In a poor man's home the new-born girl baby is not wanted, and is 
to be thrown away. With the little one in her arms, the doctor pleads 
for its life, telling of ihc Heavenly l-'atber's love for even this tiny 
babe, and His displeasure if its life is taken, and so day after day 
the doctor's opportunities find her, now among the sons of an official, 
who arc studying English, and having brought their books for her to 
hear them read, find something in the text refernng to God, which 
leads her to speak of heavenly things ; now in the dispensary, where 
a heart of stone must needs ache with pity. For in all these places, in 
places where in poverty and hlth a woman is slowly dying of an in- 
curable disease, and even on the street, where a woman has taken 
poison, and has thrown herself on the doorstep of her adversary to 
die. and where a crowd has filled the street both ways — even there the 
woman physician does the work of an evangelist. Her work is not 
of that class which consists in conducting " women's meetings," 
teaching in Sunday-schools, and attending public worship, but that 
individual personal work which is converting the world. This makes 
contact with such misery endurable. The pathos of a Chinese wom- 
an's life, as seen by the woman physician, would eat her heart out, 
were it not for the hope of changing its sorrow into joy. 

The Plicc of Medical Work In Mitdoos 

Rev. Geo. E. Post, M..\., M.D., D.D.S.. Professor, Syrian 
Protestant Coilcge, Beirut.* 

If the Good Samaritan had sat down by the side of the wounded 
man who fell among thieves, and spoken to him of his sins, and 
preached the Law and the Prophets to him. our matchless parable 
would never have been written, and the lawyer would have been as 
uncertain as ever as to who was his neighbor. But when the Samari- 
tan lionnd up the wounds, and p(jured over the bandajjes oil and wine, 
the best antiseptic dressing in his power, and then made an ambulance 
of his ass, and took the injured man to the nearest inn, and made pro- 
vision for his nourishment and nursing until his return, he became a 
true medical missionarv. and gave to our Saviour a luminous illus- 
tration of His own Golden Rule. We have been asked to write on 
the relation of medical work to mission work as a whole. In the 
short time allotted to us we can only mention the more important of 
these relations : 

I. Medical missions arc the pioneers of evangelism. They can be 
planted where no other branch of evangelistic work is possible. They 
are founded on a need which is universal, and felt by all. Every hu- 
man being is sometimes ill, and, when not ill himself, is often anx- 

* Ckrneglc Hall , April jd. 






196 MEDICAL MISSIONS 



ious on account of the illness of some relative or friend. The doc- 
tor, therefore, has immediate and welcome access to vast numbers 
who neither wish, nor will have, any intercourse with other mission- 
aries. From the moment that the doctor pitches his tent in an Arab 
encampment, or by an African kraal, or opens a dispensary in a Hindu 
village, or itinerates among the teeming muliitudcs of China, or opens 
a hospital in any of the cities of heathendom or Islam, he is besieged 
by applicants for his healing skill. The most bigoted Muhamniedan 
nioHah or fakir will kiss his liand, and beseech him in tones which re- 
call the plaintive appeals of the blind, the lame, the paralyzed, and of 
the fathers and mothers of the dying and the dead, to Christ Himself. 
Often those who have for their lifetime scoffed at Christ, and spit 
upon His followers, will beg, in the name and for the sake of Jesus. 
that the doctor woidtl take pity on them, or their father, or mother, or 
child. Men and women who have never heard of the Gospel will pros- 
trate themselves, and crawl the length of the room, to seize and kiss the 
feet of the doctor, to move him to pity their misery. A doctor may 
live in security among robbers and thugs. He can visit districts 
closed to all others. He is called lo the inmost recesses of the harem 
and the zenana. lie is a welcome guest in the hnvise of Jewish rab- 
bis, of Mohammedan tilenta, of Hindu and Buddhist priests. He is 
regarded as a guardian angel by the poor, and he stands as an equal 
before rulers and kings. 

2. Medical missions are permanent agencies of evangelism. Were 
the offices of the doctor merely a bribe to induce men to listen to the 
gospel ihey would soon lose their power to draw men to Christ. We 
belieye them to be a nccessarv* outcome of that humanity which Christ 
taught and lived. The ministry of healing is itself Christlikc. In pro- 
portion to its simplicity will it best sen'c its higher purposes and pre- 
pare its beneficiaries for its healing of (he soul. Long after the work 
of preaching, printing, teaching, and civilizing has been firmly es- 
tablished, medical work shoufd be continued as a missionary agency. 
In many instances its form may advantageously be changed. Instead 
of being pushed through the country by foreign doctors, schools of 
medicine may belter be established, by means of which native men 
and women may be traine<l to carry forward the good work. Model 
hospitals and dispensaries are required to make possible the ripest re- 
sults of modem science, and to give opportunity for prolonged in- 
struction, both in medical treatment and in mctlical evangelism. It 
will be many years, centuries perhaps, ere such agencies as these will 
cease to be required in connection with missionary work. 

3. Medical missions are the only efficient opponents of the quack- 
ery which is intimately associated with religious superstition. Those 
living in Christian lands can have little conception of the extent and 
power of quackery in the unevangelized world. Among the lower 
types of humanity in Africa. Polynesia, and aboriginal .■\merica, re- 
ligion is quackery. The abject fear of the unknown on the side of the 
people, and the devilish cunning and malice of the sorcerers and the 
medicine men or witch doctors on the other, have given to the latter 
an incredible power for evil. The people believe that woods, foun- 
tains, caves, rivers, are inhabited by malignant spirits or the ghosts 



POWER OF MEDICAL UISSIONS 



197 



lof dead men. They believe thai disease is produced by such spirits. 
Land that wizards and witches have the power to aHlict their victims 
ivith all sorts of complaints. The witch ductors diligently foster these 
[superstition.^ and pretend to be able to find out by their incantations 
ynUo the wizards and witches arc. If the witch doctor can not ex- 
orcise the sick person, the friends usually torture and kill the alleged 
wizard or witch. 

Such somber beliefs beget a contempt for human life and for suf- 
fering. In proportion to the rank and power of the afflicted parties 
is the number of victims sacrificed to promote recovery, or to revenge 
; death, or to provide for tUc repose of the dead. Human beings, some- 
times by the hundred, arc hacked to pieces, poisoned, drowned. 
I burned, or buried alive, during the sickness, or at the burial of a 
chief. This compound of medical and spiritual quackery destroys the 
sentiment of human brotherhood, annihilates sympathy for suffering, 
prevents the sick man and his friends from attributing disease to its 
.true causes and seeking rational means of relief. By fostering sus- 
'picion, cruelty, and revenge, it develops the worst qualities of the soul 
and urges it more and more into the path of sin. 

Medical missions break the power and destroy the prestige of the 
medicine-men and witch-doctors. They teach the true nature of dis- 
ease and death, and their independence of the malignant spirits which 
are supposed to be their cause. They urge the use of the means 
which God has given to men to cure the one and ward off the other. 
The modus tncdendi of drugs can often be understood by the simplest 
[iicathen. They can see and partially understand a surgical operation. 
When they have once grasped the idea that their w itch-iloctors arc a 
fraud, they disbelieve in the demons which they had invoked. The 
rustling of a leaf no longer suggests a prowling devil. The echoes 
of a cavern or the fliglit of bals scared by the torch are no more at- 
tributed to malign spirits. Darkness is no more peopled by ghosts and 
I apparitions. The tenderness of the missionary doctor and nurse in 
caring for the sick, ciihances the value of human life, and teaches 
sympathy with suffering. Thus, through beneficence to the body, the 
doctor undermines the quackery which has so long crushed the soul, 
and unveils the face of a merciful God, who seeks to save body and 
soul together from suffering and sin. The missionary's surgical opera- 
lions restore sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, make the lame to 
walk, and repair all sorts of injuries. The power which works such 
wonders seems little short of miraculous to those accustomed to the 
crudities and cmelties of the native charlatans. 

4. Medical work is peculiarly adapted to missions in Muslim lands. 
The intense fanaticism of Mohammedan men makes direct evangelism 
well-nigh impossible. Street preaching is wholly out of the question. 
The death penaltj- always impends over a convert from Islam. The 
mere fact that a Muslim is reading the Scriptures, or conferring with 
a Christian, exposes him to most serious peril. But Muslims sicken 
and suffer pain like other men. And, notwithstanding the fatalism 
which leads them to attribute disease to direct divine appointment, 
they have a traditional respect for doctors. The Arabians of Spain 
and Africa were once the chief depositaries of medical learning and 



A 




UEOICAL MISSIONS 



skill. Their doctors bore the honorable title of Itaktm (wise man). 
The record of their practice has coi^ce down in the works of Er-Razi, 
Ibn-Sina, and many others. It is true that the ancient skill is lost. 
The native liakim is an arrant quack. But when a true hakim ap- 
pears, armed with all the wonderful appliances of modem science and 
art, Mohammedans are ready to concede to him the honor which be- 
longed to their illustrious ancestors. The missionary physician is a 
privileged person among them, and when his healing work is done, he 
can fearlessly explain to them the person and doctrines of Christ. 

Mohammedan women are no less fanatical and far more difficult 
of access than men. Medical missions, however, have broken down 
this barrier. Under the stress of pain and danger the doctor is called, 
or the sick woman comes to him, and so hears the gospel of Christ. 
Nothing is more encouraging in all our labors than the eagerness 
with which Mohammedan and Druzc men and women listen to the 
story of Christ from the lips of tlw doctors in our mission hospitals 
and dispensaries. 

S- All the influence of medical work should be diligently utilized 
for the winning of souls to Christ. We have before said, and now 
reitt-rate, that the ministry of healing has a motive and an end in itself, 
an<1 thai, to he effective as an evangelistic agency, it must be given 
as a brotherly service, unencumbered by any conditions as to religious 
leaching, even as Christ rendered it. But the ministry of healing has 
also a motive and an end above itself, which raises it tc the highest 
plane of Christian service. This motive and end are the saving of the 
soul from sin and death. TlitTc is a j>eculiar appropriateness in the 
association of bodily and spiritual healing. During sickness the soul 
ia usually open to conviction nf sin, and, after the restoration to 
health, often .strongly moved by gratitude to God. The physician who 
has given his knowledge and strength to the sick man has a special 
right to speak to him on the state of his soul, anil the patient will lis- 
ten to him with a confidence and affection which he can have for no 
other man. If the doctor is filled with love for souls, and has the gift 
of utterance, he can never fail for illustrations to enforce his appeal. 
And if he have thL- gift of healing, hut not of teaching or exhortation, 
his brother misstnnary stands upon the vantage ground won by the 
doctor's skill and devotion, from which to reach and capture the heale^ 
man for Christ. ^ 



Rev. William E. Cousins, Missionary, London Afissronary 
Society, Madagascar. 

I went out to Madagascar in the year 1862, and among my com- 
panions in that first voyage was the man who was honored of God 
to be the father of medical missionary work in the island, Dr. An- 
drew Davidson. 

Soon after his arrival, he successfully performed an operation for 
cataract, and a woman who had long been blind received her sight. 
Then there was great talk throughout the city. A few days after, Dr. 
Davidson heard a commotion outside his house, and, going out onto 
the veranda, he fouTid a long palanquin covered up with a sheet, and 



'Central Prc>i1>ytCTlan Qmrch. April jo. 




J 



POWER OF MEDICAL MISSIONS 



199 



under that sheet was the body of a dead man. The friends had 
brought this corpse, and they said : " You can give sight to the 
blind; surely you can raise the dead, too." They had to learn that 
there were Hmits to the skill of even a European doctor. 

After the first French war. the officers who came to Madagascar to 
represent the repiibhc. took a leaf out of the missionary's book and 
copied our methods. They appointed what I may describe as pulitical 
medical missionaries. That is, they placed French doctors in certain 
places to attend the people gratuitously. These men showed great 
skill and great kindness; they were placed there to win the good- 
will of the natives and make them more inclined to accept the rule of 
France. The appointment of these doctors is a testimony to the value 
of me(HcaI niission.s as an agency for winning good-will. 

No mission can he considcrccl fully cqutppctl that has not its med- 
ical branch. Fiut in more remote places, where a missionary from the 
very necessity of the case is far rcmtjvi-d from his fellows, then even 
a Httle medical knowle<lge is not to be despised. Where a missionary 
is likely to he isolated he should have some opportunity of getting a 
little insight into medical work before leaving for tlie mission field. 

Miss Grace N. Kimhall, M.D., Former Missionary, 'Ameri- 
can Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, Turkey* 

Let us consider what we, as workers at home, are to expect of our 
medical missionaries ; what we are to consider that work to be to 
which we send them, and what we are to expect of them as the out- 
put of their endeavor in foreign lands. In order to give point to 
what I will say, I should like just to give you the gross statistics in 
a rude way of our medical missionary work. 

There are in the world something over 5,000 Protestant mission 
stations. There are in each station an average, I presume, of at 
least 200.000 people, to whom that mission station must minister in all 
things spiritual and in all things medical as well. Great Britain and 
America have sent into the foreign missionary field, and I presume 
most of the medical missionaries are from Great Britain and from 
America. 650 medical missionaries. Six hundred and fifty medical 
missionaries are scattered among 5,000 mission stations. That gives 
you the amount of work which t!ic medical missionary is expected to 
do. T do not want you to think that they have little or nothing to do. 

Now what are we to expect of our medical missionaries, and what 
is the medical missionary to look for, too, as his or her legitimate 
work? In the mission, on general principles, the medical missionary 
is expected to use all the powers of mind or body and soul and all the 
skill that he may possess for the physical benefit, first, as physician, of 
all who require his or her services. Now, I say this, and many of you 
perhaps will object to my emphasis on the physical. St. Paul tells us 
to wait upon the ministry unto which we were called, and I believe 
that there is a mischievous and a fallacious tendency toward the feel- 
ing that a medical man or woman abroad is something very different 
from a medical man or a medical woman at home. I wish to contend 
against that. A Christian physician is a Christian physician the 

•Kodison Avenue Reformed Church, Aprtl s*. 




300 



MEDICAL MISSIONS 





world over, and stands in the same relation to his patients at home 
tliat he does abroad, and abroad that he does at home. His first duty 
is to be as good a physician as he can be ; to maintain his power to the 
highest degree of which he is capable, and lo use his skill with sin- 
gle-heartedness for the benefit of the physical welfare of his patients. 

Now, why may not a medical missionary be Imth an evangelist and 
a medical ocrson ? iJecause. in the nrFt place, we can not serve two 
masters. The medical profession is. I believe, more exacting than 
any profession that men or women take up. It is a profession that 
is regitlated by no set hours, by no set times, by no previously esti- 
mated outlay of energ>- or of exertion. The physician knows not 
how many nights he will be kept up continuously. The physician 
knows not at what moment, when he is tired and exhausted, the most 
necessary and urgent case will demand his skill. It demands the liest 
he can give, and it should have that best, or humanity suffers. 

Again, the physician carries continually, even in days of quiet, or- 
dinary practice, the responsibility for human life — the life that God 
has created and that God bids us perpetuate on the earth. The work 
iisclf of a skillful physician is continually preaching, lie need not 
open his Bible to chapter and verse. lie need not use spiritual 
language. To every one of his patients to whom he comes with 
loving sympathy and with skillful power he brings the message 
of the love of God. Does not your Christian physician here 
at home, when he comes into your chamber of sickness, bring both 
spiritual and mental consolation as well as medical? Does not the 
Christian physician everywhere bring tliat power of the love of Christ 
into your room ? And much more abroad, among non-Chrisilan peo- 
ples, the physician preaches without opening his lips. The love of 
Christ, which impels men and women to leave comfortable homes and 
occupations and lo endure llic hard.ships of the missionary medical 
life, is certainly preached through the.ec deeds more loudly than by 
words. So that 1 would earnestly, with careful thought and with 
some experience, deprecate the tendency which exists to call upon 
our medical missionaries to be both physicians and formally desig- 
nated evangcIL^ts. 

Now to whom docs the medical missionary bring succor? In the 
(list place — and with many of our hoards, T lake it this was the origin 
of our medical missions — the medical missionary has upon his hands 
the care of his fellow-missionaries. A great responsibility is his. and 
especially is this true of those medical missionaries, and they arc not 
few, who minister in this capacity, not to one station, hut to several, 
often separated by distance and by tedious journeys. His is the duty 
of keeping all these workers whom we send abroad in the best phys- 
ical condition for the work which they have to do. I would again 
protest against asking our ordained missionaries to take a course of 
medical lectures hefore they go lo their station, that we, as support- 
ing rliurcbcs at bnmc, may imagine we are C(|uipping the station on 
its medical side. We are not. It is not an adequate equipment. It is 
a very inadequate, and at times, a ver>' dangerous, equipment. A man 
who has studied theolog\". who is giving his heart and his soul to 
his evangelistic work, to the work of the ministry, can not rightly be 




THE FIEt.D or THE MEDICAL MISSIONARY 301 

(allcd upon to add to the burden uf his cares Iliat of the medical care 
of his own family and the other families in ihe station. 

Many fields exist where more than one society is engaged in labor. 
The cjuestion often comes up, what shall he done? Here is one mis- 
sionary society equipped with a medical missionary. By the side of it 
another is working which is not equipped with a medical mis- 
sionary. What i-ii the relation there? I tliink tlic relation can always 
he solved, and solved most easily in this way: I think the churches 
at home who are sending abroad missionaries to stations where there 
is no medical missionary, should always put aside, fcr the use of their 
missionaries, just as we put aside for repairs of buildings in our ap- 
propriations, a sum of money for the medical care of the missionaries, 
and pay it over lo whatever doctor can be found. 

Again, and perhaps chiefly in our thoughts, the medical missionary 
vorks for all who call upon him in the place where he lives. In a 
great many of our stations, as you know, there are many Europeans. 
In many of the stations there are no European physicians. In a great 
many stations there is an upper class of natives. ric!i and surrounded 
by the luxury which wealth brings. Now, it is often a temptation to 
us at home, aud perhaps tc our medical missionaries, pcrliaps to the 
other missionaries, too, to say: " Now, our duty is not to these peo- 
ple ; we are not sent out here for the Europeans, wc arc not sent out 
here for the rich natives who have ever\i:hing; we are sont out here 
to the poor and dependent native people." I think that is a great mis- 
lake, and I am sure many of yon think so. I believe that any doctor 
anywhere has taken upon himself a solemn obligation to attend the 
call of distress and sickness from whencesoevcr that call may come. 
from high or low, and, emphatically I believe our medical missionary 
i"! under the obligation to attend whomsoever may call upon him. 
This means a great outlay and a great many problems, as I know 
right well, because I have been in thai position myself where the de- 
mands of foreigners in the city made me feel impatient; but I be- 
lieve that the kingdom of God is advanced by our doing patiently 
whatsoever is given us to do. So 1 think wherever that obligation 
comes up the call exists to induce someone to go out there who 
wishes the opportunity to practice for money, and not for the love of 
Christ, that thus the missionary physician may be set free. But by 
all means attend to every one of God's children who calls upon you. 

Then there is another matter which I would like briefly to refer to. 
We who sit here at home are greatly entertained and think it is a 
very interesting thing whenever our missionaries go itinerating all 
over a large area of country, doing an enormous amount of work. 
I think we need to put on our thinking-caps when we read these 
stories of the missionary physician itinerating, and think what it 
means. I have quoted statistics to show you what an enormous 
amount of work a station medical missionary must do. but when a 
medical missionary leaves, say, the paltry 200,000 people in his own 
immediate ncigbliorhood, think what work must be donef It is a 

I very fascinating work. It is very pleasant work to a missionary. 
But it is above all things exacting. When you have put up 50.000 
prescriptions in a year— that is to say, something like 140 prescrip- 



I 
I 

I 



I 





»oa UEDICAL MISSIONS 



tions a day — and if any of you ever put up one. you would not want 
to put up 140 a day, not to speak of writing them out and making 
your diagnosis, etc. — you will realize that each day has seen a good 
day's work. Your missionaries are not loafing out there. But to 
send them itinerating is a questionable thing. It makes a very g;ood 
missionary letter, hut it is very hard on the missionary. Then, again, 
it is hard on the people, because where the people are accustomed to 
the sen-ices of a medical man or woman, they want them, and I ques- 
tion very much if the itinerating work is so valuable in the end to the 
kingdom of God, as the steady, plodding work right in one place. 
Do work in the area only wliich you can cover. Do it well, and do 
it scientifically, get good medical results, and the kingdom of God 
will get (he glory. 

I urge those of you who are thinking of the career of a medical 
missionary, to note that there is no other career more honorable, 
more necessary, more helpful to the kingdom of God, more fascinat- 
ing in its carrying out. and I will say. more wearing to mind, and 
body, and soul than that of the medical missionary. We at home 
need to remember that if we are going to send medical missionaries 
at all, we should send them something like ten times as numerously 



and as well equipped as we are now sending them. Let us thi 
earnestly upon this problem. 



-^ 



Rev. Jacob Chamberumn, M.D., D.D.. Missionary, Reformed 
Church in America, India* 

Let us read the commission given to medical missionaries from on 
high: " And Jesus went ahnut all the cities and villages, teaching in 
their synagogues and preaching the gospel of God and healing all 
manner of disease and all manner of sickness, and he called unto 
him his twelve disciples and gave them authority over unclean spirits, 
to cast them out. and to heal all manner of disease and all manner 
of sickness, and Jesus said, Freely ye have received, freely give." 

This is a sufficient sanction for medical missions. And it confirms 
our idea that no man and no woman should assume to be a medical 
missionary without putting the great emphasis on the second word — 
the missionary. Anyone who goes out as a medical missionary and 
does not put the emphasis on that second word is a misfit in llic mis- 
sionary ranks. Nor does the carrying out of this idea in any way 
militate against bis reception among the heathen, among the non- 
Christians with whom he is to mingle, or prevent them from coming 
to him for medical and surgical aid. More than a third of a cen- 
tury ago, when 1 first establis^hcd my little hospital and dispensary in 
India, the people were invited to come in to receive healing. £ach 
morning at sunrise the doors were open ; an assistant sat taking the 
names of all who entered, with their number, giving them cards, on 
the back of which was printed a concise statement of Christianity, 
and then they were allowed to come into the door, and I, sitting at my 
dispensing table, would call off the numbers as they came in, diagnose 
the case, prescribe, and have the medicine prt^iaring, while those who 
had been prescribed for sat on benches to wait. Usually within half 

* CAfticgic llftll, April jQ. 




INFLUENCE OF MEDICAL MISSIONS 



303 



I 



an hour or three-quarters of an hour after sunrise, the room would 
be full. Then the Holy Bible would be taken down, a chapter would 
be read, telling of the love of our I-ord Jesus Christ to a lost world, 
and He would be presented as the physician who could heal the 
maladies of the soul. Then, all being^ asked to remain in a reverent 
attitude, prayer would be offered, the missionary praying for the di- 
rection of God Almighty lo the physician in prescribing- and to the 
one who was putting up the medicines, and asking for God's blessing 
upon those medicines when administered, and for the healing of all 
those who came for healing; ending with a petition to the Great 
Physician to heal the maladies of the soul. 

I had occasion to lest whether this was distasteful or not to the 
people. Within a few months there came in three Brahman clerks of 
the Govenuncnt ufficc, which was adjacent. They came in for treat- 
ment, obtained ibcir tickets, were prescribed for, and sat down to 
wait for the distrihuliun uf the medicine, for no medicines would be 
given out until after the prayer; but as I knew these young Brahmans 
lo be not their own masters, but obliged to be at their office at a given 
hour, and the room was not yet at all fillcu, 1 said lo Ihem : " 1 will 
excuse you from waiting to-day for the religious exercises, as I know 
ihal you must be at the Government office at the stroke of the clock. 
You can lake your medicines and go." " No, sir," said they ; " if you 
please, we will wait for the prayer." I said, " That is my rule, but I 
make an exception in your case, because 1 know you may be in great 
haste to go." " No, sir, we will wait for the reading and the prayer, 
because after your prayer to your God who sent you Iiere to heal us, 
wc believe that these medicines will have a much greater effect upon 
us, and though we be not of your religion, wc do believe that your 
prayers arc heard, and we will wail for the reading of the Scripture 
and the prayer." 

Not long after that a very touching incident occurred, which I 
may refer lo briefly, to show still further the attitude of the Hindu 
mind tn that respect. I had lo perform an operation, a very delicate 
and dangerous operation, upon the daughter of a Brahman. He had 
bee:j there through the operation, and it seemed to be perfectly 
successful. The father decided in bis own mind at once that 
that operation had saved bis daughter's life; and when she had recov- 
ered from the chloroform, and was sitting resting by his side, he 
turned to me to render thanks, and to my surprise and consternation he 
threw himself prostrate upon the floor, clasped my ankles in his arms, 
and kissed my feet. " No, no," f said ; " that can nnly be done to 
God : that is the highest worship; you miist not do that to a human 
being;" and T stnig^Ied to get away. He looked at me and said: 
"Oh, sir! No man could do what you have done for my daughter 
unless God helped him. and if God has sent His healing mercy 
through you to me, let the worship go back thrnueh you to Him." 




Mtss Mary Pierson F" 
Church. U. S. A.. Syria* 
As far as spiritual re« 
am proud to say that n 



'hvterum 



■ Hadlacm AvMiue Presbjrt" 



104 



MEOICM. UISSIOKS 




not have it otherwise. When I first went out to Syria, the Syri; 
Mission very generously gave me half a year to study the existing 
methods of missionary work and to see where Syria lacked, and to see 
if my work could supply tliat need. I found in the centers persons- 
well qualified for medical work, so I concluded that my work should 
be among those for whom no provision is made. 

I take long tours. I go north from Palmyra, among the Syrian 
fields, among the magnificent olive trees. In one place where my work 
carries me the ground is never plowed ; the Arab chief saying, this is 
the cam ping- ground of the medical missionary, and if she came here 
and found ihc ground plowed up she would not stay so long with 
us. Wc need no guards there. I have no lack of listeners when I 
speak the Word of God, but I force no one to hear the go,spel ; they 
join with us. In the morning what is more natural than that T sliould 
step out of my tent and hold a little service, and in the evening that 
wc should have an evening service, and no person goes into our tent 
but that he has a chance to hear of Jesus Christ, who went about not 
only preaching the gospel, but healing the sick. 

Then I want to speak about fees. After going around to various 
hospitals, I found that in one place they gave them the bottles and 
charged for the medicine, and in another they gave them the medi- 
cine and charged for the bottles, and in one ptnce a curious bottle 
was given to the patients. That was in Jerusalem. In Passion Week 
the Greek Hospital gives bottles, and every bottle has the scene of the 
Crucifixion on one side and the picture of the Virgin Mary blown in 
the glass on the other. If that is not combining medicine with re- 
ligion. I do not know how it could be better done. I thought at first 
I would try equal fees to all, two cents to each. But that did not 
work at a!!. Some came in rags, and some in tags, and some in their 
best because they thought it would do honor to the foreign doctor; 
and so 1 adopted the plan of having one free day and one pay day. 
Every patient who comes must bring a certificate from the head of 
his religion — if a Jew, from the rabbi, and so on through the va- 
rious sects and religions that come to me, saying that they are unable 
to pay, and then I am willing and glad to offer all I have, whether 
medicines, instruments, time, strength, all to them. Put I am not 
willing to offer my services to those who are able to pay a large fee. 
and can go and give it to the doctor whose "time is specially for such 
cases, because mine is pioneer evangelistic medical work, and I must 
go to the tents and villages beyond, where no medical aid is available. 
Where patients can pay T have them pay. Where they can not pay 
in money I accept anything that will go to the support of the patients 
in the hospital. If they bring wheat, I take it. Last year all our but- 
ter was furnished by a dragoman on whom I operated for cataract. 
That is the way I collect fees when money is not available. One of 
llie fees I once received from a Bedouin shctkh in tlic desert was a 
beautiful Arabian mare, but, alas, she died. While she lived she was 
a. great comfort, and I am afraid I did what I should not have done, 
overworked her in the cause, because this time last year I rode her 
continuously every day in my itinerating. Not that I moved every 
day. We muit not wear ourselves out in itinerating day by day, in 





QUALIFICATIONS 



THE MEDIOVL MISSIONARY 



205 



taking* long journeys, but I lake one station, and if there is a large 
amount of surgical or medical wock to do, I stay there from ten days 
■to three or four weeks ; as I always stay at Casarta Philippi. As I 
go around to those centers where 1 stay, I try to visit one or two of 
the adjacent villages, and I have very nearly covered all the villages 
in the Vlain of the Jordan. 

Miss Jessie C. Wilson, M.D., Missionary, Presbyterian Church, 
U. S. A., Persia* 

I felt ver>- deeply, when I went out in 1890 to Persia, that there 
should be no separation between the medical work and the evangelis- 
tic work. I ser\'ed there almost eight years, and I have come back 
with that same thought, that there can be no separation of the two. 
When I first went out there I was told that when these women gath- 
ered around me, fifty, sixty, or even eighty of :i morning, they 
would not sit slUI quietly and listm, if I opened my dispensary 
with devotional exercises. " But," I said, " we ean try and see what 
they will do." At first there was a noisy crowd. We had to keep 
a man inside of the room to keep order. They would all come, of 
course, expecting to be treated at once. They would want me to 
feel their pulse all at once. They would want me lo give out their 
medicines to them. Of course, we have heard tliis afternoon how the 
medical missionary not only prescribes, but how he must put up his 
prescription. And I found that those same women, who said that 
they nmst go innnediately home and attend to their family duties, 
on being treated would sit there until noon talking with their 
neighbors, so that time meant nothing to them. I found also that 
if I opened my dispensary with devotional exercises in the morn- 
ing, those women could learn to sit quietly, and listen to the sing- 
ing, and Scripture, and prayer. I am Jurc that they carried away 
much pood, because afterward they wcndd come and ask me for 
bonks that they might carry home with them, not that they could 
read, hut they wished their brothers or husbands to read to them. 
And so that work went on year after year, and we never opened our 
dispensary without those exercises. The women would come hurry- 
ing in and would say: " Have you sung and read this morning?" 
If they were late, sometime during the forenoon we would have to 
stop our work and read to them and sing to them. And in the itinerat- 
ing also, crowds would gather around us, and we would be able to 
reach them not only by givine medicines for their bodies, but by tell- 
ing them something of the Great Physician. We can not separate 
these two branches of work. They co hand in hand. I would not 
want to go hack to Persia to-day if I did not go back with the Bible as 
well as with the medicine case. 

QuaUfkitloni of the Medtul K^jsiooary 

F. Howard Taylor, M.D., M.R.C.P., F.R.C.S., B.S., China 
Inland Mission.^ 

We arc all one in being determined to follow our Lord 
To the medical missionarv this means to heal the sick 



*M»<U}oa Arenue Rcfonafd Church, April a^. 1 Carnegie H«l 




MEDICAL MISSIONS 



save the lost. He is in no doubt as to which is the more important' 
of the two. Whatever else he is. he is a missionary. It is his meat 
and drink to lead souls lo know his Lord. So. the qualifications for 
medical missionary service fall under three heads : spiritual, profes- 
sional, and personal. ^ 

I. Of all the fruits of the presence of God the Holy Spirit in ^| 
missionary, or in anybody— one stands out pre-eminent : and that is 
Love. This means supreme devotion to the Saviour, with willingness^ 
to go anywhere and do anything^ for Him. and a great pity for the lostM 

To love the heathen is not < isy anywhere. But the love of Christ" 
constrains us, and the presence of Christ enables. But lo show them 
love is harder. It is just here that the missionary doctor has the 
vantage ground. < 

Imagine a case. A proud, long-robed, Confucian scholar, with 
erect and graceful carriage, and the most polished manners imagin- 
able, calls to see you. Conversation comes round to the theme of 
themes. He hears for the first time the grand old story of the life and^ 
death of Christ. It seems to him an idle tale. A lever is needed to^ 
move him. 

But let the same man come when his only son is very ill. The 
father's face tells its own tale. The physician goes to see the childJ 
Suitable means arc used, with a prayer to God for His blessing. In 
a few hours the exhausted chiM falls happily asleep ; and awakes hun- 
gry. Danger is past. The father calls tu offer his thanks. What a 
change in his face! His mind is relieved, his heart grateful and open. 
Now is the chance for the medical missionary. No one else in the 
world can speak to his heart as he can. In such a case, as you value 
the soul cjf that man do not leave to another the duty of making known 
Jesus Christ. This man has come to thank you with all his heart. 
He will not listen to any other, except, perhaps, with well-bred tolera-S 
tion. Then is your time to press him and win ! ™ 

The first, tlicn, and incomparably the most important qualification 
for medical missiunary service is love; love that can be felt, that prac- 
tices as well as preaches. 

2. To turn now to the professional qualifieations for medical mis- 
sionary service. We all feel that Jesus should have ihe best, the very 
best that we can offer Him. Every year the gold- medalists, the first 
men of their class, ought to be going out lo the foreign field. Happy 
for them if they are I But, may I venture to make a suggestion lo the 
members of the boards? Do not refuse the man who will go. because 
he is not equal to the man who won't I To students I would say : 
Give God your best. There will be nn other doctor to consult, in most 
cases. So be as fit as you can. and God will accept and use your 
best, and make you a blessing. 

It is well to remember that special knowledge in certain branches 
will prove invaluable. A high official came to sec me one day, from 
K'ai-feng-fu. the capital of Ho-nan. His city is, perhaps, the most 
anti-foreign in China. But note the result of his visit. He was blind 
in both eyes. One was hopeless, the other had an occluded pupil. 
After a good deal of prayer, for the risks nf failure might be serious, 
I operated, opening a new pupil for him. Ten days later he went 



I 



' he wcntS 



QUALIFICATIONS OF THE MEDICAL MISSIONARY 



307 



grateful, and said. *' H 



to 



I 



r 



home seeing. He was very gratetui, and said. " it you come 
city, stop at an inn outside, and send in your card. 1 will send a 
closed carriage for you. The gatekeepers will ask my coachman no 
questions, you shall be my guest as long as you can stay. And if you 
want a house, I will rent you one of my own, as long as you like, or 
sell you one or mortgage to you." 

Eye cases and skin diseases are among the most tmporlant, as they 
are among the most frequent in most tropical and sub-tropical coun- 
tries. Then, again, obstetric cases are, of course, of very great im- 
portance; life and death often hang in the balance. And you will 
thank God if you can save life at such a time. Of course, as a rule, 
it is only the most critical and complicated cases that come to us at alL 
All the more need to be thoroughly equipped. For the sake of our 
fellow-workers, moreover, and uurselves, it is very important to be 
■well up in fevers, especially the protean forms of malaria, and of 
typhoid; in plague and iiiHuciiza: also in dysentery, ciiolera, and the 
like, and liver troubles. In all these, prevention, it will be remem- 
bered, is still more important than cure. 

3. The medical missionary niust have fair health and be smuid 
in body, to stand the strain of work, which is never light and 
is often very exacting. He nmst be agreeable, and fairly easy to 
get on with; for he will have colk-agiies, native, perhaps, as well as 
foreign. He must be both decided and stable as a Christian, or the 
great adversary will probably shipwreck his life-work. And he must 
have good judgment, both for his medical and spiritual work; or he 
may involve himself and his fellow-workers in very serious, or even 
fatal consequences. In medical work in new cities or districts, great 
caution is imperative, especially in hostile communities, such as one 
meets with in many parts of China. What cases to take in and what 
to refuse ; when to operate, and when to decline, are questions of 
great delicacy and importance. 

C. F. Harford-Battersbv, M.A., M.D.. M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.. 
Lknngstonc College. Englumi* 

No mistake can be greater than to suppose that medical mission 
work can be carried on properly by those who have not given suf- 
ficient time to medical study, or who have not given satisfactory evi- 
dence that their training has been to good purpose. To send such a 
one to a responsible medical mission station is to do a grave injustice 
to the individual so placed, to the people to whom he or she is ex- 
pected to minister, and to the great cause of Christianity. 

When we remember that a medical missionary must practice with- 
out the help of the many specialists and consultants who can be re- 
ferred to at home, and that he may be called upon to train assistants, it 
will be readily acknowledged that fully trained skill is required for 
such a TX)st. 

I would assert in the most unhesitating manner that the medical 
missionary mu.it be every inch a missionary. It is the one who can 
aid the body who will have influence on the souls of the patients, and 
if there is a dissociation between the medical and the spiritual, the 

« Carotgie Hall, Aprit 30- 




J 




•oB MEDCCAL MOSnVS 

pn a a r j idea of the medical naamamarr is gaoc We want, then, as 
■rriini nirwifwa iics. persons of the deqiesc ■^■'^■"' povrcr. There 
is BO need of any etabotax th e ological tiainiiig, nor eico must the 
■■edical maskmary nccosarihr be a great prcadicr. bat cxperioice in 
tbe sacred prrrilege of soal-Miming, and tbe power aod knowle<^ to 
poiol cicailjr the way to everlastii^ life shookl be regarded as indis- 
|HMiMi Persaoalljr I am sm«gl> tJ|ipua e d u the medical nnsswa- 
aiy bcaig oraaiocd* for abnoogn fais fjiuuiy woiIl win be lo tmn- 
g^K tbe people. Ids chief time most be spent in medkal and surgi- 
cal woffc, and I contend that die tntvaotwiy doctor oi^ht not to have 
die responsnle char^ of a mission station in vincfa be may find bins- 
sell bampeted by pastoral or cdtKatioaaL as wefl as administrative 
work, which may prore a serioos hindrance to tbe work be has beea 
aeni onl to carry on and for whidi his traiai i ^ has fitted him. li is 
oriy loo lifccfy that mdcr sndi drcnmstanoes notlxr tbe medica] nor 
spuitual work will be properly carried out. In this connection I can 
not do better than quote the words of Wniiam Lockbart, coc of the 
pioneers of medical missions in China, in a book written nearly forty 
years ago, in which he says : 

" I urgently adrise that the medical nnssaonary be a la^inan, for, 
as a layman, be can do all tcachii^ and preaching that he has op|X>r- 
tnnity and abihty for; but be ought to have no r espon s ibility as a 
pastor, or he wiU become distracted from his ovm line of operation, 
and thus be less willii^ to tnidergo the drod^r>- of his ho^iital ; and 
without comimious work and effort there, be can not expect to have 
a wide influence." This vie»- is so stroc^y hdd by the committee of 
the Cbttrch Missiooary Society that a resolution has been passed 
deprecating the taking of holy orders by a medical missionary. 

It is obvious, however, that in many cases the medical missionar}- 
may need h^ in order to make full use of the grand evangelistic <^ 
portnnities wmdi tbe medical work affords, and which can not be met 
from the medica! staff. In these cases the assistance of a clerical or 
other evangelistic colleague may be highly prized, and it is a question 
whether tlwre might t»ot be attached to a medical mission one or more 
such evangelistic agents, only it is important that it should be recog- 
nized that tbe medKal missicKiar>' at the head of the mission hospital 
is not in any way superseded in the control which he would exercise 
over all departments of the medical mission. 

Tbe importance of a few well-manned stations, rather than a num- 
ber of isolated outposts, is a point in missionarj- policy which is com- 
monly believed in. In a medical mission it is particularly important 
It should, therefore, be taken as an axiom that a properly equipped 
medical mission should have at least two doctors, in addition to native 
assistants. It is also most desirable that each hospital should have 
attached to it not less than two missionary nurses, who have passed 
through a full nursing ciirrictilnm, and who are well filled, from the 
missionary standpoint. In the case of native assistants it need hardly 
be said that ever>' effort should be made to secure Clmstians who 
would be able to coHDperate heartily in missionary as well as in medical 
work. 

I will give a few instances from my own experience, when I wa 





I 



I 



I 

I 



I 



EXPERIENCES OP THE MEDICAL MISSIONARY S09 

a medical missionary on the Niger in connection with the Church 
Missionary Society, to show the influence of this branch of missionary 
work. My hospital experience was a short one, as frequent attacks of 
fever prevented any long period of continued medical work, but at 
the end of two months one of my patients was baptized, as a result 
of the daily teaching in the hospital ward. The mau had been a pro- 
fessed Mohammedan, but a very ignorant one, and the clearness and 
the confidence with which he declared before men his faith in Christ 
was all the more remarkalile. 

Perhaps my most interesting experiences took place on a pioneer 
journey to Bida, one of the great Mohammedan cities of the Central 
Sudan, having about 80,000 inhabitants. On the way we stopped 
at various villages and took occasion to give the gospel message. 
We did not find, however, as is sometimes supposed, the people 
eager to hear it. On the contrary, they are. as a rule, far too well 
satisfied with their own ways to %vant an>'thtng better. My plan, 
however, was to ask whether there were any sick people, and, ivhen 
in response to my invitation some of these had been brought, in 
considerable fear and trembling, and I had cleansed and treated some 
loathsome sores, I found that the people flocked round and would 
listen to anything we had to say. In Bida, I was admitted even to 
treat their chief women, and was welcomed at a time when the feeling 
of the king and of his princes was anything but favorable to the Brit- 
ish. On leaving, I arrived at midnight at the banks of the river where 
I was to join my canoe in order t^ rettim to my station: but at day- 
break the following morning a man was brought to mc with a swollen 
arm, the result of a beating received at the hands of a local tax- 
gatherer. I found that there was an abscess, and at once decided to 
operate. This I did in the open air before a considerable assembly. 
Their amazement at the result was untold, and, falling down on their 
knees, the women particularly raised their hands to heaven in grati- 
tude to the great God for what had been done. Need I say that the 
incident gave the opportunity for pointing the peojile to the Great 
Physician who alone can cure the great malady of sin. 

These are the trivial instances compared with the triumphs of med- 
ical missions which could be told by those who have greater ex- 
perience, but they serve to illustrate the large number of ways in 
which medical mission work opens the door for the gospel. 

There is another department of medical work which, though it 
can not rank in any way with real medical missionary work, is yet 
of the highest importance. The supply of medical missionaries is 
unhappily only too smalt, and in many parts of the world in which 
missionaries are working there is no possibility of securing qualified 
medical help for themselves or their families. TTie conviction has 
gradually been gaining ground that we have no right to send such 
missionaries abroad without giving them some sound knowledge of 
the laws of health and of the simple treatment of common diseases 
and accidents, and it was this which led me, on my return invalided 
from the mission field, in connection with other medical men, to 
found Livingstone College for providing the requisite training. Who 
can blame a man who in such a case does his best to relieve disease 




I 




MEDICAL MISSIONS 

and siiflfering around him, though he should have no medical quali- 
fication? Il is, however, of the utmost importance, and this we have 
fully recognized, that those who have only this elementary training 
must. not call themselves medical missionaries or assume the position 
of qualified practitioners of medicine, hut under these conditions and 
without any great pretensions a large amount of good is now being 
done in many different parts of the world. 

There rc-mains one further aspect of medical work in its relation to 
foreign missionary enterprise. Most mission fields are situated in 
unhealthy climates, or, at least, in parts of the world where the con- 
ditions of life are very different from those of the missionary's home. 
It is, therefore, imperative that attention should he paid tn such ques- 
tions as house accommodation, food, water supply, clothing, habits 
of life, climatic conditions: all of which have an important bearing 
upon the usefulness of the missionary. These matters are occupying 
our special attention at Livingstone College, and we hope that the in- 
formation which we may be able to collect may be of service to mis- 
sionaries of all societies in all parts of the mission field. 

Jn the Church Missionary Society the Medical Department has been 
practically developed since the meeting of the last Internationa! Con- 
ference. We have now a Medical Comniiltee. which not only deals 
with the medical missions of the society, but which takes cognizance 
of all medical matters connected with the society's work. The sec- 
retary of this committee is a medical man. Dr. Herbert Lankester. 
whose whole time is devoted to super^'isi^g tlie medical missions of 
the society, hnth on the home and foreign side, and he is chiefly re- 
sponsible for raising the special fund by which the medical missions 
are now supported. 

Under these circumstances, it is little to be wondered at that the 
number of medical missionaries has more than trebled since the last 
Missionary Conference, and that the ordinary expenses of the med- 
ical missions are entirely met by a special fund which was expected 
this year to amount to £12,000. In addition to this, Dr. Lankester 
acts as the society's physician, and with the assistance of a medical 
board attends to all qnestiotis concerning the health and well-being 
of the society's missionaries. 

HoEpHali ind Dlqjcnsarics 

Rev. R. C. Beebe, M.D., Missionary, Methodist Episcopal 
Church, China* 

The question naturally arises when medical work in any mission is 
projected, whether it should be done through a hospital or dispensary, 
or both. I would say that as soon as possible it should be done 
through both, and, as a rule, from the beginning. There may be cir- 
cumstances, however, that make it wise to delay the locating of a 
hospital. Where there is no previous acquaintance with the city 
chosen, or its surroundine; territory, it is well to study the ground be- 
fore permanently fixing the site, and this can be done advantageously 
by renting a place and conducting a dispensary. Nevertheless, to ac- 

*CiimrKl Prcsbjterlan Cbnrcli, April jo. 





HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES III 

complish the most, both evangelically and professionally^ there should 
be I hospital. The dispensary, from a missionary standpoint, is like 
the street chapel, It has the advantage of a more regular audience 
and of favor and good-will gained by the medtcal work. But, as in 
the case of a street chapel, its audience is constantly changing. Many 
come but once, and these are liable to gel an inadequate idea of the 
gospel message presented to them. By means of a dispensary, much 
seed-sowing can be done, and it serves admirably to advertise Chris- 
tian work: but a hospital is naturally required to complete the medi- 
cal work begun, and it is in the wards and regular daily services of 
the hospital that the gospel is nnade plain. The hospital affords time. 
under most favorable circumstances, for leading men to Christ. 

As a rule, hospitals and dispensaries should be located at large cen- 
ters. At a large center more people are brought under the influence 
of the hospital, and patients will come from a wider extent of terri- 
tory. Influence over the minds of people is affected by locality. The 
prestige gaintrd by a name and following in a large city is no small 
factor in the problem, and should not be ignored. Then it is desir- 
able that the physician should be at a point easy of access to all other 
members of the mission who may be dependent upon him for medical 
care and attendance. As a rule, also, hospitals should be located 
where no other medical mission work is conducted. Most mission 
fields to-day are so inadequately occupied, and there are so many 
large centers, now destitute, where medical work could be most ad- 
vantageously conducted, that it would seem unfortunate for any hos- 
pital or dispensary to lose the least of its usefulness or its influence 
by dividing with another hospital the incidental benefits of its work. 
It is very true that one hospital can not do all the work of a large city 
and its territory. Neither can all the missionary societies do all the 
work of evangelizing heathen lands. We can establish only centers 
of influence throughout the great mass of heathenism until there be a 
native church that shall continue the work and perpetuate the influence 
the missionary societies have introduced. 

The medical work in whatever form should be started by a mission, 
with funds from the church. Christianity should have all the credit 
and influence which the inception cf such work exerts, and the enter- 
prise should be free to exert its whole influence for Christ. From 
this it does not follow that we should not accept help from the na- 
tives, but it is better for such help to come later when we have demon- 
strated the spirit and character of the work. Then it can be received 
without restrictions either expressed or implied. Win, by good work, 
willing and cheerful patronage. Support given to a work with a 
feeling of obligation and a grateful sense of favor received is worth 
far more than the same support given with a sense of conferring 
favor. 

The question of fees, or whether our work shall be a free charity, 
is, I think, a question of locality, to be determined by the resources 
of the people and their attitude Inward us and our work. In our de- 
sire to reach a condition of self-support, we should be careful not to 
give ground for the suspicion that our benevolence is not disinter- 
ested ; and, on the other hand, it is well that patients, when it is pos- 




SI a MEDICAL UIS5I0NS 



sible for them to do so, pay something for the medicine and treatment 
which they receive. A person too poor to pay a fee for registering 
can easily be recognized and passtd on as a free patient. But mosi 
of the common people can pay something, and do so wilHngly, pro- 
vided the fee comes within their idea of value received. Relatively 
high fees should be charged for visits to the homes of the wealthy. 
It has been my custom to send to such families, when I have been 
called, a neatly printed folder, setting forth the character of our work 
and stating my fee, making it plain that in paying this fee they add 
to our resources for helping the poor. Few hospitals or dispensaries in 
the United States are entirely self-supporting, and the question very 
naturally arises whether in the present state of society it is desirable 
that they should be. The same may be said of hospitals and dis- 
pensaries on mission territory. 

Medical work has a great advantage in being able to reach both the 
upper and the lower classes, and while it is true that the larger part 
of our patronage comes from the humbler ranks, and that the Church 
is largely recruited from the same classes, we can not neglect the 
wealthy, who. in other lands, in every age, have furnished to the 
Church notable examples of piety, influence, and love to fellow-men. 
We go to all classes alike, with love, and sympathy, and help, and as 
missionaries and physicians arc able to please all, without partiality 
to any, and in word, deed, and life commend the gospel of our Lord 
Jl'sus Christ. 

We might be able to do a great deal of good in advancing the 
gospel with inferior medical work, but we should aim at nothing less 
than the best professional results possible under the circumstances of 
our position. The best work secures the best results. Careless, half- 
hearted work aflfects both ourselves and our patients unfavorably. 
All other questions relating to hospitals and dispensaries are subor- 
dinate to the one relating to the physician who serves them ; for on 
his character and spirit largely depends the success or failure of the 
work. It is he more than any other factor who determines the ef- 
ficiency of a hospital or dispensary. He should learn the language 
of those among whom he labors, and be able to enter into their 
thoughts and sympathies. He should be a man of good judgment in 
dealing with men and problems of mission life. He should be an in- 
fluence that makes for peace, since he, more than any other man in his 
little missionary community, comes into intimate relations with his 
fellow-workers. He should have a thorough professional training 
and as much hospital experience as possible, before going to the field, 
for there he can not turn over a patient to some specialist or call in 
a consultant to help in his extremity. He must have the stamina and 
ability to meet any emergency and do at least fairly well with his 
cases. I do not say the best, for in this age of special development 
no one man is able to afford his patient, in all cases, the best results 
the medical profession is able to give. And. finally, he should under- 
take mission work with a definite sense of obligation and consecration, 
and a clear conception of duty and privilege, so that he will give his 
life and energies in full surrender to the Lord for joyful service, and 
show forth in his daily walk among his patients the mind and spirit 



HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES 213 

of his Master, who was the healer of Gennesaret, and who went about 

doing good. 

Since we aim to do the best work the appliances needed for such 
work should not be wanting in a mission hospital. An\-thtng that 
increases the usefulness ami influciu'c of a nie<Iical missionary is a 
good investment for the society that meets tlie expense of sending him 
to the field and maintaining him there. 

One matter in this line I consider very important, and that is regu- 
larity. It is good for the work as well as for the patients that there 
be no failure in having the dispensary open every day and the physi- 
cian there promptly. Such a course will increase the number of pa- 
tients, and it is due to the suffering poor who come to us for treat- 
ment that they be not disappointed. The trouble and expense of 
coming is no inconsiderable matter to one whose physical and finan- 
cial resources are at a low ebb. I once heard a prominent surgeon 
in New York remark that he had built up the largest surgical clinic 
in this country by always being there at the hour appointed. 

It is needless to say that one or two physicians are unable alone to 
do the work that comes every day to a mission hospital. We must 
have native assistants. Thus far in the history of missions few med- 
ical helpers have been trained outside of mission hospitals, and in 
China their education is still an important and onerous part of the 
medical missionaries' duties. These assistants should be ChriSilAn, 
alive to the spirit and purpose of mission work. When imbued with 
the proper spirit and pcjssessed of the high degrees of intclUgencc 
that medical work is able to attract, they are invaluable to the work, 
and. in fact, are indispensable to the conduct of hospitals and dis- 
pensaries. I consider it very desirable that there shall be at least one 
trained nurse from the home land in connection with every mission 
hospital. Where there are wards for both men and women, a nurse 
is indispensable. Her ser\'ices are required in training native women 
as helpers in the hospital. In fact, she must do the work of a dea- 
coness also, as she has a field unequaled for religious work. I think 
there is no more valuable worker to be found on the mission field 
than an earnest, efRcieiU, trained nurse. 

In both hospitals and dispensaries we should utilize every avenue 
of approach to the soul, and these will vary with the people among 
whom we labor, and with the character of the individual in charge 
of the work. It is possible, through the dispensary, to distribute a 
large number of tracts and portions of Scripture. Every patient 
should be required to register and pay a small fee, unless he be loo 
poor to do so. and with the ticket supplied him there can be given a 
copy of one of the Gospels or some tract that in a brief and clear way 
will convey the gospel message. In this way the hospitals at Nanking 
circulate every year a great many thousand portions of Scriptures, 
together with tracts. Christian calendars, etc. Activity on the part 
of the Mission Press is almost indispensable to this part of the med- 
ical work. In the wards, too, various opportunities will arise for 
presenting the gospel without its being done too obtrusively. In 
China, where it is the custom to adorn the walls of the houses with 
pious maxims, appropriate passages of Scripture can be painted on 




It4 MEDICAL MISSIONS 




the walls of the wards, words of hope and cheer that will meet the eye 
of some poor sufferer, or words of conviction that will lead someone 
10 think of llic needs of his soul. Many patients in a hospital find 
lime hanging heavily un their hands and arc glad to spend a part oi it 
in reading books and tracts. 

I have never made it a matter of compulsion, in the hospital under 
my care, fur patients to attend the daily service. But Uierc has been, 
as a rule, a good part of the palicnt.s in attendance. In the chapd of 
the dispensary, white patients are wailing for the doctor to begin his ' 
work, the gospel is presented to those assembled by exposition of 
Scriptures or a familiar talk. .Mi are obliged to listen, or withdraw. » 
In China, 1 think it is rare for anyone to object to or resent such \ 
methods, which have been very helpful in awakening an interest and 
making clear the purpose of our work. 

It is very desirable that there be, in connection with each hospital, 
a native preacher of such gifts and graces that he can spend some 
time each day in conversation with tlic patients at their bedside. He 
should be quiet, sympathetic, and possessed of tact and a pleasant 
manner, so as to be able to gain tlie confidence of those he meets. 
A good native can do what the foreign missionary can not do in get- 
ting an intimate acquaintance with his countrymen, but the wrcmg 
man in such a place is nothing less than a calamity to the work. 

An important feature of hospital work is the following up of the 
interest excited, utilizing the good-will gained, and making the most 
of the access obtained to the hearts of patients. It would require a 
larger force than is usually availabk- in a mi.ssion lo have a sufficient 
number of workers attached to a hospital to visit all the villages and 
homes of these patients, water the seed sown, and care for the 
ripening grain. Yet this is most desirable, and it has been my obser- 
vation that at this point our work is liable to be most weak. Many 
hospital patients arc from the country districts. They are a quiet. 
well-disposed class, of stable character, and, as a ruk. frugal and 
thrifty. These are more accessible to gospel influences than are the 
dwellers in the city, and they make excellent Christians. They live 
so far removed from the centers of work where the hospital is lo- 
cated that they can not attend services there. The means of grace 
must be taken to them. This can be done by the itinerating evangelist, 
and should be done in harmony with a plan of co-operation whereby 
different sections of a region are cared for by the different societies. 
To this end a record should be made giving the names and residences 
of alt patients who can be classed as inquirers, the degree of interest 
manifested by them, and any other item that may be helpful to the 
evangelist. These facts should then be furnished to the missionary 
laboring in the district where the patient resides, and the spiritual re- 
sponsibility turned over to him. Such a plan would increase the ef- 
ficiency of the hospital many fold as an evangelizing agency, and 
make it helpful to all the societies working from the same center. 

Some have assumed that medical work is valuable only for the 
opening of a mission station, and that its purpose is served when 
prejudice is broken down, friends gained, and a church established. 
They claim that, after there remains no difficulty for the evangelist to 



J 



HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES Hf 

get a hearing, medical work should be withdrawn. From this view 
I think that all those who are well informed will dissent. Ie is our 
hope and expectation that the time will come when the home church 
will not be caUed upon to conduct hospitals, and dispensaries, and 
schools, or build churches on mission ground, but that will be when 
existing mission fields are fully evangelized. As long^ as huspitals and 
(lispcnsaries prove an efficient agency in preaching the gospel, and arc 
crowded with people ignorant of the gospel and ready to hear it, 
missionary societies can not afford to lose this strong arm of help in 
their operation. 

The physician's life, whether in Christian lands or on the mission 
6c!d, is one of service. He gives of his time, his energies, his sym- 
pathies, of his very life that others may be helped into better and 
happici lives. Happy the man whom the Church puts into a position 
where he can make the most of his profession, his Christian ex- 
perience, and the opportunities of his life for the uplifting of man- 
kind;. for man's material, physical, and spiritual advancement. 

Rev. D. W. Torrance, M.D., Missionary, Free Church, of Scot- 
land, Palcsttnc* 

I had the pleasure of placing and conducting a medical mission on 
the shores of the Sea of Galilee, where the first medical missionary- 
trod. 1 have llie honor of having a model missionary hospital, and I 
also have the honor to labor for a committee who have never refused 
one request I have made. We have there a hospital with marble 
floors, an operating-room with every known scientific appliance; and 
I have a nurse trained at the Royal Infirmary in Edinburgh. You 
should see the wild Arabs from the desert who come in, and in a day 
are transformed into little children ! 

I want to make just a few suggestions to those who arc thinking 
of going out. I want to say, beware of taking too many patients. 
I have seen medical missionaries not having time to tell the patients 
to sit down and take off their coats. How can anyone, if he is taking 
more cases than he can attend to. do good work ? If the work is worth 
doing it is worth doing well. No quack work in medical work. 

It has been said that medical missionaries bribe the patients to lis- 
ten to the gospel. Welt. I for one will say there is no bribery in my 
hospital- There is no compulsion to anyone to sit there and listen to 
the missionary. They come in and will remain, if you will speak to 
them as a brother out of a loving heart. If they can pay, they ought 
to pay, and if they can not pay, why, you can not make them. 

Then, again, I would say to the medical missionary who is going 
out, don't try to do everything yourself. You will find everywhere 
people who are practicing; go to them, be friendly to them, give them 
tips; you can. and you will, soon find them your friends, and 
it is only out of fairness to the other men who are practicing there 
that you should charge: but I do not call the man a medical mission- 
ary who is working in the field for his own pocket. There are some 
who are doing that. 

* Ceotr&l Presbyteriui Cbnrch, April 30, 




J 




2l6 MEDICAL MISSIONS 



Mrs. Ida Fave Levering^ M.D., Missionary, American Baptist 

Missionary Union, India* 

If anyone should ask mc if my work was self-supporting, I should 
have U; say. No; and when you consider the number of very poor 
people, the starving millions in India, and the number who get from 
four to six cent:* a day, with a family of any number of children, so 
that the mother and father must both work, and then if that mother is 
ill they have hardly anything to live on, then you will see that when 
I am called into their homes, or they come into my hospital, I simply 
can not charge them fees. And not only that, hut 1 have to feed them, 
and if there is a little baby, I have to clothe it. There is nothing 
else to do. 

I do charge for my bottles. I charge an anna apiece for bottles, 
and if they haven't got the money, I say, " You can borrow the 
money, and when the medicine is gone you bring the bottle back and 
I will pay you for it." I insist upon having the money far the hot- 
ties. But among the wealthy people, the Brahmans and the Sudras, 
I do charge fees, and I have found it to work very well indeed. A 
woman will come and ask for treatment and medicine, and when she 
comes to the hospital, I say she must pay an anna. She may say, 
" You did not charge that other woman.' My answer is, " I am taking 
that anna from you to help the other woman." If I go to her home I 
charge her from five rupees up to seventy-five nipees. If they have no 
money, I simply can not charge them. You could not here. And 
you leam, after a while, who has the money. A poor Brahman woman 
came one day and had been treated in the hospital for some time, but 
I did not charge her, because I knew that her husband was de- 
pendent on the Government for a few rupees a month, and he was a 
Brahman, and bathed and prayed all day, so that he did not have 
money. But after she had been treated in the hospital she came 
to me one day and brought me ten rupees, a wonderful fee from a 
poor woman. And very often women from whom I expect nothing 
except the anna a day will come to me and bring money after they 
are cured. But my work is not self-supporting, because t feel that I 
must do all I can for the very poor who can have no other physician. 

In India, you know, the work is only limited by the doctor's 
strength. If you could work every minute of the twenty-four hours. 
and then add twenty-four more hours to the day, you could not get 
through with the work that would come to you todo. I could make 
my work entirely self-supporting if I had more time and more 
strength, because there arc enough Brahman people in India, or, at 
least, in Nellore. to keep me busy at! the time, and I could charge 
them and receive enough fees to make the work self-supporting, but 
I simply can not do it. These arc the Lord's poor, and they must be 
treated. 

Miss May Ellen Carleton, M.D., Missionary, Mflhodist Epis- 
copal Church. China.-f 

T think Mr. Robert Speer struck a splendid note when he said that 
the aim of foreign missionaries is to make Christ known to every 



* HwUmo ATcnus Relormed Cfaurdi, April ^4. f CAraeglc M&ll, April 30. 




1 



CXPTS OF NATIVES SI? 

heathen, and that educational, evangelistic, and medical work are but 
methods to that end. I know that sometimes the medical work crowds 
upon one to such an extent that it seems as if wc could not do per- 
sonal evangelistic work, but there is a phase of the work that 1 want 
you to help us lo remember. If you allow us lo be so crowded by uur 
medical work, 1 want you to remember the result on the medical mis- 
sionary — our own souls will be starved and warped. What Christian 
among you would Hke to delegate to another personal, individual 
work for Christ? 

1 want to speak also about the carefulness with which our boards 
should locate hospitals. In Fuchau, in a radius of five miles, there 
are six mission hospitals, while in that province there are six or more 
districts in which there is no medical work. Another thing: If any 
person on the face of the earth ought to be hroad minded a ]]hysician 
ought to be. And if we sec some woman, or some man, doing so- 
called medical work, we ought not to oppose that man or that woman. 
I know of a great many missionaries who are located days away 
from any physician, and who are doing splendid medical work, and 
God is blessing them. 

Frank Van Allen, M.D., Missionary, American Board of 
Commissioners for Foreign M-issioiis, India* 

I want to speak of one single result of medical missions in South 
India. I went to India in i888, and 1 had not been there long when 
I needed a new hospital, and, to make a long, long story very short, 
I have a new hospital. It was erected with money given entirely in 
India. It is a large two-slory building; the foundations are of stone, 
and the superstructure is of brick rubbed over with white plaster; it 
has a veranda ten feet wide on all sides ; it contains twenty wards, and 
is a strong, handsome building. The money was given almost en- 
tirely by non-Christian Hindus — principally by the native Princes 
and native merchants of that district and of the village district which 
adjoins it on the south. Most of the people of India, as everybody 
knows, are very, very poor, and most of them even in good times 
have only one meal a day ; bitt of the well-to-do people we were most 
provident in making the acquaintance. Now, when the natives will 
go down into their purses to this extent and will give freely to the 
missionaries you send, it shows more effectively than any words can 
do what they think of the missionaries. 

The building cost $14,000, and as a day's labor in India is worth 
about twenty cents, and as the building was paid for in cash, it is fair, 
I think, to say that this building is one which, in the United States, 
would cost $100,000. 

I think the gift of this building to our mission by the non-Christian 
Hindus is one of the results of the medical missionary work in South 
India, 

This hospital would never have been put up had it not been for 
three things: First of all. God blessed the work. In the second 
place, the native people who gave the money are generous and very 
nice people. In the third place, our missionaries have been working 

*CuaerIc Hall. Aoril v. 





3 id MEDICAL MISSIONS 

for sixty or seventy years in the Madura district, and their lives have 
made a very strong impression upon the minds of the people ; and the 
people of that district have gone on drawing closer and closer to the 
missionaries, and tlie missionaries closer and closer to them, each 
seeing the good in the other. All the money for the erection of this 
liospital, whicli was given by non-Christian Hindus, was given with- 
out any condition of any kind, the title to tlie hospital stands in 
the name of the American Board, tlie Christian religion is being 
preached in that village, and tlie Christian atmosphere in tJiat hos- 
pital is just as pronuunced as it is in any church in New York. 

Medical Triioiog of Nxtivt Helpcn 

Edwin Sabcood Fry, M.D., Edinburgh Medical Missionary So- 

ciety* 

A native agency for medical missions is as important and neces- 
sary as for any other department of missionary operations. The ex- 
amination ot the patient and prescribing of medicine are only the two 
first stages in the process of cure. There must be the preparation and 
dispensing of drugs; in the hospital there nitisr cften be serious opera- 
tions in which trained help is essential to success. The after treat- 
ment and nursing is frequently as important as the operatinn itself. 
Probably every medical missionary has felt the necessity of training 
one or more native helpers to assist in what may be called the routine 
work which day by day has to be done. 

Hnt it is not merely tlie training of native assistants who shall work 
under the immediate supervision of the medical missionary that is 
implied by the term medical native agency. It includes also the 
systematic training of classes of students. This is sometimes under- 
taken by the medical missionary individually, sometimes by a college 
with a regular faculty of medicine. In the former case there is not 
usually a diploma recognized by Government; in the latter there is. 
Aintab. Beirut, and Agra are well-known examples of such colleges 
for natives. 

Almost all missions afford conspicuous examples of what may )>c 
termed the individnal method of training medical helpers. 

The question as to the best method and place of training native 
medical evangelists must naturally be largely determined by the coun- 
try, the stage of development of the mission, the distance from a suit- 
able medical establishment, and the special needs to be met. 

Jn my opinion there can be little doubt but that in^the vast majority 
of cases the training should take place in the country itself. Both on 
the ground of expense and probable influence on character and mode 
of life, it is. I think, a risk to bring natives for training to European 
or American schools. 

In my own former work in Travancore. where we were far from 
any Government medical school, the plan chosen was to select twelve 
or fourteen young men. These were chosen from the various dis- 
tricts worked bv the mission. The voung men cliosen were all Church 
members, and had already proved tlieir earnestness in mission work. 
They were well grounded in English, so that all their instruction 



^ 
4 



*Cluii)ber Uiuic Hftll, CAmcgic Ha]l. April >j. 




TftAIKING OF NATIVE HCLt'ERS 3X9 

could be carried on in that tongue. The usual routine of daily in- 
struction consisted in clinical work in the huspital; assisting at opera- 
tions; attendance at systematic lectures, usually llirce daily, each 
lasting an huur: study uf anatomical diagrams and models, dissec- 
tion not being very feasible in that part uf India. Periodical exami- 
nations, both oral and written, were held. 

The missionary part uf the training of these young men was not 
forgotten. A Bible-class was regularly held. Every day one of the 
students, in turn with the medical missionary, addressed the as- 
sembled patients. On Sundays tlie students went in pairs to heathen 
towns and villages, and in this and other ways were encouraged dur- 
ing their whole course to cumbine spiritual witli medical work. 

These young men received a small schdarslnp during their course. 
The results of thi.'i system of training can only be brielly n>entioned. 

Almost without exception tliosc thus trained have remained in 
mission employment. Possibly, having no Government diploma, there 
has been in their case less temptation in this direction than with some. 
As medical evangehsts they have done, and are doing, an incalculable 
amount of good. They are located in thirteen branch dispensaries and 
in the Central tfospital. From the latter they receive periodical med- 
ical supplies, and to it they can send any speciaHy serious case. Many 
of them have some beds for in-patients, and can perform operations 
of some magnitude. The medical missionary visits, from time to 
time, these branch dispensar*^s. In all of them the daily preaching of 
the gospel goes on side by side with the healing of the sick. The 
blessed influence of the medical mission is thus muttiptied tenfold. 

Such training as has been described may be taken as typical of the 
preparation of native medical evangelists for work among the villages. 
The Agra Medical Missionary Institution may be taken as the t)pe 
of 3 much more ambitious preparation. Since 1885 this institution 
has been affiliated with the Edinbttrgh Medical Missionary Society, 
and takes advantage of the instruction given in the Agra Government 
Medical College. Here there are native professors; and a legal di- 
ploma is obtainable at the end of the four years' course. The in- 
stniction is all in the native language. During the time it has ex- 
isted young mm from most of the Protestant denominations in India 
have been accepted as students, going back to work with the mission 
which has sent them in. It is not an expensive course, and £10 a 
year, or £40 in all. is sufficient to maintain each student. 

One other inslitutinn in India like Agra, interdenominational in 
character, is called the North India School of Medicine for Christian 
Women, and is intended tn train women doctors, nurses, and phar- 
macist assistants. It is placed at Lodiana, and is now in its sixth 
year of work. 

Rev. Moses Ci-ark Whitk, M.D., Vale Vnircrsity. former Mis- 
sionary Methodist Ef^iscopal Church, China* 

I wish to say a word in regard to the opinion that it is somewhat 
dangerous to bring natives to this country for education. I know a 
young lady whose grandfather was a military officer at Fuchau; her 



•CbuDber Hiuic Hail. Carnegie H&ll, ApHI *s- 






i36 MEDICAL MISSION'S 

father a disting^uished and successful preacher of the gospel. She 

was baptized in infancy, and at llie age of about sixteen, after taking 
a course of education in a mission school at Fuchau, came to this 
country, studied three years in Ohio, tlicn two years in the Woman's 
College in Philadelphia. Thtn she was three months under my care 
Lnd instruction during the summer, and afterward went back to 
C-"hina for a couple of years, then came back to this country and spent 
three years more in getting a medical education, two of her vacations 
being spent in my care. 

Now, this girl was an eminently devoted Christian. While in 
Ohio, three or four of her college classmates, young ladies, were con- 
verted Uiiough her instrumentality. I have been connected with 
medical education for thirty-three years, and have had some very 
fine scholars under my instniction, but T will say that this Chinese 
girl was as good a scholar as any of them. She has gone back to 
Fucliau, and there has charge of a hospital in the city. She spends 
most of her mornings at the Women's Hospital in the southern part 
of the city, teaching women the elements of medical education ; and 
although for years that hospital has had two or three Americans as 
instructors, not one of them can get up the enthusiasm among the 
native girls and women in regard to medical education that this Chi- 
nese girl does. I simply say that it is possible for a girl to come 
here for study and remain a devoted, earnest Christian. I do believe, 
especially as to such a country as China, where there is no opportu- 
nity for dissection, that the students would do better to come to this 
country. And I do not believe it is possible to carry on proper medical 
schools in China without some native teachers educated in foreign 
lands, because neither women nor men who go from this country to 
China can learn for many years to use that language in a way to con- 
vey instruction, as native Chinese educated in this country can. 

Miss Mary E. Bryan, M.D., Missionary, Methodist Episcopal 
Church, India* 

Is it wise to bring native women to this country for medical edu- 
cation ? 

Very few of our native women in India are prepared to come to 
this country. There are great difficulties here. First, the language. 
They can not attend the lectures unless they know the English lan- 
guage. Again, the climate, which is very changeable, is an obstacle. 
Furthermore, we do not think it wise to ask our churches to burden 
themselves with the expense of bringing to this country native women 
and paying their expenses in collie and otherwise, while the work of 
educating them can be done far better in their own country. 

Then. too. there are many things that they teach us in these col- 
leges at home that we have no use for in a foreign country, and many 
things that they ought to teach us that we do not get. lA'hat do our 
colleges know about tropical diseases? How many of them can fur- 
nish us a clinic for smaU-pox. cholera, the deadly miasma, and ma- 
larial fevers, and so on? These things are at the doors of our mis- 

* MkdisoD Annue Reforacd Cfaurch, April 34. 




TRAINING OF NATIVE WOMEN ajl 

sionaries the year round. We have better clinics, better opportuni- 
ties for clinical work in foreign lands than you do in America. 

How shall we educate these women In the foreign lands? Educate 
them in their own lan|:piage. Start medical schools in the great cen- 
ters, and let these schools be under the supervision of our mission- 
aries. Medical missions have been called clinical Christianity. If 
we do not put our girls where they receive this Christian instruction 
along with their medical education, how much can they do? VVc have 
a very fine medical school, a Government school, in the city of Agra, 
India. The opportunities are good. It is under ihc Duffcrin Asso- 
ciation. Our girls have been sent there. Eiglit-tcnths of them were 
girls of our mission schools, because others were nut educated up to 
the required grade. This coU^c teaches medicine and surgery. I 
liad to visit it in an official capacity fur my Confc-rCTicc, and I found 
there a lady in charge, not a Christian, who had no sympathy or lave 
for those native girls, and a numljer of the instructors were Mo- 
hammedan men. Now, if you know anything about Moham- 
medanism you may see the danger our girls arc in when they are 
placed under the instruction of Mohammedan men in such matters 
as anatomy, obstetrics, and diseases of women. I have nothing to 
say against the Dufferin hospitals. This great association has done 
much to relic\'e the suffering of humanity in India, but it does not 
touch the subject dear to the hearts of the Christian people of this 
country. These girls that we send there are often only one genera- 
tion from heathenism, and it is very easy to fall. We must establish 
Christian medical schools so that our girls will not only be taught to 
use their hands and brains for suflfering humanity, but their hearts 
as well ; where they may be brought in contact with the hospital work 
and in touch with tlie missionaries in all tlic liospilal work; where 
the Bible is as truly a textbook as Gray's Anatomy ; where the motto 
of the clinic and the routine of the hospital is " The love of Christ 
conslraincth us." 

There Is such a school in North India. It is called The North In- 
dia Medical School for Christian Women. It is supported by various 
denominations. Each denomination may furnish $250 annually, and 
for this can have three scholarships at reduced rates. We can have 
our doctors and our own missionaries on the committees and ad- 
visory boards, and as consultants to the hospital. If any of you have 
ever had the experience thai I have had, of treating 8,000 patients a 
year, with 10,500 visits of patients to the dispensaries, and with 20,- 
000 prescriptions to fill annually, you will deem it a blessing that 
there is a school for training druggistSv nurses, and doctors. 

We are not going to stay In the foreign fields always. We arc 
there only temporarily, to prepare the people, to train them to build 
up the work tliat will last long beyond the time that we send our 
missionaries and our money to foreign countries. Let us build well 
the foundations. Let us not bring two, three, or a dozen native women 
to this country to educate them in medicine, but let us establish insti- 
tutions imder Christian missions in wliich we can educate hundreds 
of them, not only as doctors, but as nurses and druggists. Let us 
educate these women to be a blessing to their sisters; not only a 




J 



flSS MEDICAL MISSIONS 

blessing to their bodies, but a blessing to their souls as well. Fc 
medical missions are a failure if thoy do not bring the people tt 
Christ. 

Mrs. S. E. Johnson, M.D.. a Nati-'e of India* 

The North India School of Medicine has been referred to, for the 

training of native Christian girls and women as assistants. This is^H 
located in the north of the Punjab, in Lodiana. ^H 

When Dr. Brown, of the Baptist Mission, first went out from Eng- 
land she found so much difficully in getting anyone to help her that 
she felt the first duty was to train native workers to help the medi- 
cal missionaries, and she founded this school. I think it is not five 
years since it was started ; but now it has forty students. It is still 
in its infancy. There is no arrangement made to turn out graduates 
in medicine, but we have succeeded so far that we arc raising first- 
class hospital assistants. They arc all Christians: not one of our 
workers there is anything but a missionary. We require each girl^J 
to bring some sort of a recommendation from her missionary socieiyi^H 
Most of the students who have so far entered our school have been" 
from missionary schools of different denominations in all parts of 
India. We require them to pledge their word that after leavinjf^ 
school they will serve so many years as missionary helpers. 

We are educating first-class hospital assistants at seven dollars a 
month. Then, we have another class who are druggists and mid- 
wives, and we educate them for about half of that sum. Our nurses 
take t\vo years' training in the school, at an expense of about three 
dollars and a half a month. Our hospital assistants take four years, 
and our druggists take two and one-half to three years of training. 
All our .students have to pass the regular examination at the hands 
of the Government doctors, so that they are recognized where\'er they 
go all over India. 

This is the first school of the kind in India that I know of. It has 
already begim to bear fruit, I am a native nf India. I was educated 
in this country. liefore I came to America I had been working eight 
years In connection with the United Presbv'terian Ntission in Korth 
India, and then I came to this countr>' and spent over five years here, 
in educating myself so that I may do more for Christ. And now I^h 
have been ten years in this work. I now have a hospital there, wit1u^| 
thirty beds. We take from 15,000 to 16,000, sometimes 17.000 cases, 
in the year, with 140 to 150 indoor cases ; and 1 can not tell you how 
many operations. That hospital is left under the care of three of my 
girls, trained in the Lodiana Medical School. One of them is a hos- 
pital assistant ; one of them is a hospital druggist and a trained mid- 
wife; the third is a trained nurse. What I wish to say is. that, al- 
though I came to this countrj- for my training. I am not in favor of 
bringing natives to this country for iheir education. I know the lime 
is coming, five or six years hence, when this little school in Lodiana 
will have full recognition at the hands of the English Goverimicnt. 
We can then train our own doctors, who will in every instance 
fill every demand made upon them. 

•Ouunbct Music Hall. Canwffie Hall. April >$. 





TRAINING OF NATIVE WOMEN 2*3 

Mary Stone, M.D.. a Nath'e of China* 

The writer is asked to speak on this question from the point of 
view of a native of China. What scientific knowledge of medicine a 
few Chinese have acquired has been through the agency of medical 
missionaries, who, in addition to their practice, ranging annually from 
thousands to tens of thousands of patients, can scarcely be expected 
to find time or strength for much in ihc line of leaching. 

A medical missionary mot only has the double mission of minister- 
ing to the wants of the soul and of the body, but is also confronted 
with the problem of teaching alone all the different branches of medi- 
cine. Not only this. Nothing is convenient for a course of labora- 
tory training in China. In a country where ancestors are worshiped, 
one does not wonder that dissection is interdicted. The missionary 
and students fail of the stimulus that regular hours for lectures af- 
ford. Then there are hut few books translated into the Chinese, and 
these soon become antiquated. In a country where women are not 
honored, they are left to suffer untold miseries. Tn China there are 
women who would rather disease should run its course than call a 
man to treat them. 

As we can not hope for enough foreign lady missionaries to sup- 
ply the needs of our women, or to train a sufficient number of Chi- 
nese women to be thoroughly qualified physicians, the only solution 
seems to be to send a number of Chinese women abroad to be edu- 
cated, making them competent for indciK*ndcnt work an\*where in 
China, even where foreigners can not go. Young women with apti- 
tude for learning, and a fixed purpose to devote their lives to the good 
of others, might, in this way, not only be qualified to care for the sick 
and the needy, but the coming in contact with a better, more Chris- 
tian civilization, would make them broader, and in many ways render 
them more competent. 

To provide the means for any number of Chinese girls to take such 
a course of study abroad, unless it be regarded as a legitimate field for 
missionary effort, would require so much that I fear China will need 
to wait snme generations yet for qualified medical women. 

It has been asked whether foreign training does not separate such 
girls from their own people by reason of changed tastes ami habits of 
thought and life. That may very well be, but in conjunction with the 
most intimate sympathy with the people; even as the pupils trained 
by the highest Master were instructed to " come out from their 
midst " and yet to " go into all the world." But do they retain their 
connection with their own people, so that they are received in more 
intimate and therefore more effective touch on the lives of the Chi- 
nese? A few items of personal experience may he pardoned here. 
Our reception by our people has been a source of surprise and grati- 
fication in more than one respect. Such wonders have not been ex- 
pected of us that we could have no hope of fulfilling the expectation. 
But there has generally been a willingness to accept us and our work 
for what wc could make manifest as tnic worth. We are constantly 
brought in contact with great numbers of our countrywomen in a 

* HftdlfOO Arenuc Reformed Cborcb, April t^. 





sa4 



MEDICAL UISSIOKS 



professional way, and all classes love to visit us at our home, where 
we receive Uicm and try in some way to speak a word or suggest an 
idea that will tell for Christian truth. 



O. R. AvisoN, M.D., Missionary, Presbyterian Church in V, 

S. A., Korea* 

Ail I can do, or attempt to do, will be just to plead for one thing— 
that is, for the establishment in every mission country of a well- 
equipped school for the training- of native physicians and nurses. 
Why should we have it ? Why should they not be trained somewhere 
else, or why should we train them at all? It seems to me that every 
department of our mission work has been foimded with the thought 
that it was only to be temporary; that ultimately every department of 
the mission work will have to be taken up and sustained and carried 
on by the people to whom we arc now sent, or else that work is not 
worth founding at all. If we arc to be dependent upon sending out 
doctors always, then we had better not bother with it at all. But if 
our work is only temporary, we must look forward to the lime when 
there shall be native physicians. If we are to have native physicians, 
somebody has to train them. The proper people to train them are the 
people on the field themselves. But this can not be done until there 
has been, by the introduction of Christianity, sufficiently strong Chris^ 
tian and benevolent sentiment created in the minds of those people 
who have the money, or of the Government. 

Now. the time will come when Government will provide a medical 
school in Korea; but if we have to send our natives there to be 
trained it will simply develop a class of infidel physicians that will be 
a detriment to our work. Now. it seems to me that we want to be 
ready to take the opportunity when it comes. I had. when I left 
Korea, a class of seven young men under training, and I have said 
to them: " It will not be long until there is a regularly established 
Government school in this country. Remember this, thai if you are 
faithful, you will be the only men in this country ready to go in and 
teach in that school." I regard it as my opportunity, and the oppor- 
tunity of our mission to have a number of young men trained up now, 
in the day before Government schools are established, so that when 
these schools arc established, the men. and the only men they can get 
to teach in them, will be Christian doctors. That is what I call look- 
ing out for the future, and being ready when it comes. 

Where should they be trained? On the spot. In what language? 
In their own language. Some doctor.*: have said to me: "I would 
not he bothered taking a man into my hospital who can not talk Eng- 
lish." Well. I say, I want to train every man that comes into my 
school in the Korean language, and then I am willing that while he is 
studying the Korean language he shall also study English ; so that by 
the time he is ready to graduate he shall understand enough English 
to be able to read English books, so that he can advance himself, and 
follow on his course afterward. But if you train them only in the 
English language you are going to spoil them for living among their 
own people. 



• C)umb«r Musif Hitll. Cuneiric fUll, April 15. 




J 



TRAINING OF NATIVE HELPERS 



MS 



John C. Berhy, M.D., Worcester, Mass., Former Missionary, 
American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, Japan.* 

In addition to the arguments already advanced, I would suggest 
the following special reasons for medical training on the mission field : 

1. The mission hospital, which is required by the medical school for 
clinical instruction, is always necessary for the best work of the mis- 
sionary physician. The medical missionary and his hospital ataflf, 
every member of which should be a Christian, naturally become iden- 
tified with all the organized humanitarian activities of the young 
Christian community, and these are best conducted from the hos- 
pital, as a center. The benefits arising from the presence of intelli- 
gent Christian physicians on the mission field are appreciated by no 
dass of people more than by native pastors and evangelists. Their 
own and their people's moral support and co-operation in the inter- 
ests of the school are, therefore, assured. 

2. The establishing of a medical school on the mission field en- 
courages the broad interests of Christian education. 

People everywhere. Christian or non-Christian, honor knowledge 
that can conquer disease, and the influence of a medical school in 
recommending to the public the advantages of Christian education is 
potent and far-reaching; while by the requirement that the matricu- 
lates to the medical school shall possess acquirements equal to the 
graduates of the higher mission schools, young men outside of Protes- 
tant communities who may purpose to become physicians are led to 
enter the mission schools for preparatory study, thus bringing them 
under the influence of Qiristian truth for three to five years. Con- 
versely, if the young men of Christian families who have already 
studied in our mission schools are obliged to procure their medical 
training in institutions where medical science is associated with ma- 
terialism, modern skepticism, and infidelity, the previous work of 
Christian teachers is largely neutralized, and a distinct loss to Chris- 
tian work sustained. 

3. The help which both the hospital and medical school may be 
made to afford to the principle of self-support. 

The value of a general education, or, Indeed, of the Christian 
Church„ may not be sufficiently appreciated by the native people to 
lead to large self-sacrifice for their support; but to have health re- 
stored, or to have a son educated for a useful and remunerative pro- 
fession, are objects which can be appreciated at once as worth the 
greatest self-sacrifice. The first step taken, the next, in behalf of the 
Church, becomes easier. Some of the larger givers for Christian 
schools and for Church work in Japan, were brought into sympathy 
with that work through the hospitals and dispensaries. 

A medical school or a training-class connected with the mission hos- 
pital, therefore, multiplies, through its graduates, the influence and 
work of the medical missionary; it accomplishes for humanity a mis- 
sion in harmony with Christ's example and commands ; it encourages 
the broad interests of Christian education in mission schools, deepens 
a spirit of benevolence in a community, raises up an inRuential pro- 
fession whose members will effectively co-operate with Christian pas- 

• Cbambcr Muiic Hftll, CvDeci* Hftll, April ■$. 




MEDICAL MISSIONS 



tors and evangtlists in the work of the Church ; and it encourages a 
spirit of responsibility for the support of Christian institutions. In 
every great mission center, therefore, there should be a mission hos- 
pita! and its class for clinical and didactic traininp, while in coun- 
tries where medical schools are already supported by the State, but 
dominated by skepticism and infidelity, missionary societies should 
unite and. with the aid of phitanthropists, native and foreign, estab- 
hsh a medical school under Christian auspices, second to none in the 
land, where young men can acquire knowledge of the principles and 
practice of medicine, from a Christian standpoint, and under the 
influence of a positive Christian faith. 

In this connection arises the question : Shall we encourage men to 
go to Europe or America for medical study ? To this I would reply, 
in general. No. In case a man of special promise has had a good 
preliminary medical training on the mission field, and his Christian' 
character and devotion to the interests of Christian work for hia 
people are pronounced, it may be well to send him to a medical center 
abroad for post-graduale work, with a view to taking up, on his re- 
turn, duties in the medical scliool and hospital. 

Another form of medical training was found very useful in Japan 
at a period when native physicians, already in practice, were desirous 
of knowing something of our system of medicine. 

The plan was to encourage the organizing of companies of physi- 
cians at different centers from twenty to fifty miles away from the 
central station, and to each of these neighborhoods to make monthly 
visits. At the appointed time these pliysicians would come together 
bringing their difficult cases, sometimes numbering two or three hun- 
dred, to some hotel or Buddhist temple employed as a dlspensan,-, and 
to this place I would go. taking with me a hospital assistant and an 
evangelist. The dispensary service — perhaps consultation service 
would be a more accurate term — was always begun in the early morn- 
ing by a religious exercise^ following which each case would be pre- 
sented, together with its history, by the physician having it in charge. 
A careful physical examination would then follow, made in the pres- 
ence of the physicians, and a full record of diagnosis and treatment 
added, together with suggestions for treatment until the next visit. 
All these records the physicians would take hack to their homes, study 
tlicm at their leisure, and then put the knowledge gained into their 
daily practice. On returning to the central station. I would fre- 
quently take up one or more of the interesting cases seen and discuss 
Iheir etiology, symptoms^ treatment, etc., in a lecture delivered to one 
of the hospital assistants. This lecture he would copy and send to 
the secretary of the nearest dispensary organization, when he, in turn, 
would copy aTid forward it to the next nearest to him. Thus it would 
proceed, reaching in its course fifty or more physicians. This form 
of medical training was very practical, very productive of missionary 
results, and very helpful, educationally and financially, to the physi- 
cians receiving it. Some of them early accepted the Christian faith, 
and became deacons in the first churches organized. They were soon 
regarded by the people as the best of the native physicians in the 



n 



M 



TRAINING FOR OTHER NATIVES aaj 

province, and their prosperity brought added strength to those early 
Christian coninmnities. 

The need for the trained nurse goes hand in hand with the need for 
the trained physician on the missiou field. 

To enter a home darkened by the shadow of grief and carry the 
comfort of Christian sympathy is well; but if, wiih this, the weary 
and anxioub mother can be helped in the nursing of husband or child. 
all hearts are touched, and (he visitor and her message of Christian 
love are long cherished in grateful remembrance. Such workers. 
then, hkc missionary physicians, are double missionaries, carrying the 
Gospel in one hand and a practical application of its precepts to the 
needs of humanity in the other. During the late China-Japan War the 
Crown Prince of Japan was taken tU, and sent to the military hospital 
at Hiroshima. A Christian and a non-Christian nurse were detailed to 
care for him. One evening the prince spoke to the nurse on duty, 
asking her where she was trained. On telling him, he made reply, 
" I thought as much. Your patience and devotion to duty are proof 
that you had a Christian training." This led to a conversation con- 
cerning the Christian fahh. and thus the obscure and humble Chris- 
tian nurse was given an opportunity to help her future emperor to sec 
something more of the beauty and the glory of that Light which light- 
elh every man. 

Can native women, with their limited education, be made reliable 
for such work ? Yes ; not only in the routine work of the ward, but 
in the gravest emci^encies as well. 

In the autumn of 1891 a great seismic shock shook Japan, and 
within a few minutes about ten thousand people lay dead and fifteen 
thousand wounded. Hurrying forward to the center of the disaster, 
with a corps of assistants and nurses, we lalwred most arduously for 
their relief. On the fourth day of the service an event occurretl which 
severely tested the courage of the nur.ses and their devotion to duty. 
I had just performed a surgical operation, and was in the act of pick- 
ing up an important artery for ligation, when the ominous roar of an 
approaching earthquake shock was heard. Louder it grew as it rap- 
idly approached, while the large number of patients and their friends 
in the waiting-room rushed out of doors into the yard for safety. 
Not a nurse or an assistant, however, moved from their posts of duty, 
but, bracing themselves to withstand the shock, stood bravely at their 
task. It requires but the application of Christian truth to the heart, 
followed by thorough professional training, to make strong characters 
of any people. 

Mcdicd Tniaiaz for Other Natives than Helperc 

A. P. Peck, M.A.. M.D., Dean of the Medical Department, 
North China College, Tttngcho* 

With the establishment of training-classes, which grow into med- 
ical schools, there comes, perhaps, the question. Is it worth while to 
educate a larger nnmher than will be required to keep up the supply 
of trained help needed by the mission ; purposing that they may, per- 



h 



• Clanibei Hitilc Hall, Carntglc Hall. April 15. 



I 




3x8 MEDICAL MISSIONS 



haps, pass into independent practice and support themselves in thctr 
profession as Christian practitioners among their own people? The 
peculiar conditions of the various countries where our interests He, 
will determine largely our attitude. But, broadly speaking, if we 
recognize and admit the value of the medical profession as a social 
factor in our own civilization, we shall be ready to see the importance 
of such an element in the infusion of a new life into the eflfete civili- 
zation of the East. To the reflecting mind I trust it will seem to be a 
religious duty to assist in the formation of such a useful class in the 
communities wliere we are trying to build up a Christian civilization. 

Some ten years ago, it was my fortune to travel through the island 
of Ceylon. Stopping at the famous " buried city " of Anuradhupura 
as a sight-seer, 1 was met by the local surgeon in the employ of the 
British Government, a dignified and intelligent Tamil gentleman. He 
saw me comfortably attended at the Governmait rest-house, and 
kindly guided me through the maze of those wonderful ruins. Upon 
leaving, he would not allow me to pay anything for the expenses of 
my stay, and to my protest against this generosity to a total stranger, 
he made this remarkable reply : " 1 was educated," said he, " at llie 
American Mission College at Jafna. Personally i owe all that I have 
attained to the American missionaries, and no one can tell the incal- 
culable good they have done to my people. I very seldom sec an 
American gentleman, and I shall feel very badly if you do not allow 
me this small tribute in testimony of my gratitude to the Christian 
people of America." There are many such men and women known 
to you, in all quarters of the globe, who arc ministering to society 
and indebted to missionary enterprise for their training. 

If it be conceded that sometimes, at least, we should educate natives 
for this work, let us consider when and how. I would say, tlial 
when the medical missionary, as a pioneer of a new civilization, can 
come in touch with the old order, so as to give to the adult genera- 
tion of practitioners even a little empirical instruction, it will be lirac 
and Sabor well spent. 

In regard to the northern part of China, I would say that there is 
hardly a body that can be called pracCttioners of medicine. Every 
scholar is supposed to be a doctor. Some have more reputation than 
others, some do not care for the business at all ; but among the large 
class who try to make something in this way, it is not by study and 
fitness, but by a competition of intrigite and deceit. Thus there is a 
sorry procession of ignorant quacks passing the bedside of every un- 
fortunate who is ill or injured, the speed of their transit being propor- 
tioned to the gravity of the case. If the patient lie wealthy and se- 
riously ill, there may he several doctors calted in a single day, not in 
mutual consultation, but one after another, and the unfortunate patient 
is compelled to swallow a series of disgusting compounds, which have 
as little rational relation to each other as have the unsavory in- 
gredients to the disease. There is no such thing as a medical school, 
and few. if any. practitioners of medicine who support themselves by 
their practice alone. 

There will always, however, be a yoitnger generation in every mis- 
sion field, coming up through the schools of the Church, educated in a 



J 



TRAINING FOR OTHER NATIVES 



339 



rational manner. Upon the members of this generation rest the hopes 
of the future. And so, in speaking of the question, When shall we 
educate in medicine, I would say, briefly : In yuuth, after a sound pre- 
liminary general education. 

The last question is, How shall we educate? Qinical instruction is 
indispensable to medical education, and it is fortunate that in mission 
hospitals the material is usually so abundant. It is probably generally 
impracticable, if not impossible, to teach practical anatomy by dis- 
section of the human body. Even the use of dry bones will, in many 
communities, like those in China, he open to misconstruction. Some 
disabilities there must be, liut without attempting to speak in detail i:i 
many points which might be raised, the one principle which 1 would 
present for the guidance of ever)' mission medical school is to have 
plain, practical teaching, adapted with discrimination and good sense 
to the status of tlie people among whom the student was bom and 
must live. The average intelligence of such communities, for instance, 
as we have in China, is not very high. They can not follow very ad- 
vanced hygienic teaching, nor appreciate the most scientific practice. 

My point is, therefore, that a plain, practical, and somewhat em- 
pirical education is the best for the somewhat undeveloped state ol 
society of which I speak, teaching the best uses of the imperfect equip- 
ment, the rude surroundings which they must have. So my recom- 
mendation is rather for what we would now call an old-fashioned edu- 
cation for our medical students. I would have considerable attention 
given to practical pharmacology. The materia medica of every land 
should be studied by scientific methods, and medical students should 
be shown how the resources of a country, in its flora, are made useless 
or damaged by not being collected at the proper time, and by im- 
proper preparation. This leads to the thoup;ht of using on principle 
the coarser and cheaper forms of drugs. The writer has always prac- 
ticed buying a large part of his supplies in the shape of crude drugs, 
and exercising his staff in the simple operations of pharmaceutical 
preparation, after which their therapeutic uses in varying doses be- 
comes plainer. My point, in brief, is that there are refinements of 
practice admirable in our splendidly appointed hospitals at home not 
so generally suitable for mission hospitals. 

My argument is, to a certain extent, a plea for incompleteness, not 
for incompetence. It would be nmch more agreeable to the writer, 
perhaps to the hearer, to call for the tribute of civilization's highest 
and best on the altar of service. But the lowliest service is, perhaps, 
the best ; it implies a self-denial which puts away the newest and most 
complicated instruments for diagnosis and treatment, and teaclics our 
proteges to accomplish (he best they can with the ruder means at com- 
mand, strong in the faith that with the gradual elevation of these 
races into a more complex civilization, science will keep the pace. 




^ 



CHAPTER XXXII 
GENERAL PHILANTHROPY OF MISSIONS. 

Evangelistic Influence of Philanthropy — Caring lor the Famine-strickea— For 
Orpbaas— For Child Widonrs— For the Blind— For L«|>ers. 



Twflwwir^ of Christun Philanthropy 

Rev. Richard Winsok, Missionary, American Board of C<mh- 
missiomrs for Foreign Missions, India* 

Four years ago. in the district where I have labored now for almost 
thirty vfars, you helped llie suffering, and 1 am going to tell you the 
result. There are many villages in our district, concerning which we 
were obliged to say to our native agents : " Into certain villages of the 
Hindus enter ye not." They were shut, they didn't want the gospel, 
they didn't want the missionary, they didn't want to know anytbicg 
about the Christian religion. Rut when the rain ceased, and the earth 
did not bring forth her produce, they began to suffer, and they ap- 
pealed to me. They came to us by the thousand, saying; '* If you 
don't belp us now we die." And the money came at this crisis from 
America and from England, and from Indiana came a load of com. 
I called for a number of sacks of lliat corn, and we sent fifty-three 
wagons to bring it to the place where I lived, and there my wife and 
son, and myself, with six of our native agents, fed at one time 3,000 
people with the com sent from America. Some thought the occa* 
sion good to take revenge upon those people who had persecuted the 
Christians, and to let ihein starve and die ; but Paul said : " If thine 
enemy hunger, feed him," and so we fed those enemies, and this is the 
result: From those very people — strong, stalwart, high-caste, agri- 
cultural people — after we had fed them and carried them through the 
famine four years ago, forty of the select men of the village walked 
fourteen miles to our station. They came up on the veranda and 
said : " We have done wrong ; we have come to ask you to forgive us. 
You have helped us ; you have saved us from death, and now we 
promise that we will do wrong no more." 

▼ork for th« Famioe-ctrickcii 

Rev. J. H. L.\uchlin, Missionary, Presbytenan Church. U. S. 
A., China." 

In this work many missionaries have had to engage, and in it many 
more w ill doubtless have to engage before " the parched ground shall 
become a pool." Then, how to do it best, and what results to ex- 
pect from it, are two natural and important inquiries which suggest 
themselves. 



* Church of the Struffcrs, Uay i. 



WORK FOR THE PAMINE-STRICKEX 



aSi 



I. The proper method of conveying relief to the victims of famine 
is not to stand on a high place and scatter your liaiidfuls or bagfuls 
of coin among ttic jostling beggars below. TIic proper method is that 
which pays due regard, first, to inspection, which is to ascertain who 
are tlie needy, and the amount of their need ; and, second, to the dis- 
tribution of the aid, which is to sec that each needy one receives his 
due proportion, and in the way that will most promote his own and 
the public good. 

Such inspection involves a careful scrutiny of homes, as well as 
people. Of homes, because it is an easy thing for such past masters 
of deceit as heathen are, to make themselves look like famhie suf- 
ferers. But that home inspection is not easy. It is a going from 
house to house, prying into corntrs ; a searching behind doors and on 
the housetops. Sometitnes one is blinded by the acrid smoke from 
the fire of cornstalks ur grass around which the wretched family is 
huddled in a vain effort to keep warm ; sometimes one is driven forth 
by the stench of filth, or of a dead body, sharing the room with the 
living. For frequently a parent has died, and economy has led to the 
incasing of the body in a coffin to keep it until the other parent dies. 
Then one funeral will answer for both. Abject misery is found in 
nearly every house. Ye:, the inspection is essential, for cne nmst 
make sure that no grain, nu donkey, no pig, no chickens, no fat dog 
stands between the petitioners and starvation. Nor are the people 
themselves to be passed by without scrutiny. Sometimes their con- 
dition indicates that there must be food concealed. Sometimes, alas, 
they are worse than their surroundings. Clothes they have, but no 
food: stalks, but no grain. Flesh and strength are gone, life is fast 
going. Evidently help must be given, and quickly, or death will win 
the race. 

In such inspection of homes and people, it is often quite pnssihie 
to use native agents. They arc often shrewder in detecting hiding- 
places of food than the foreigner. They know their own people bet- 
ter. Still it is a great satisfaction to the missionary to be able to tes- 
tify to that which he has seen. 

Then comes the second half of his duty, namely, the proper distri- 
bution of aid. The funds have, presimiably, come to hand ; some 
from the foreign business men and consuls of the coast cities, some 
from the missionaries, most from the richly blessed lands of the West. 
In Ihe shape, perhaps, of ingots of silver, they have been loaded on 
carts, wheelbarrows, or mules, and. guarded by squads of soldiers, 
conveyed inland to the center of destitution. For fear of robbers, this 
wealth is not kept an hour longer than necessary in the little room 
you are inhabiting. It is hurried off five. ten. fifteen miles to a bank, 
or to several banks. There it is sold for current coin and left on 
deposit. The relief is then made to reach the impatient hands of the 
sufferers in one of several ways : 

First, by giving checks to village elders, the representatives of the 
towns and villages which you have previously inspected and found 
worthy of aid. These men draw the money from the bank ; enough, 
say for a week, at the rate of a penny, or less, a day for each hungry 
mouth, and then distribute it. But, in most cases, I fear, such men 




939 



GENERAL PHILAKTHROPY OF MISSIONS 




keep back a sufEciently liberal compensation for their own time and 
!abor. This is the chief disadvantage of this plan. Or. secondly, you 
yourself procure carts and wheelbarrows, and place tlie cash in the 
liands of the sufferers without the intervention of go-betweens. For 
the few, this plan is better ; but the extra consumption of time neces- 
sarily limits the numlKir of individuals added to the roll. 

Or, thirdly, the tllatribulor of relief gives out food, in the shape of 
rice, millet, wheat, corn, and other grains. A greater quantity of food 
for the money will in this way reach tlic hungry, but tlie missionary's 
cares and anxieties are increased, as well as the channels of leakage, 
through the necessity of employing more vehicles, animals, and men. 

Or, fourthly, ihe distributor makes no gratuitous distribution what- 
ever: but organizes relief works, dredging river beds, strengthening 
their embankments, repairing roads, digging wells, building houses. 
Then lie pays out his funds in compensation for labor. This, of neces- 
sity, reduces the number of those aided and increases opportunities for 
fraud through the multiplication of middlemen. But, on the other 
hand, the people are not pauperized, and the works are left as a peren- 
nial benefit, which, in the way of preventing the recurrence of famine, 
will probably benefit a far larger number after all. 

II. The results of famine relief are of two kinds — unhappy and 
happy. .An unhappy result is (he widespread suspicion that the dis- 
tributor has " squeezed " more or less of the funds passing through 
his hands. This suspicion is confirmed, if soon .ifter the famine he is 
seen to be adding lands or buildings to the mi.s.<!ion premises. Such a 
suspicion it is almost impossible to avoid creating, because examples of 
such acts are kept before the people by the officials, through whose 
hands no large sum passes and remains large. Nor need they look so 
far away as even their own officials. A disinterested act of kindness 
is hard for a heathen to comprehend. Another unhappy result is the 
impression that missionaries possess, or control untold wealth. They 
are, therefore, the legitimate prey of hordes of beggars and borrow- 
ers. And hence the danger, too, that in the local churcli they shall be 
expected to bear the hulk, if not the whole, of the burden of current 
expenses. A third unhappy result of famine relief is the fastening 
on to the Church of leeches who only wish to feed on the temporal 
benefits she can bestow. Helped by the Church through one famine, 
they will make themselves secure against a future one by a permanent 
place in the bosom of their benefactor. Fed by the Church for A 
while, they will sit down to her table for all time. 

As to the happy results, the first is. of course, the saving of life. 
" Only keep up the pcnny-a-day gift till the harvest, and we shall 
live"; "Had you not come, I should have been dead long before 
this"; "Here come the life-saving gods," are remarks which are 
pleasant to hear. The same singing of the heart is often produced by 
what one sees. A little boy, emaciated beyond description, clothed in 
dirty rags, begging from door to door, is picked up unconscious one 
day and brought to you to be warmed and fed. You make arrange- 
ments with your landlord that the boy shall receive each day so many 
biscuits or so many bowls of grud. You see gradually returning a 
healthy color, strength, activity, happiness, life ; and you rejoice wit' 




ice wi^^H 



WORK FOR TUE FAMINE-STRICKEN 




I 



»33 



a joy almost unspeakable over a life saved by your instrumentality. 
Such alone were reward sufficient for tJic toil and privation of the 
months spent in this service. 

A second happy result is an intimate knowledge of tlie native home- 
life that could scarcely be obtained in any other way. Native homes, 
as a rule, are closed to foreign visitors, especially to men. Inspection 
requires that you penetrate them, that you pass through the " but " 
into the " ben " of the family. At such a time, this right is freely con- 
ceded. Your welcome is expressed not only tn words, but in prostra- 
tions and genuflections almost endless. The sight of those bare, im- 
poverished dwelling-places; the absence of what we consider neces- 
saries of life; of home-spirit and home-life ; the dreariness, wretched- 
ness, hopelessness of it alt, filii you with a new measure of gratitude 
for your own abundance of blessing, with a sympathy for the poor 
natives that you never felt before, and with a larger comprehension 
of the honor put upon you by Almighty God when you were singled 
out for a position of so much possible usefulness. 

A third happy result is the opening up of the country to missionary 
residence and effort; and through them to other foreigners and the 
various products of a high civilization. Even where treaty and prec- 
edent have established the right of the missionary to live, it is easy 
and common for an unscrupulous community to keep him out of his 
right. But during and after a famine, when he has manifestly en- 
dured indefinite separation from home, unremitting drudgery, ex- 
posure to disease, peril of robbers, for the sake of the people, then he is 
not repelled, but welcomed to remain permanently. He is not only 
invited but urged, houses being offered freely to rent or sell. And 
after the missionary, sooner or later, will come tlie railroad, the tele- 
graph, the postofHce, and all other agencies needed, in God's judg- 
ment, to uplift an inert, degraded people. Whatever opens doors in 
a country like China or Tibet, may well be welcomed as from the 
hand of God. 

A fourth happy result, and the happiest of all, is the saving of souls. 
The subjects of this blessing are, first, the actual recipients of aid. 
From the initiation of the work of relief, this class will furnish in- 
quirers after the truth. We naturally suspect them of being moved 
by hunger for the " loaves and fishes," but it is easy for them to rea- 
son from the calamity to its cause — their own sins — and 'thus time 
and probation often prove tlicm to be true penitents genuinely con- 
verted. 

Again, many orphan children, especially in India, have been picked 
up and carried to the various missions^ brought up in the faith, and 
have turned out well. 

Many who received no aid whatever, impressed by the exhibition 
of disinterested benevolence, seeing in it proof that the Christian 
Church not only preaches but practices love to one's neighbor, have 
yielded to the conviction that this is the true Church. Even the 
heathen knows that genuine religion is " to love the Lord thy God 
with all thy heart, and thy neighbor as thyself." 

And so, as famine proved a mighty blessing to old Jacob's people, 
it Has proved a mighty blessing to the peoples of old India and Cliina. 



n 



J 




I 



CEMCRAL PHILANTHROPY OF MISSIONS 

Rev, L. B. Wolf, M.A., Principal, Lutheran Mission College, 
Guutitr, India.'' 

The history of India can not be written without devoting a Ur^^H 
chapter to the subject of famine. Chrislian missions and pIiilan^^^H 
ihropic work have ever been joined. Tlie missionary dots not need to 
fight alone an Indian famine; he can only help, though powerfully, 
the magnificent effurts of a Christian govcrnnii-nl, such as during the 
last fifty years has given the most intelligent consideration to the, 
whole question of famine in India. 

The causes of famine should be noticed in considering the question 
of the manner of dealing with the victims. No question has taxed the 
energies of English statesmen more severely and secured more patient 
investigation than the causes of famine and the method of averting 
them or mitigating their horrors. In the first place, when rains fail, 
when the southwest, or the northwest, or both monsoons fail, as theyi 
alas, loo often do, famines become inevitablf. 

Another cause of famine is found in the density of the population, 
its character, and rapid increase. Sixty millions of India's popula- 
tion are laborers, depending on the tiUafijc nf the soil fnr daily food. 
When the farmers can not give them work, through the failure of 
crops, in a verj- short time large numbers are reduced to want. Nin^ 
teen-twentieths of the people depend on the soil, and any long-con- 
tinued drought soon swells the ranks of the poor laborers through 
an influx of the petty farmers and small land-owners. Two con- 
tinued failures of rain in any region will bring to the verge of star- 
vation millions even of the better class of farmers. 

During the last hundred years, the population of India has more 
than doubled. At the next census, in 1901. it w-iU fall little short of 
3,00,000,000. To feed such a mighty population in good times must 
tax the resources of the nation, especiallv when neither the mineral 
resources nor the industrial enterprises of the country are at all de- 
veloped. ! 

Another cause for famine is the improvidence of many of the peo- 
ple, and their fondness for running into debt in prosperous times. 
But the victims of the famine become such through no fault, in the 
main, of their own; they starve through failure of the rains. India 
has famine .in some part or other of the empire every year; and yet 
so well does the India Government understand these local distresses 
and provide for tliem, that the world at large is hardly infonned of 
their existence. 

The means taken by the India Government to limit the ravages of 
famine is an interesting study. During the last twenty-five years it has 
opened over 21,000 miles of railway and increased tlie areas under 
rice cultivation through irrigation works by over 10.000.000 of acres. 
Much of this railway system was built for famine-protective purposes ; 
and certainly the latter measure is the most powerful means of ward*' 
ing off famine by increasing the grain supply of the nation. 

As soon as famine begins to declare itself in any district the Govern' 
ment sends its servants to the part affected to investigate and report. 
■ If it appears that famine is on, test relief works are opened, by w 

*Cburcb ol the Sirangen, SJa; i. 




WOHK VOK THE FAMlNE-STRlCKEN 



235 



is meant, that men and women are ;i<ykcd to come sometimes as far as 
twciity-five niHcs from thtir homes to do work under Government su- 
pervision upon some work of general utility, such as digging wells, 
opening roads and railroads, or making artificial lakes. As these 
works are opened simply to test the existence of famine in any area 
the wages paid arc very low indeed, though food and shelter are pro- 
vided on the spot at vcr)' low rates. The wages generally paid are 
from four to six cents per adult, and from two to three cents for each 
child. If the people do not cumc at this rate, it is pretty generally 
understood that they are not in dire want. If ihey come, the famine- 
code rale of wages is soon adopted, which is so carefully drawn up by 
trained and experienced men that the need of fcach worker is fully 
met. In addition to work given, famine kitchens are opened for 
those unable to work, in which food is prepared for a large class of 
aged, and infirm, and children. But here caste prejudices inter\'ene 
and great difficulty is experienced in working these public kitchens. 
If the food is prepared by a Brahman cook, all classes under the 
Brahman may eat the food prqwrcd, but at the same time great per- 
plexity arises through the restrictions of caste and custom. In a 
famine so widespread as the present the resources of Government are 
taxed to their uliiiost, and with all their kind offices and spleniUd pro- 
visions hundreds ami thousands mu.st fall victims to want. Such 
misery and woe as that which a famine entails can only be imagined. 
It is too awful to photograph, too touching to describe, too horrible 
to contt.'m]>latc. 

Christian missions have a work to do which, unless they discharge 
it, will not be done. Let us briefly outline what that work may be. 
The missionary and the philanthropist can only do a supplemental 
work. But it is by no means unimportant. The missionaries become 
the right hand of the Government in distributing food to the people. 
They are the centers of help and succor to thousands who would 
not be reached by the Government relief camp or the famine kitchen. 
They often collect money among rich natives in the centers of wealth, 
and through th;.*ir respective boards and home committees. They dis- 
pense alnib to the infirm and aged, to weak women and little children, 
in places where no help would come and want would be most acute. 

Missionaries have been instrumental, especially under philanthropic 
societies and missions, in opening orphanages to care for the thou- 
sands of helpless and homeless little ones, whose parents may have 
fterished in the famine, or who may have been abandoned because of 
the widespread want. In this way especially much permanent good 
can be done, and distress relieved. 

There are, furthermore, classes in India, able-bodied men and 
women, who can not get to the public relief works, who could not 
work if Ihey reached them, and who must die unless some kind provi- 
dence send tliem help through channels which respect their caste 
prejudices and pity their helplessness. Here the Christian philan- 
thropist finds a wide field for his efforts. 

In caring for famine victims with Church funds, the starving poor 
of the native church should receive the first aid ; but the missionary 



a 



336 GENER.\L PniLANTHROPY OF MISSIONS 

must not be restricted in his work to any class or creed, but must 
give help to all within his reach who need. 

For some good reason God has been permitting such awful ravages 
amonj; the nations. Perhaps He would break clown the barriers that 
sqjarate men. and bring in the reign of true brotherhood among the 
kindreds of the earth. The Christian Church and world, every hu- 
man heart, whether of Jew or Gentile, must respond to India's sad cry. 

Rev. J. E. Abuott, D.D., Missionary, American Board of Com- 
missioners fur Foreign Missions, India.* 

Perhaps you may wonder why famines are so terrible in India; 
wliy so many arc dying when the Government has given a promise 
that every man, woman, and cliild shall be saved if they will only come 
to the camps. There are many reasons. Tlicy arise from ignorance, 
frora superstition, and often indeed from self-respect. The farmers, 
for example, are unwilling to go and become paupers at these camps, 
and so they strive to live somehow, now on wild fruit, now on roots; 
but they grow weaker and weaker until the body is unable to do its 
work. And when iE is too late they decide to walk twenty or thirty 
miles to some camp, and so the family starts, maybe the father, the 
mother, and the little one, and they drop by the way, and they are 
abandoned by the way, and the last who come to the camp arrive 
there too late ; food is of no use to them. 

But a great opportunity lies in the saving of the children. I re- 
ceived a month ago a cablegram from the mission to which I belong, 
saying that they are ready to take 2,000 children, if only their support 
can be guaranteed. I understand the Methodist Mission is also in- 
tending to take 2,000 children. And now this is a great oppor- 
tunity for America. I bear witness, as it is right that I should, lo 
ibe work that the Government of India is doing. It is the universal 
testimony of every missionary there whom I have seen that the Gov- 
ernment is doing nobly. Her officers at the camp under that scorching 
sun are showing a noble self-sacrifice, a nobler self-sacrifice than is 
seen on the battlefields of South Africa. Your missionaries, too, are 
facing sorrows, and those sorrows to-day are increased a hundred- 
fold unless they have the means to help. How can they preach the 
gospel to them if they have no money to feed them? As one mi.ssion- 
ary said when he was out of money, " I can not preach, I can not 
tell them of the love of Christ." But when he received a hundred dol- 
lars, then he said, " Now I am going out and feeding and preaching 
the gospel of Christ." 

If you will be compassionate, there will arise out of the ruins in 
India something in God's providence that will be for the blessing of 
that people. 

'Work for Orphaot m Urfa, Turkey 

Miss Cobinna Shattuck, Missionary, American Board of 
Commissioners for Foreign Missions, Turkey.^ 

In the city of Urfa, in Turkey, where I found myself at the time 
of the massacres, there were left us 3,000 orphans. We were very 

* Cliufcb of the SinLDcen, Hty i. t Cburdi of the SCruieen, April ja. 



I 



W0R7C FOR ORPHANS 237 

unH besides the money sent us for clothing the peo- 

cre thinking of supporting orphans. The first offer 

from the Germans, through the deaconesses who 

orking many years in Smyrna. Later, ofEcrs carac from 

s to support orphans 'n Urfa. A prominent pastor in 

ate, saying: '" Take for nie fifty girls, care for them un- 

d someone into the country to care for tlieni. and I will 

money for them." A month or two later he wrote us 

'e care of fifty boys on the same terms. As we were picking 

iL- most needy, people wrote also from England and from Scot- 

.. and through the agent of the Red Cross Society of America: 

ake for us children and we will send you money to care for 

m." So. we had a superfluity of children; children in what usel 

my kitchen, in my dining-room, in what used Co be our stable, 

n everywhere. But as the summer was near when they could 

sleep in the court and on the roof, we got along. And we managed to 

care for them until the Germans came, a year ]ater, and opened homes 

for their part of the children. 

As to [lie kind of children we took in, there were llie children of the 
pastor, who was killed in the massacre. Tliese were as well trained as 
children in this land, as neat in their habits, as gentle in their man- 
ners. Along with them we had some who were very rmigti and hard 
to harmonize with the others. The young man who was in charge of 
our boys while yet we had the care of the orphans whom the Germans 
supported and were receiving yet others because we could not do 
otherwise on account of the distress, often begged nic to turn out cer- 
tain classes of boys because their iiirtuaice was so poisonous. But I 
could not help myself. 1 could not turn thcni out, I had obligated 
myself to care for them, and there was nothing to do but to labor for 
them. And so they were never turned out. 

These orphans attend school, and one of the difficulties wc have 
had to contend with was that some of the boys did not wish to go to 
school. They said they were willing to do anything that was told them, 
but that they could not learn to read, and it w^as nonsense for them to 
go to school. One of ihem ran away. VVc tonk him hack and 
told him that he nmst not run away from us. Many a time since 
he has shown his thankfulness. This same boy and others in a sim- 
ilar slate of mind have developed beautifully as Christians, though 
they came from only nominal Christian homes, their fathers and 
mothers not being really intelligent Christians. 

Five hundred orphans are in the German homes, and under our 
care, supported by English and American funds; of these five hun- 
dred only two have died. Is it not a wonderful record? Wc feel that 
God is specially caring for these children. 

Our orphan boys are being taught trades, all that are over 
twelve years of age, carpentering and cahinetmaking. shoemaking. 
weaving. One of them is a bookbinder, he is rather a delicate boy, 
and does the repairing of the bonks the children use in the schools. 
Even in the short days of winter these hoys never complain. They 
' always rise in the gray dusk, and half of them go to their trades for 

LE hours before school in the morning, the other half after school. 





GENERAL PHILANTHROPY OF MISSIONS 



and with all this they get their time for piay. They arc full of fun 
and frolic. When I first went out to Turkey someone said to me: 
" You are going to a land whtrc there arc no trees, and where the 
children do not laugh. " As I have listened to the merry laughter of 
the boys and skirls in these orphanages, 1 have thought of it many 
times. A land where the children never laugh ! There was somewhat 
of truth in this statement, but it is being falsified among the orphan 
children. 

We give these orphans freely the Bible. But Ave do nothing in the 
line of proselyting. We expect every one of them to be a Christian 
child. Wc care not what churdi they shall afterward continue to 
attend, whether the church be thcJr fathers', who may be Gregorian 
Armenians or whether it he the Protestant church. Those bom of 
Gregorian Armenian parcnt-s attend the church of their own fathers 
and also our own. Our only desire is that they be faithful servants of 
our Ix>rd Jesus Christ. 

The older boys are eager to study in college. Already we have 
sent four to college. You would not have lis do otherwise, for many 
of our pastors were cut down, many of our school teachers were cut 
down, many of our doctors, and other leaders. Who more fitting 
than these children, to grow up and take the place of those killed in the 
massacres which nia<Ic them orphans? As to the oldest girl orphans, 
already wc are being besought to give them in marriage. Do ynu 
wish us to ? AH our days we have worked against those early mar- 
riages. Shall wc now go against what wc have been teaching and 
give away these girls, fourteen, or fifteen, or sixteen years of age? 
Wc say, no. W^c expect many of these girls to be teachers. TJiey are 
as eager as the boys are for this. However, neither the boys nor the 
girls will be educated out of tfie sphere of common working people. 
I'^or that reason we are giving the boys trades, while the girls arc 
learning to spin, to make their own garments, to do cooking, and 
all tlie things expected of them in their homes later. 



The Wldovn of IndU 

Miss .Anstice Abbott, .Afissionary, American Board of Com- 
tttissiotiiTs for Foreign Missions, Jmiin* 

The term widow, in every land, i.s a .synonym for sorrow. In 
Christian lands it suggests tendercst sympathy. In non-Christian 
lands it is a term of reproach. In no land is it more than in India 
a term of contempt. 

The Hindu Scriptures say but little of the position of widows or of 
their treatment. In the old Vedic times wc know that widows were 
allowed to remarry. The laws of Manu, which give in one section 
full directions as to the treatment of women, as also instnictions to 
women in regard to their behavior, deal almost wholly with the rela- 
tion of husband and wife, The woman is the property of lier hus- 
band. He is her 2:od and her priest. .Ml her duties are related to him. 
If he is removed out of her life, she is a stray and ownerless animal. 

The origin of the ill-treatment of widows is scarc^-ly known. It is 
traced to the rise of P.rahmanisra after Buddhism faded away, and 

* Cbarcfa of Uk SiriaKcrs. April jo. 



I 





THB WIDOWS or INDIA 



339 



was owing probably to the greed for gain of the priests or of the de- 
ceased husband's relatives. However this may be as to the custom of 
suttee, the Brahnianical laws for women have the following; incorpo- 
rated in them: " The wife who commits herself to the flames, with 
her husband's coqjsc shall equal tlic goddess Arundhati, and reside 
in Swcrga (Heaven J. Accompanying her husband she shall reside as 
many ytars in Swarga as there are hairs on the human body." 

As if this prospect of prolonged bliss was not enough to allure the 
widow to immolate herself, the consequences of preferring to live are 
thus stated ; " As long as a woman shall not burn herself after the 
deatli of her husband, she sliall be subject to transmigration in a fe- 
male form." Many women of exalted minds consented to the sacri- 
fice, considering the joys of Stvarga preferable, though bought by 
fire, to the Hfe of the flegraded widow. According to tradition some 
repented when they felt the fire, but their screams and entreaties were 
soon drowned by the yells of the priests and the clanging of their 
tocsins. Englishmen who have witnessed some of these fearful sac- 
rifices bear teslimony that many a widow was taken against her will; 
some in an agony of protest. Others had been stupefied by drugs and 
were unconscious of the fate awaiting them. 

In the year 1817, it was found that, on an average, two widows 
were burned alive every day in Bengal alone. The horror of the Eng- 
lish army and of the civilians ctdminated in a protest against the mon- 
strous crime. Governor after governor had his attention called to it, 
hut until Lord Eentinck came into power as governor-general not one 
had dared take prohibitory measures. In 1829 Lord Uentinck de- 
clared suttee illegal, wliereupon a protest was sent him by the Brah- 
mans, affirming that " the suttee was not only a sacred duty, but an 
exalted privilege, and denouncing the prohiljilion as a breach of the 
promise that there should be no interference with the religious cus- 
toms of the Hindus, and begging for its restoration." Lord Bentinck 
refused to rescind the act, but sent it to the Privy Council in England 
for action. The result was that in 1831 suttee became a thing of the 
past. 

But w-idows remained. One peculiarity nf India is a disproportion 
of widows. Out of about 140,000.000 women, 27,000.000 are widows. 
of whom 14,000 are less than four years of age. Now a widow, by 
the mere fact of widowhood, is accursed of the gods. She was some- 
one or something in a fnrmcr birth that committed a great sin, and is 
now. as a widow, suffering the penalty for it. According to Hindii- 
ism every woman may he one nf an aidless round of reincarnations 
of a widow who did not burn herself on her husband's pyre, or she 
may have been, in some former state, a wiic who gave an ugly an- 
swer, at some time, to her husband, and who consequently was re- 
born a pariah dog; the dog may have, one day, eaten the dinner of a 
Rrahman priest, being punished, in turn, by returning to earth as 
a widow. The woman who comes into the world never knows what 
she was or what she has done in her former birth. If she had been 
something good, she would not now be a woman; being a woman, 
widowhood ever hangs over her as a possible curse, and the first 
daily prayer of a wife is that she may die before her husband. 



I 




240 GENERAL PHILANTHROPY OF UISSIONS 

According to Manu, " a husband must constantly be revered as a 
god by a virtuous wife." No sacrifice is allowed to women apart from 
their husbands, no religious rite, no fasting; as far only as a wife 
honors her lord, so far is she exalted ; for women being weak 
creatures, and having no share in the mantras, are falsehood personi- 
fied. Manu aI»o says : " Day and night should women be kept by 
the male members of the family in a state of dependence. The father 
guards them in childhood ; the husband guards them in youth ; in old 
age, the sons gnartl thcni. A woman ought never to be in a state of 
independence." In the Skanda Pitrana, we find: '* A husband is to 
a wife greater than Vishnu. The husband is her god, priest, and re- 
ligion." Therefore, when her husband dies, the widow finds herself 
godless, prieslless, without religion, accursed. Her touch is pollu- 
tion. The sight of her is a bad omen. She is not bidden to any 
festive occasion, and not only that, but if a widow crosses the path of a 
man before he goes out to his dady duties, he considers himself de- 
filed, and if a Brahman he must take a second bath to purify himself. 

Poor, weak, dependent creature I What awaits her now, since she 
can not ascend in flames to the Swarga of her husband? She must 
first be shorn ; the barber is called in haste ; but even before he ar- 
rives, a k:ck of her hair must be cut off to lay upon the bier of the 
<lcad. The glory {)f her womanhood has departed, and in lieu of her 
own body, the hair miist be burned, to represent the laying aside ol 
all wifely privileges. Htr ornaments are all removed, sometimes 
forcibly. For the relatives of the deceased husband have been greatly 
wronged and afflicted by this woman who was his wife, and if they are 
harsh and cruel in disposition, the earrings are torn from her ears; the 
bracelets are snatched from the wrists, leaving them scratched and 
bleeding ; even kicks are bestowed with the abuses heaped upon the 
suffering woman's head. The little jacket which is the pride of the 
Hindu woman, is taken from her, never to be worn again. Her pretty 
colored robes of fine muslin or silk must all be given up, and here- 
after she can wear but one coarse dress, either white or red. 

After her disrobing and despoliation, the widow mu.st pass thir- 
teen days in solitude. The darkness and loneliness is relieved only 
by the revilings and abuses poured upon the shunned and sorrowing 
one, by those who pass her door, or who sit by it to bewail the dead 
and curse the living. The Brahman and high-caste widows have to 
suffer the most. After the heartrending ceremonies of the thirteen 
days are over, the widow's life depends on her surroundings. She 
must go through life without the jacket, without jewels, without 
money. She may have only one hot meal in the twenty-four hours. 
She must make long fasts. She can enjoy no privileges of religion 
now that her husband has gone, but the fasting she can kctp up since 
it is still in connection with him, for she mourns for htm, and has, 
moreover, herself to purify. For who knnws what she may be in the 
next birth? Unless she makes expiation she may be again a widow* 
or perhaps a jackal, or a snake. 

At the time of her marriage, a girl goes to the family of her hus- 

*«»nd. and thereafter belongs to them. If the husband has no familv 

ig at the time of bis death, the widow can ro back to her own 



I 




THE WIDOWS OF INDIA 




mily: she may then lead a comparatively quiet and easy life. Or, if 
(•he is not widowed until she has sons old enough to protect her, she 
Jmay live with a son, and not with the husband's relatives^ and, al- 
:though she must be dependent on her son in his house, she may be 
■an honored woman who really rules the household. Even if she is in 
^e husband's family, if she is old enough lo be of service and is 
, obedient and cheerful, she may remain through life with the minimum 
•of the hardships in a widow's life. It is early widowhood that ap- 
>pcals the most strongly for sympathy. Pundit Nuara Vidyasagara, 
''who, in 1855, led the agitation for the remarriage of widows, says 
tin his appeal: "An adequate idea of the intolerable hardships of 
' early widowhood can be formed by those only whose idaughtcrs, sis- 
[tcrs, and other female relatives have been deprived of their husbands 
tin infancy." If the husband dies young, the greater the sin of the 
'widow and the more severe her lot must naturally be. She becomes the 
[ilave and the drudge of the family. She can be beaten even with a 
j^red-hot iron, and there is no redress. Imagine the woe of a pretty 
tlittle girl-wife, who has been laden with ornaments, to be in a single 
(day thrust aside, a shaven, denuded, polluted creature, subject to the 
• orders of the whole household. 

All widowed children are not cruelly treated, but there is not one 

whose lot can be envied ; not one whose lot is not sad enough even 

without mentioning the sundering of ties of love when the marriage 

tie is so woefully broken. For although the bride has no choice of a 

[lover, but marries the man the parents have provided for her, there 

I arc cases where love, or, at least liking, for each other, grows up be- 

j twecn husband and wife. Is it strange that many a widow gives her- 

[ficlf to illicit love, since nowhere else in the wide world does she know 

[or receive kindly care? Many a little widow has no option. She 

I has become the property of the male members of the family. But 

;■ worse than this, priests and their emissaries prowl around to allure 

ij the pretty and bright girls to temple service. Some of the great tem- 

'ples, especially in Benares, are called the charnel houses of widows. 

I The picture grows too dark, we must throw upon it the light that has 
come to it in latter years; the beams from the " Light of the World." 
Ever since Christianity came into India there have been widows here 
[and there who have heard the good news and accepted it. In nearly 
!aJ] cases these have been older women who were bereft of kindred 
.or who had larger liberty of action. The widowed children ind 
young women have had far less opportunity even of hearing of love 
:and freedom in Christ. 

In the western presidency, Pundita Ramabai was the first to open 
:a home for young Hindu widows where they couM be educated. It 
[began and still continues a neutral school; no Christianity is taught 
[directly, but the atmosphere is Christian, and many a youner woman 
f there has been intelligent enough to see that the source of all her bless- 
jings is worthy to be loved and worshiped, and so she has been bap- 
[tixed a Christian. But the Pundita's great, warm heart has planned 
[larger things. On her farm near Poena, she has a distinctively Chrls- 
[tian home, and in it are gathered nearly three hundred widows, most 
'©f them child-widows saved from the famine of 1897, This home 



L 





GOTESAL PHXLAKTHBOrY OF MISSIONS 

it 3 Icmdergartai. a sdiool, and a place of manual txaimD^ with a 
variety of indDstncs. Pundita Ramabai is dab^ uujjuifiueat work 
magntficentlj. 

In a smaller way other bocnes have been opened Cor widows by 
missknary ladies. The condition of the widows has ahrays mu ig lj 
appealed to me, and I had made room m one ujnipumid for two or 
three at a time, as they would come to me^ pennilesft. deserted, ill. or 
crippled. In every case the love and care which they leoeived was 
a revelation to them, and nearly every one yielded with joy to her 
Saviour, to become a new creature in every sense. 

The famine of 1S97 opened the hearts ot God's people, and anxng 
the thousands of dollars sent, some were sent to me especially im 
widows. The will of the Lord went before, and prepared a boose. 
When all was ready, the widows came in. some from the famine dis- 
trict, old and young. Others came from the city, widowed by plague ; 
and soon the house was full of women and their little children. The 
famine women came filthy, unkempt, ravenous, sn^ucions, full of 
evil habits intensified by a year of wandering and severest hardships. 
They were all of the better caste, some Brahmans. but few of Chose 
who came in from the city knew how to read or to sew. Most of 
them knew nothing whatever except to cook their own food. Les- 
sons in morality, decency, and cleanliness came first, then sewing 
and the alphabet, with every day and many times a day the lessons 
of Christ's love and care. 

Within three years fifteen of these women have united with the 
Church and had their children baptized. Three have been remarried 
to Christian men. one went to a Bible school, another to a teachers* 
training school, another to be trained as a nurse in a hospital, tvro 
went to care for untainted children connected with our leper asylum, 
and two have died. As these have gone out, others have come in. 

BUdd G4rlft til Chbu 

Mrs. Wellingtok White, Former Missioitary. Presbylerian 
Church. U. S. A.. China* 

In Canton, twenty years ago, there was not the slightest work being 
done for the blind. 

I can not explain to you what the life of blind girls in China really 
is. The very evening of the day I landed in China, Mrs. Happer took 
me to the front veranda, and as we stood there we counted sixteen 
processions of blind girls as they walked through that street. An old 
woman with eyes that could see walked in front playing on some kind 
of a stringed instrument and behind her walked these twelve or 
fourteen girls, each one with her hands on the shoulders of the one 
in front of her. They were prettily dressed. Oh, Satan always makes 
everything so beautiful, their faces were painted, their hair prettily 
dressed, the garments were pretty, and of course, everything was done 
to make then*, beautiful. But when you looked carefully you saw 
they were stone blind. That old wretch walking in front owned those 
girls body and soul, and walked the streets of Canton playing on that 
mstrument to call the attention of people to this party of girls, and 

*Cbarcb o( ibe Stnuifcn, April )o. 





WORK FOR THE BUND 



M3 



she left them, one here, and one there, and one somewhere else, wher- 
ever they were calk'd in, lo a night of imniorahty. And I said to Mrs. 
Rapper: '* What is done for them?" " Nothing," she said. 
I Two years after that, God sent Mary Niks to Canton. God used 
Jtfiat woman physician to start a home for those bhnd girls. Thank God 
J stand here to-day to tell yuii thai the story of twenty years ago can 
fpot be repeated so readily in the streets of Canton. In 1891 Dr. Mary 
[Niles was called into a Viceroy's family and there her medical skill 
snade her the means of saving the life of one of the wives of the Vice- 
Toy of Canton. And after a while, a servant of the Viceroy came to 
Dr. Xiles and said: "The \'iceroy has told mc to ask you whether 
there was anyihing he could do to help your work." She answered, 
as quick as a flash, * Yes, take this little book to the Viceroy and to 
ithe high officials and get nve some money to start a home for Llind 
yirls." The Viceroy's man took that book away, and be it said to the 
honor of those heathen men who understood the life of a blind girl 
a& you people do not. in just one week's time they sent her one thou- 
sand dollars to start her home. 

Dr. Mary NIlcs is using the Braille method In teaching these girls 
'to read and write in Chinese with their own little fingers. So these 
httlc girls arc printing, you may call it, their own Bibles by embossing 
on the paper the points of the Braille system. Now you see what is 
going to be done with those girts. Some of them are being supported 
by one denomination and some by another in America, and in Ger- 
l^any, and in England. 

] Where blind children of the rich are received into die Home, it will 
jbc safe to let them return to their parents after studying at the school. 
[Then each of the blind girls will carry the gospel of our Lord and 
[Saviour to those heathen homes where possibly none of the mission- 
pries could enter in and tell them about Christ. 

t One other thing about what Is to be done with them. If they do not 
'go back to rich homes — that is, if they have been saved from a life of 
'^Sl-fame, they will be used by our lady physicians and Bible-women 
working in the hospital. We have women's wards 111 the hospital, and 
they can be used as Bible- women to read the Word of God to the sick 
women and go from bedside to bedside in the women's hospital. 

Mumy'i Syitcm for Teaching <^^"«t Blind 

Rev. a. M. Cunningham, Missionary, Presbyterian Church, 
\V. S. A., Chim.* 

( It may be that the Chinaman's heavily curtained and diminutive 
;eyes may be accounted for by rimless hats, intense sunlight, sandy and 
iwindy plains, hut as causes which account, at least in part, for the 
awful prevalence of blindness, we would mention the following ; Un- 
cured ophthalmia, smallpox, leprosy, and other loathsome diseases, 
[together with the habit of imrcstrained passion and filthiness. We 
'must also add another horrible cause : namely, that of parents ruth- 
jlessly putting otit the eyes of their own children with the hope that 
■thus deprived of external vision they may have in a fuller measure an 
jintcmal vision — i.e., power to read the thoughts of other hearts which 

■ Cburcb at ihe Stnogen, Af ril ja. 





GENERAL PHtLAKTHROPY OF MISSION'S 




944 



will enable them to become successful fortune-tellers, and thus bring" a 
litllc more cash into the family treasury. By day Uic blind go about 
from place to place in companies or alone, begging. At night they 
seek out sonic roadside niche, or projecting roof, their only shelter. 
It is a sad fact that among the blind there is an appalling looseness of 
life, and many, very many sightless girls are taken to fill the brothels. 
Loss of natural eyesight seems to be followed by a loss of moral 
vision and sense of social pnrity. 

Rev. W. H. Murray, of the National Bible Society of Scotland, was 
located in Peking in 187 1. He found the Beggars' Bridge an excel- 
lent place for his Bible selling. He even found the blind willing 
to buy portions of this sacred book. On being asked what good it 
would do them, they said that they would try and get someone to 
read it to them. Mr. Murray's heart was full of pity for these poor, 
wretched people. In 1880, in face of great difficulties he determined 
to do something for them. He learned from blind little Mina Dud- 
geon and her governess in the home of Dr. Dudgeon, of Peking, how 
the blind in England are taught. Mr. Murray adapted the Braille 
system of embossed dots to the Chinese language. The 408 distinct 
sounds of the mandarin dialect were numbered. Mr. Murray then 
represented each cf the numerals, i to 10, by one of Braille's symbols; 
by combining these all other numbers are obtained. For instance, to 
represent the numeral 387, it is only necessary to place the symbols 
for 3, 8, and 7 in succession. When the deft finger tips arc passed 
over the symbials 3. 8, and 7 in this immediate succession, the ready 
mind instantly suggests the meaning of the number 387. 

It is said that the Chinese find Mr. Murray's system of numbers so 
surprisingly easy that the most ignorant blind persons acquire the 
art both of reading and writing fluently in less than three months. 
Indeed persons who are not blind are learning to read Chinese by 
exactly the same system. 

I would add that I have known different missionaries to employ 
this system with men and women who could sec, but who could not 
read, and the results were gratifying. Only a few days ago a letter 
came from a lady missionary of Peking, saying that she had just been 
using this system with a class of country women. The results seemed 
to be satisfactory. 

Mr. Murray's school of from twenty to thirty has already turned 
out some good men and women ready for efficient work. I may not 
here dwell upon the use of this system in teaching vocal and instru- 
mental music and shorthand. The pupils arc taught type work for 
sight printing, type work for blind embossing, to be practical teachers 
of those who see, tuning, repairing harmoniums, etc. 

I know from observation both in the school and of those sent to tlie 
Presbyterian Hospital how large a place both Mr. and Mrs. Murray 
have in the hearts of these poor blind boys and girls. 

Among the most satisfactory sturlents who have attracted no little 
attention among the Chinese Christians and also of the foreigners is 
Blind Peter. He was taken from a life of begging to become a 
valued and trusted helper. He received the truth, lived it, talked it, 
and sang it. He also made the organ tell it in many gospel services. 



I 





WORK AMONG LEPERS ^45 

His sincere Chnstian life and victorious death both told of the power 
of God upon him. He knew by lieart much of the New TesiainciU 
and some hundreds of songs, both words and music. Surely the work 
of rescuing such poor unfortunates is a labor of love which verily re- 
veals the heart of the Master, Jesus Christ. 

Mbuoo 'Work Amonf Lepcn 

Mk. WeLLtiiLEv C. Bailey, Secretary, Mission to Lepers in 
India and the East, Ediitbttrgh.* 

It is a fact that lepers abound in the world in the present day. 
There is scarcely a country, be it never so small, where the disease is 
cot to be found. Great Britain is, perhaps, as free as any place, and 
yet even there a few lepers arc always to be discovered, if one takes 
the trouble to look for Ihem. India is said to have half a millioa 
lepers, China has probably a like number. In the former country 
the disease is more evenly distributed than in the latter, being found 
from the Himalayas to Cape Comoriti; in the mountains and in the 
plains; inland and on the scacoast; in dry, arid regions, as well as in 
the damp and swampy places, though it must be allowed that the damp 
regions seem to favor the disease. In China, leprosy is more prL-valent 
in the south and southeast. Japan has two hundred thousand officially 
registered cases of leprosy, and it is known to abound in (he Malay 
Archipelago, Siam, the Philippines, and also in Korea ; so that, speak- 
ing of India and the East, we are well within the mark if we place 
the leper population at one million and a half. 

The disease is found to a large extent in Africa and Madagascar; 
more or less in North and South America ; in the West India Islands, 
and in the Sandwich Islands. 

It is now very generally admitted that the leprosy of the present 
day is the same disease as tlial of which we read so much in the Word 
of God, though from the Old Testament records it is quite evident 
that there was a good deal of confusion in the minds of the people 
as to what constituted true leprosy, and what did not. 

Leprosy is undoubtedly contagious, though not infectious — that is 
to say, it is conveyed from the diseased to the healthy by actual con- 
tact; but at the same time, it can not be highly contagious, for very 
few of those who have been ministering to lepers have ever con- 
tracted the disease, so few indeed, that we may almost say that all 
workers among lepers arc exempt. 

The nature of the contact necessary to produce risk, and the manner 
in which the bacillus lepra is received into the system, are matters 
Still hotly debated in the medical world. A very popular mistake 
about leprosy is that it is hereditary. And yet on this pha.se of the 
subject there is perhaps a more genera! consensus of opinion in the 
medical and scientific world than upon any other. In the report of 
the commissioners appointed by the National Leprosy Fund, under 
' the presidency of H. R. H. the Prince of Wales, K. G., we find the 
following : 

" I. No authentic congenital case has ever been put on record, nor 
was one seen in this country (India). 2. Many instances occur of 

• Cburcb of Uie Stnncert, Miy i. 






246 CEKERAL FUILANTHROrV OF UlfSIOXS 

children l>eing affected while their parents remain perfectly health)*. 
3. The percentage of chihlren, the rtsuU of leper marriages, who be- 
come lepers, is too small to warrant the behcf in the hereditarj* trans- 
mission of the disease. 4. The facts obtained from the Orphanage of 
the Almora Asylum (a home for the untainted children of lepers) 
disprove the existence of a speci6c hereditary predisposition. 5. Only 
five or six per cent, of the cliildren bom after manifestation of the 
disease in the parents, become subsequently affected. The histories 
of the brothers and sisters of leper parents with a true or false heredi- 
tary taint seem to show that little importance can be attached to in- 
heritance in the perpetuation of the disease." 

The great Leprosy Conference in Berlin in October, 1897, gave 
to the world as their verdict that " leprosy is contagious, but not 
hereditary." The disease may certainly be regarded as incurable. The 
Berlin Conference says on this point : " The disease has hitherto re- 
sisted all efforts to cure it." 

While one can not but acknowledge that, comparatively speaking. 
a great deal is being done to ameliorate the unhappy lot of the leper, 
there are yet instances occurring, from time to time, in different 
parts of the world, which go to show that the unfortunate leper is still 
treated with as great barbarity as ever he was. For instance, in speak- 
ing of China, a missionary tells us: '" Many years ago a Mandarin 
determined to stamp it out, and took the following manner of doing 
so. He invited all the lepers to a great feast, set fire to the building, 
and all who escaped the fire perished by the swords of the troops sur- 
rounding the building." Within the last few months a terrible story- 
has reached us from one of the missionaries of the Rhenish Mission- 
ary Society of the burning alive of at least four lepers in Sumatra. 
Tliis lady says : " I have told you about my poor leper, Nai Haseja, 
whom I used to visit regularly. I believe she did tnist in the Saviour. 
though her notions were very confused. She lived alone in a little 
hut made of bamboo, with straw roof. Her neighbors were very 
frightened of her and wanted her to go away, but she refused. Last 
week Brother S. rode past there and saw a terrible sight : the hut and 
the brushwood burned to the ground, and the bones in the midst. 
The people were standing around, among them Nai Haseja's son, 
who was crying, but Brother S. heard a man scolding him because 
of his tears. ' He ought to be thankful that liis mother was now 
dead.' If they had only done it at night when she was fast asleep 
she would not have suffered so much, but this was at 5.30 a.m. She 
was awake, but had not yet left her hut, and her boy told me she 
had been begging for mercy! I passed by there this afternoon. It 
is hardly five minutes from here." 

Wc are told by lepers from Nepal, in the Himalayas, that to be a 
leper there is to incur the death penalty, and in order to avoid this 
fate, they sometimes flee into British territory. Even in many places 
where the leper is not allowed to be put to death he is treated with 
great barbarity. In Japan ihcy are called "himm." which means 
" not human." In India they are often driven ovX of house and 
home, sometimes being " stoned away " from their villages. 

The writer of this paper has himself come across them in different 




I 



I 
I 



\ 



WORK AMONG LEPERS 

parts of India wandering' a.bout witliout a friend in the world. After 
they are driven away irviu their villagi; they will wander away into 
the jungle, where they build themselves a little mat or reed hul and 
eke out a terrible existence, living on roots, or on whatever may 
chance to be thrown to them by paascrs-by. They will sometimes 
take up their abode in a cave, or in a hole under some g^eat rock. It 
must he borne in mind, too, that these pitiable objects are sometimes 
women, and children of tender years. Sometimes a mother will lae 
hunted from her home with a babe at her breast ! And if we remem- 
ber that in many instances the victims of the disease arc absolutely 
helpless, having lost fingers and toes, or even hands and feet, leav- 
ing nothing but useless stumps, which continue to waste and slough, 
and that the disease will sometimes have robbed them of sight and 
almost of the power of speech, it will, 1 think, be allowed that such 
piteous cases are in themselves the very quintessence of human misery. 

Then let us consider that these people are not only without hope of 
bodily relief, or of having their condition bettered in this life, but that 
the unknown future ujion which they are to enter as soon as they are 
released from their misery here is without one ray of light, and I 
think we have at all events established the fact that there is no class 
in all the world more needing the gospel of Jesus Christ. 

Missionary work among lepers naturally falls — like medical mis- 
sion work — into two grooves, the healing or physical relief groove, 
and the spiritual groove. Such work has been carried on among 
lepers for many years. Roman Catholics in olden times were very 
devoted in their attention to lepers, and in those days all the tazar 
houses were looked after by priests or nuiis. Roman Catholics still 
have institutions for lepers in different parts of the world. 

Among Protestants, the Moravians were probably the first to take 
up this work as far back as i8tQ. when Ihey began their noble work 
at HemcI-en-Aarde, in South Africa. Their first regular missionary 
was Leitner, who, with his English wife, entered the leper settle- 
ment. For six years did Brother Leitncr continue his arduous and 
Christlike work in that terrible abode of living death, a work that re- 
sembled in most respects that of Damicn ; and, like him, he fell at his 
post, though, happily, not a leper. The Leitners were followed by 
Brother and Sister Tietze, who remained in the settlement nearly ten 
years, when Brother Tietze. too, may have been said to have fallen 
at his post. Next came Brother and Sister Fritsch, who were fol- 
lowed by Brother and Sister Lehman. It was while the Lehmans 
were in charge that the settlement was moved from Hemel-en-Aardc 
to Robben Island, in 1846. These devoted laborers were followed 
in turn by the Stollzes. Brother Wedeman (who was once for two 
years without a visit from any of his brethren on the mainland), the 
KustcTS, and Brother John Taylor. 

At present, as is pretty generally known, the Moravians have an In- 
teresting leper home near Jerusalem, where there are men and women 
who, for Christ's sake, are in hourly attendance on the suffering in- 
mates of that institution. 

In India and China individual missionaries and others have for 
many years been ministering to lepers as they found opportunity, and 







348 GENERAL PHILANTHROPY OP MISSIONS 

have done noble service in this direction. A score of names mi^ be 
mentioned of missionaries now at work for lepers in conoectioo with 
some of the great missionary societies. 

Miss Reed's pathetic story has sent a thrill of sympathy thm^ 
the world. How she herself discovered that she had bocomc a vic- 
tim to the disease: how she turned her back upon her home and all 
dear to her, and determined to consecrate the rest of her life to her 
fellow-sufferers, how she took op her abode in a leper settlement in a 
lonely spot in the Himalayas, and how wonderfully the progress of 
the disease has, in her case, been stayed, as she believes, in answer 
to prayer which has ascended from Qiristiaiis all over the worlds are 
now matters of history. 

It remained, however, for the " Mission to Lepers in India and the 
East " to be the 6rst to enter this field as a society founded wholly 
and solely for the benefit, physical and spiritual, of lepers. This so- 
ciety was founded in Dublin in the year 1874, and originally aimed 
at reaching lepers in India only, but as time went on, the work ex- 
tended to China and Japan, and the title of the society was enlarged 
accordingly. The society is now at work in fifty-six centers: in In- 
dia, Burma, Ceylon, China, and Japan, and is about to extend its 
operations to Korea and Sumatra. It has twenty-four asylums, or 
homes of its own, fourteen homes for the untainted children of lepers, 
and aids fifteen other institutions. 

It is interdenominational and international in its constitution and 
in its working. It carries on its work in co-operation with the mission- 
aries of twenty-two different societies, among which are sevefal 
American and German societies. 

The most effective way of reaching lepers has been found to be 
by gathering the more helpless of them into asylums, and there 
ministering to their wants, spiritual and temporal, and where this is 
being done the results are tnily man-elous. The writer has recently 
been making up some statistics of the work for the year 1899, and 
finds some remarkable facts. Of a total of 1,320 lepers and 188 un- 
tainted children of lepers, gathered into nineteen Christian institu- 
tions, watched over by missionaries, there are 1,147 professing Chris- 
tians, of whom 365 have been baptized during the yearl 

In nineteen other institutions aided by the society, many of which 
are Government or municipal hospitals or asylums, and in some of 
which there are only occasional visits from missionaries, the results 
are very different. Of 1,130 inmates, only 434 arc professing Chris- 
tians, while the baptisms were only thirty for the year. This dearly 
shows the immense advantage of having such institutions completdy 
under Christian control. 

The two main departments in the work of this mission are: (a) 
That of ministering to those actually afflicted with the disease, and 
(b) that of saving the as yet untainted children from falling victims 
to the disease. For the former we can do biil little from the physical 
point of view, at least so far as any hope of euro is concerned ; at the 
"•ne time wc can do a great deal to relieve suffering and to improve 
etieral health ; and then we have for them the great consolations 
gospel. For them of all people, surely it is sweet music to 



* 




J 




KG LEPEHS 



I 



I 



I 



I 



I 
I 



I 



lear: " come unto me all ye that labour and arc heavy laden, and 
T will give you rest," or. " Thine eyes shall sec the king in his 
beauty . . . and the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick." But 
for the latter we have, thank God, a double salvation. 

If those children of lepers who arc as yet untainted with the dis- 
ease, can be separated from their leprous relatives, there is every rea- 
son to hope that they may be saved. Acting- on that idea, the " Mis- 
sion to Lepers " has for some years been making efforts to save the 
children. The method adopted ts to build, in connection with asylums 
for lepers, homes for their untainted offspring, and to invite the lepers 
to give up their children into the charge of the missionaries. This 
has been carried on now for a considerable time with very marked 
success. Many of the children thus separated and saved arc now in 
the world doing for themselves ; some of them arc married and have 
children of tlieir own. Not only arc these children saved from the 
physical taint of leprosy, but through the grace of God many of them 
are being saved from a far worse moral taint, and further, this work 
for children assists largely in putting an end to one of earth's greatest 
scourges, A tliird and very important branch of the operations of 
this societj- is that of providing religious instruction for the inmates 
of Government and municipal asylums, where otherwise they would 
have no opportunity of hearing the gospel. 

From every point of view the results of this leper work are most 
striking. It is a work upon which God seems to have set a special 
seal. As a class tlic lepers arc easily reached, and as a class they 
readily respond to the gospel invitation. Many splendid trophies of 
divine grace have hccn won from among them. This work has a 
wonderful effect also upon the surrounding heathen, and influences 
them in favor of Christianity. To .see a European or American lady 
binding up the sores of a poor leper is an object-lesson not easily for- 
gotten by the heathen. 

The results of this work upon the Christian converts, too, are very 
good, for when they see Iheir missionaries ministering with their own 
hands to the poor oiucast leper, it teaches them a wonderful lesson in 
self-sacrifice, making them willing to deny themselves for others. 

Miss Budden, Missionary, London Missionary Society. India* 
I have been asked to say a few words in connection with the lepers, 
because I am in contact with them. I come from Almora, where one 
of the first asylums of India was opened by Sir Henry Ramsay, and 
carried on by my father. My father and mother worked among these 
lepers for many years and I consider it one of the highest privileges to 
be allowed to carry on the work. 

One does not need to work long among heathen people to realize 
very clearly that the gospel is meant for them, and T do not think I 
ever realized it so clearly as when I worked among the lepers in the 
asylum. Leprosy is such a fearful disease. To feel that it must day 
by day get worse and worse until finaHy it destroys the lifel And it 
is not only the hopelessness of the disease^ it is the hopelessness of 
everything in this life and the life to come; for the lepers among the 

* Churck of tk« Stnngtn, Mtf u 




J 



350 GSNBKAt PHUANTHROPy OF MISSIONS 

heathen have no hope even in the life beyond. If you understand 
this, you will understand what It is to them to receive the gospel of 
Christ, and when it dawns on their minds that Jesus came into the 
world for them ; and when the stories are read to them about having 
pity on the leper ; and when they realize that this Christ is still living 
and pities them and is willing to save them, I assure you the effect 
upon them is so marvelous that it makes you realize as you never did 
before that Christ is the Saviour of all the world. 

This knowledge brings not only hope, but it brings love and life to 
them. I used to have a Bible class once a week for the leper women in 
our asylum. It was one of the happiest afternoons of the week. 
Often I have heard those women thank God for having made them 
lepers, because if they had not been lepers, perhaps they would never 
have heard of the kingdom of Christ, and certainly they would not 
have been so willing to receive Him as their Saviour, as after having 
been ca«t off by everyone else. And they would say to you : " When 
we come to the other life, when we see Jesus as He is, we shall not be 
as we are now, shall we ? We shall be like other people, we shall not 
take these bodies with us into that hfe beyond." The joy and the hope 
it brings them is marvelous. 

Anything that we do for them is not thrown away even in this life. 
Their hearts are filled with gratitude. It fills their hearts with a 
desire to do something for others, and sometimes out of their poverty 
they try to help others. We have special self-denial work in our 
mission m Almora, and the lepers themselves express the desire that 
they could join with the other Christians in this. They have even 
volunteered to give up a whole day's food that they might join a con- 
tribution with ours. 




Relations of NmItc Workers to the Missionary— Training and Development' 
Colporteurs — Bible-women. 



Rcbtioiu of Native ^Torkets to tfie Miwonary 

Rev. H M. M. Hacki:tt, M.A., D.C.L,, Former Missionary, 
Church Missionary Society, India.* 

In most question.^ the real difficulty in forming' a jurlpment arises 
from ignorance, total or partial, of the facts and conditions involved. 
If these were fnlly known, the conclusion would be almost self- 
evident. Let ns try. therefore, to present as clcarJy as possible the 
facts, conditions, and difficulties of the question of the relation of the 
native agency to the missionary. Then we may safely leave the solu- 
tion of the question to take care of itself. 

Personal observation and experience enable me to speak with con- 
fidence of one mission field in oitc eountry of the non-Christian world 
— the northwestern provinces of the prcat Indian Empire. This will 
serve to remind you that no one answer can be complete. The cir- 
cumstances of one country arc quite different from those of another, 
and even those of the various parts of one sing"le country. How 
widely separated in India is the man laboring among the more civil- 
ized classes, from his brother working among the Bhils, Gonds, and 
other aboriginal tribes. 

The various branches of missionary activity also call into existence 
a great variety of native agents. There is the cvangclislie work with 
the native catechist or reader, the pastoral work with the native priest 
or pastor, the educational work with Che native teacher anrl master, 
the medical work with the native doctor and dresser, the literary de- 
partment with the native translator and colporteur, and the zenana 
work with the native Bible- woman, teacher, and visitor. In the pres-- 
ent instance we are happily limited to one field, the evangelistic. But 
it has to be remembered thai the relations between the missionary and 
the native agent are of three different kinds: there is an official, a 
personal, and a social relationship, and each calls for separate con- 
sideration. 

Enough has now been said to place before you the wide extent of 
the subject. It is a point of view sometimes lost sight of. and yet un- 
doubtedly the native agent is the center of all permanent work in 
every branch of missionary enterprise. Missionaries are few and ex- 
pensive, native agents are cheaper and more numerous. Missionaries 
«re of necessity too often only birds of passage; they retire, leave the 

* PHtb Avenue Pretbrtcrlui Churcb, AfiTil 14. 




2Sa PERMANENT RESULTS IN NATIVE WOUKERS 

country, and are no more seen. The native agents live and die in their 
own country. Missionaries are foreigners; the langiaage and modes 
of thought, the manners and customs of the people, are strange to 
them. The native agent Is speaking his mother tongue, and is at 
home in the country. Undoubtedly the missionary brings gifts and 
contributions to the work which arc superior to what the native agent 
has to offer. He has Irehind h:ni centuries of Christianity and a back- 
ing of Christian sympathy and prayer. He has definite and skilled 
knowledge of Christian doctrine and thought. He ought to possess 
a high degree of spiriuiaiity as brought up from childhood amongst 
Christians and at the footstool of Christ Himself. And he has powers 
of organization and authority which peculiarly belong to the Western, 
and are rarely found in the Eastern character. For the present, at all 
events, the missionary for the most part initiates, guides, and controls ; 
the native agent obeys and carries on tiie daily routine of work. 

A few words as to the relations actually existing in tlic mission 
field between native agents on the one hand, and missionary societies 
and different types of missionaries on the other, will complete the 
statement of the problem, and introduce the practical. difficulty of the 
question. It is a common saying amongst experienced missionaries 
that in the first period the young missionary regards all native Chris- 
tians as faultless angels. In the next period the idol is shattered, and 
the native Christian is regarded as whoHy and entirely bad. with 
hardly one redeeming quality. After that, if he is wise, the missionary 
learns to estimate native Christians at their true value. In that sec- 
ond period, however, which sometimes lasts too long, the native agent 
is never trusted, always suspected, even despised. 

But the fault of some missionaries is quite of the opposite character. 
Even though not blind to the failings of the native agent, they exalt 
him far above his station and position in life. They ignore all social 
and educational conditions, and spoil him by praise and injudicious 
treatment. They wish no difference to be made between native 
and European. Some years ago one missionary society made a false 
move of this kind from which it almost immediately retired. Owing 
to the pressure brought to bear by well-meaning but unwise persons, it 
was resolved that all native ordained agents were to have the same 
allowances as Englishmen in the same position. One only was ad- 
mitted to that privilege, and he has been laying up money ever since. 
.His expenses do not amount to one-fourth of those of a European: 
his salary for years has been the same. Hut there is the very opposite 
clanger upon the other side which also has to be avoided. In another 
society, because there has been no recognition of a higher class, edu- 
cated native worker, young men have been kept back from the min- 
istry, and have turned to secular pursuits. They have felt that they 
could do more for Qirist in an honorable position won by their own 
merit, than as the ill-paid and despised agents of a foreign missionary 
society. But here again the society is not wholly to blame. The inten- 
tion of every missionary society is to call into existence and to 
develop a native ministry supported by the native church itself. The 
business of the missionary society is to provide and support mission- 
aries to the heathen and non-Christians. The work of the native 




I 



BELAT10XS OF XATIVE WORKERS TO THE IflSSIONARY 253 

diurdi most be to sustain Its on-n clergy. But the native church is 
poor and can not afFonl to pay sufficient salaries to its ministers, and 
tlirrefore the society justly hesitates to initiate a scale of payment 
which the native church could not continue. 

Tbe tme roetbod of treatment of the native worker is the result of a 
con i b i na tion of brotherly love with Christian common-sense; the love 
which begets 5\Tnpathy. and the common-sense which refuses to be 
blinded. In the first place, missionaries should ever try fully to un- 
derstand the native worker. His ways of thought are different from 
ours ; his opportunities have been far inferior, and his cn\nronment has 
been for the most part thr very reverse of helpful. Again, mission- 
aries should constantly bear in mind the actual value of the work of 
the native and should not be slow to let him have credit for it. It is at 
times humiliating, as well as painful, to listen to a missionary de- 
scribing to an interested audience his work, his success, his baptisms, 
and bis converts, but making no allusion to his native helpers and their 
share in the work. And yet in India, at all events, it is almost always 
the native catechist who has been the means of bringing in the en- 
quirer. The missionary has then instructed and baptized him, and 
too often has taken to himself any credit that was to be had. It is 
right and it is wise that the native assistant should be made to feel that 
in this matter he is upon a level with the missionary, that both arc fel- 
low workers with God. It should be no effort to give the catechist this 
position, for undoubtedly he is the missionary's right hand and should 
be treated as such. 

However, some difficulties arc not so easily removed. Perhaps a 
catechi.st has committed some fault, and it is felt that he ought to be 
punished for it ; or a missionary has lost alt faith in the sincerity of the 
catechist. What is to be done? It is usual for the superintending 
missionary to withhold in such cases the whole or part of salary of 
the agent. It is difficult quite to justify this mode of procedure. 
Fining should only be resorted to when the case has been adjudged by 
the controlling missionary body. And even then the question arises 
whether it is right or not. If the catechist is an earnest Christian, then 
by more potent and more Christian means he may be convinced of his 
error and restored in the spirit of meekness. If he is unworthy, then 
he clearly ought to be discharged. Rut this is a point not so easily 
determined, and most mi.ssionarics shrink from the actual dismissal 
when the case is at all doubtful. If an evangelist were being ap- 
pointed in the first instance it would be right and proper to be con- 
vinced of spirituality of character and eamcsuicss of aim, but no man 
ought to be summarily dismissed because he does not seem to come 
up to the standard which ought to control the first appointment. 

The training and teaching of catechists forms now an essential part 
of all missionary work. No lay evangelist should be permanently 
appointed until he has undergone some course of training. In thi's 
connection let mc point out the unwisdom of allowing individual mis- 
sionaries to employ native agents of their own selection upon their 
own private means or iipon money subscribed hy their friends. Such 
cases have been of too frequent occurrence. Rut for several reasons 
this special support of catechists is unwise. A missionary being sup- 



ft this sp< 





PERMANENT RESULTS IN NATIVE WOKKESS 

plied with the necessary funds looks around for a suitable catechist. 
A wholly satisfactory one ts not available, for all the best are already 
engaged. But the money is there, and must be used, and so it comes 
to pass that too often an inferior man is employed. It is much better 
to leave the selection and location of evangelists to the controlling 
body of missionaries In the field, and to entrust all funds for their 
support to the society itself. 

The social relation of the evangelist to the missionary is a subject 
of much delicacy and difficulty, and time does not permit of a full 
discussion. A few words therefore must suffice. It has been seen that 
in the actual work the evangelist should be treated as a fellow laborer, 
but socially, a difference undoubtedly has to be made. It is no more 
right to place a person out of his true social position in India than it 
is in England, and it is undoubtedly injurious to the best interests of 
the work, 'I'he habits and customs and food of natives are different 
from tSiosc of Europeans, and if they arc admitted to social equality, 
it must either be upon the level of the missionary or of the native. In 
either case the result can not be satisfactory, but perhaps the worst 
is where the native is encouraged to Imitate the ways of the European. 
In camp-life and upon itineration, however, it is not only possible, but 
even right, to approximate niort: nearly to sodal equality. But after 
all the real tie between missionary and native evangelist must be a 
personal one of mutual trust and confidt-nct-. Wc spoke of the mis- 
sionary losing faith in the sincerity of the native evangelist and sug- 
gested a mode of procedure. But what about the other alternative 
when the native evangelist loses faith in the sincerity of the mis- 
sionary? Of that we prefer not to speak except to suggest that it is 
time for the recall of the missionary. If between the missionary and 
the native evangelist tlicre exists the bond nf mutual love and esteem ; 
if both are united by the tit- of faith and devotion to the one Father, 
the one common Lord and Saviour; if both are animated by a longing 
desire for the salvation of the souls of men, then the relations between 
missionarv- and catechist will always be satisfactory, and difficulties 
will be unknown. 

Rev. a. H. Ewinc^ Missionary. Presbyterian Church, U. S. A., 
India* 

The relations of native workers to missionaries and the develop- 
ment of leaders stand very close together. Dr. Murdoch, the father 
of the Christian Literature Society In India, has well said that the 
test of a mission's work Is the character of its native preachers. The 
great problem, as I understand it, in connection with this subject, is 
how to make men on the foreign field — men who will be able to lead 
the native church, Absolutely no question of finances and no ques- 
tion of the superior power and executive ability of the foreign mission- 
ary should for one instant be allowed to come in between us and this 
tremendous purpose for which we are sent forth ; to make men. 

I do not understand how iJ is pn.ssiblc that the best results even of 
Christian love, in relation with native preachers and native pastors, 
can be attained when we are their paj masters, and it is almost impos- 

• Pifth ATCDue Pmbrterlui Chnrcb. April •4. 





THEIR DEVELOPMENT 355 

sible, when a man must come from month to month to the missionary 
to receive his salary, for the missionary to avoid standing to him in 
the relation of master to servant. Here comes up that tremendous 
problem of what is to be done with the funds that go from this coun- 
try. I am profoundly convinced of this fact, that the great problem 
before mission boards and mission administration is this: How shall 
we manage so that we may have this financial question out of the way, 
and get into a new relation to our new native Christians ? Then, by 
the grace of God, which He gives us, and by the incentive which we 
may be able to give them, we may be able to make men. And the 
great solution, the one single solution, of this tremendous problem, is 
3iat we must throw responsibility upon every individual native helper 
and upon every teacher of Lhe Gospel. It is only possible to develop 
men when I have denied my right lo interfere in things which I can 
do better, and have said : " I shall be able to criticise you, but in de- 
tails you are supreme and I shall not interfere." 

Xht Developmexit of Native Woriccft 

Rev. S. H. Chester, D.D., Secretary, Board of Foreign Mis^ 
sioHS Presbyterian Church (South), U. S* 

Under constraint of the Eime limit, and also because room will be 
needed in the volumes to be issued for other phases of the work, I 
shall confine this paper lo lhe subject of the native ministry in its two 
branches of evangelists and pastors. When Christ ascended upon 
high He led captivity captive and gave gifts lo men. Among these 
gifts prominent mention is made of these two. Therefore, wherever 
Christ gives to missionary labor the material for a church, we may 
le^timately expect to find included in it the material for evangelists 
and pastors. 

I. Every foreign missionary, whether preacher^ teacher, doctor, 
translator, or writer of hooks, is essentially an evangelist, the scope of 
whose work will he measured by his ability to multiply himself by 
the native evangelists he finds, trains, and guides. In this ability or 
the lack of it, more than anywhere else, lies the difference between 
small and great missionaries. I venture to suggest that an erroneous 
conception, leading to erroneous methods, is revealed in tlic term gen- 
erally applied to native agents. In our statistical reports they are all 
still called " helpers," whereas, excepting the few who are mere per- 
sonal teachers or interpreters, ought they not to be considered as the 
main force, with the missionary for their helper? 

(0) With reference to finding evangelists it may be said that the 
missionary, provided he wants the kind that Christ wants, and seeks 
them in the way that Christ would approve, can always find as many 
of them as Christ wishes him to have at any given time. And here 
emerges the necessity that the missionary's conception of Christ's 
kingdom shall be in accord with that which Christ Himself has of it. 
Christ said: " My kingdom is not of this world." By this He did 
not mean that it has nothing to do with the governments, the social 
systems, the modes of life, the civilizations of the world; nor that 
these are things of no importance. His kingdom is the salt to save 



* FUth Amrac PmbrtcrUn Charcb, April •4. 




i 




PERMANENT RESULTS IN NATIVE WORKERS 

the world, thf leaven to leaven ft through and through, the truth to 
lighten, and the life to vivify it. In that conception of the kingdom, 
it seems to me. the missionary will have the first guidance he re- 
quires in selecting the native agency through whom the kingdom is 
to be propagated. Such workers must be, first of all, men spiritually 
alive, '* children of the kingdom." men called out of the world, and yet, 
because of the Christ-spirit in them, loving the world somewhat as He 
did, and ready as He was to live and die for its salvation. Then, as 
further marking them out as those whom Christ wants for evangel' 
ists, they must be men having a knowledge of the gospel, the gift 
utterance, and spiritual force. 

Looking at the matter from our human standpoint, there arc oth 
qualities beside these essential ones that would seem to be dcsira! 
in an evangelist. High literary culture, social position, any pow 
or means of influence that one possesses, provided it be fully conse^ 
crated, will add to his efficiency. But from the Bible standpoint, and 
taking in the whole situation, there seem to be reasons why it is only : 
in exceptional cases, at least during the missionary stage of the 
Church's life, that men with these qualities are available. The Apostlc,^^ 
writing on the subject of native agency in the Corinthian churcb?^^ 
says : " Ye sec your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men ^* 
after the fJesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called." For 
this reason, and for others, I am constrained to believe that comp 
tively few of the native agents needed to-day and chosen of Chri: 
for propagating His Church will be found among the literati 
China, the Samurai of Japan, the Yangbans of Korea, the Brahm 
of India, or the chief men of any heathen society. In Oriental 
ciety, especially, men of that class are usually found to have a marked 
aversion to every kind of work. Again, in all the Far East the most 
deadening influence on character is Confucianism, and the mos 
thoroughly Confucianized man is the litcrarj- man. To de-Con- 
fucianize him will usually require, not only regeneration, but also 
quite a lengthy period of progressive sanctification. Meanwhile he 
is likely to persist in his habit of magnifying form over substance, to 
retain more than is meet of his awful reverence for trifles and his 
enlightened scorn of weightier matters, and to shrink from the impro- 
priety of ever turning himself loose on a congregation in a full tide 
of gospel enthusiasm. In other words, as a rule, he will make a poor 
evangelist. 

In Japan the missionaries at first had their chief access to. and 
gathered the main body of their converts, and hence of necessity most 
of their evangelists from, the Samurai class. But in my observation 
of the work there, nothing impressed me so much as the need to-day 
of a supplementan,- body of evangelists, drawn from the masses, so 
as to be in full sympathy with them, free from the class spirit and^^ 
trained to hard work, to go out in all the country villages where tl>^H 
masses live, and preach to these the simple, old-time gospel. ^^ 

To the principle announced by Paul in the Scripture quoted above 
he was himself a notable exception. He was found and called from 
among the Jewish literati, of whom he was in one sense a typical 
specimen. And taking the lead from the fishermen apostles he " 




^tHEIR DEVELOPMENT 

bored more abundantly and more successfully than tbey all. But in 
another sense he was iiot a typical but a very unique specimen of the 
class to which he belonged. He was one having by nature such a sur- 
plus of enthusiasm tliat Pharisaic formalism could not kill it in him 
as it had done in the common run of Scribes and Pharisees. Let us 
hope that among the noble and wise of heathendom to-day some like 
him may be found to make the preat evangelists for which all our 
native churches are waiting;. If the World's Federation of Christian 
Students shall succeed in finding and developing just a few of these 
in each great mission land the result will repay all the effort that or- 
ganization is making. 

(b) Next in importance lo finding the right men for evangelists 
is the method of their training. Good men easily may be spoiled by 
faulty training, while by thorough training on right lines those of 
only moderate gifts may attain a good degree of effectiveness. When 
tlic institution of the Christian home has been long enough cstab- 
lisbc*! in any field to furnish the needed supply of Timothys and 
Tituscs, fitted for pre-eminent usefulness by the combined training 
of the home and school, the problem becomes practically the same as 
that of the training of cur home ministry. Meantime, some method 
must be resorted to for giving the best training practicable to those 
having the gifts that can be utilized in making the gospel known. For 
ihis purpose some gciod men will probably find the best that is avail- 
able for them in the ptri]jatctic school combined with work; some 
in the study classes arranged for them at convenient seasons; and 
others still in the regular school The most efficient ones will prob- 
ably be those who have had the benefit of all these methods combined. 
An essential feature of any good plan will be that which gives em- 
phasis lo the missionary's personal influence. How supremely im- 
portant, then, that the missionary himself should be the right man, 
rightly trained for his work; that he be sound in the faith, mighty in 
the Scriplures, humble, meek, emptied of self and full of a divine en- 
thusiasm. 

II. The pastor is also one of the ascension gifts, and bis qualifica- 
tions are given in Scripture with a minuteness and detail that seem to 
indicate Christ's estimate of the transcendent importance of not get- 
ting the wrong men into that office. And my deep conviction is that, 
whether in heathendom or Christendom, so long as men possessing 
these t|ualifications in a reasonable degree are not found, the height of 
folly is to set apart those not possessing ihcm and call them pastors, 
merely for the sake of getting the church organized. We are con- 
fident that in the final outcome results will vindicate the policy of 
our missions in China and Korea. The missionaries write to us that 
they are resolved to have there as the result of their work, either 
self-supporting and self-nourishing churches, or no churches, and to 
ordain no natives to the office of pastor until they have the men that 
are fitted for it. even though they have to wait for the second genera- 
tion of Christians to obtain them. 

III. This brings us to the last question, and partly suggests the 
answer to it, whicli I have to introduce for discussion. At what stage 
of the Church's development should the responsible supervision and 




J 





PERMANENT nESULTS IN NATIVE WORKERS 

management of the various departments of church work be devolved 
on native leaders? To this question 1 would suggest the followmg 
reply : First, be patient, if ibc lime is long before the church is ready 
to be organized. Let the home cliurch learn to wait for bona fide re- 
sults. When the cliurch is organized let it be a bona fide native 
church. Lay hands suddenly on no man for responsible office in it. 
Lcam from Scripture rather than from experience thai novices 
clothed with authority are in danger of being lifted up with pride, 
and thereby falling into the condemnation of the devil. Then, if the 
church be not premalnrely organized, as soon as organized, and 
within the limits of its organization, it should have, and by inalienable 
and divine right does have, full authority in all matters of adminis- 
tration and discipline. Such help as the missionary may still give 
will be given, of right, and far the most effectively, not by way of 
external over-lordship, but by way of personal and spiritual influence. 

I have a deep conviction that the exercise of external ecclesiastical 
aulhority by foreign missionaries over native Christians and churches, 
except in so far as it is justified by necessity, is not justified at all, 
either by principle or expediency, and ought to be reduced to a min- 
imum. 

A church organized on the principle here advocated will be ready 
from the beginning to carry on an evangehstic work of its own in 
the simple and inexpensive way that suits its condition. Let the mis- 
sion help it in such work only by their advice, and by such grants in 
aid as they believe will be wisely used. Let the mission carry on their 
own evaijgelistic work outside of the bounds of ibc organized church, 
and let them not submit to authoritative interference by native lead- 
ers in the control of it. If they can not do this in peace in the places 
where they attempt such work, let ibem move on to the regions still 
beyond. It seems to mc we have had experience enough of the con- 
fusion, misunderstanding, and bad feelings resulting from joint 
boards of control to demonstrate the unwisdom of that p!an. 

With reference to institutional work it would seem self-evident to 
say that for what belongs to and is supported by the home boards the 
native church can not have responsibility, and, therefore, can not, by 
any sort of propriety, expediency, or right, have any part in its man- 
agement, other than to give it friendly advice when asked for it. On 
the other hand, it is, perhaps, unnecessary to say that so soon as the 
native church originates and supports a school or a hospital, or sup- 
ports one received by gift from the mission, it is entitled to have, and 
for every reason ought to have, responsible supervision of it. If it 
makes mistakes, let it make them, and learn as we all must do thereby. 
When T was a small boy I made the somewhat serious mistake of get- 
ting drowned, by going into deep water before I had learned to swim. 
But I was resuscitated, as drowned small boys usually are, and profit- 
ing by the experience, betook myself to the business of learning how 
to swim with an assiduousness that insured a speedy and brilliant 
success. 

In order that the time may not be too long delayed when the na- 
tive churches may take up and carry on the various forms of insti- 
tutional work that are necessary to their development, should we not 




THEIR DEVELOPMENT 159 

strive to make the instihitions we establish among" them, as to plant, 
equipment, machinery, and plans, models of the kind that it will be 
possible for them, in the not too distant future, to establish and main- 
tain? Witli all deference I must express my inability to appreciate 
the wisdom of the elaborate and costly establishments of which I saw 
so many in China and Japan, planned on a scale which the native 
church can never hope to rival, and thus, it seemed to mc, inevitably 
tending to discourage rather than to stimulate native effort. 

In conclusion I desire lo say that I met some native ministers on 
my visit to our Oriental missions in whose presence I left as if car- 
ried back to apostolic days, and at whose feet I felt like sitting that I 
might learn more of the Spirit of Christ. I believe the number of 
such now to be found in connection with our Protestant missions 1.1 
all parts of the world is already a great host. Let us thank our 
Lord for these. His a.scension gifts, and pray for many more. May- 
be from the churches which these and our apostolic missionaries are 
now planting in foreign lands will some day come back to us the in- 
fitiences we shall need, when the waves of secularism and rationalism 
now seething around us have done their work, to bring again to this 
land and to Christian Europe that revival of primitive Christianity 
which must come to us before we shall ever see the promised glory of 
the latter days. 

Rev. C. S. Sanders, Missionary. An^erican Board of Commis- 
sioners for Foreign Missions, Tttrkey.^ 

How can we train a native ministry, a successful native ministry? 
My answer would be, by loving them, by trusting them, and by thor- 
oughly identifying ourselves with them. 

All possible systems of relation between the missionary and the 
native brethren arc resolvable into two systems. The essence of one 
is the relation of master tn servant: the essence of the other is the 
standing together as brother anrl brother. When T arrived at our field 
the relation there was that of master and ser\'ant. but still very much 
relieved by a good deal of per.«;nnal love between the missionaries and 
the native pastors. Since that time the whole system has changed, and 
we find that as we approach them and treat them with warm love we 
receive a response from them, and I think no matter what may be our 
theoretical way of training our preachers, if we arc right on this 
point, if we love them as we should as missionaries, Lliere will not be 
any very great trouble. 

One of my missionary fathers continually lectured me on the point 
of developing responsibilty. Up to the time thai be came lo our mis- 
sion all the native people were accustomed to ask the missionaries 
about everything, spiritual and temporaJ. He astonished them 
greatly, after he came out there, by refusing, point blank, to advise 
them. He would simply tell them, the principles are so and so; it is 
your business to decide, and it is very much better for you that you 
should decide. We find that the lines have fallen to us in extremely 
pleasant places. We find that we can trust our native minister, and I 
think that we can put this down as the principle, not merely so with 



* Fiftb Areauc Prcibyurlan Church, April 04. 







PERMANENT RESULTS IN NATIVE WORKERS 

our native pastors, but with aryone, that if you repard a man wit! 
suspicion you can not hide it ; he will know it. and thai very attitude on 
your part. will. like a maEnet. draw out what there is of evil in him, 
and it will show itself. On the other hand, if you will trust him and 
expect him to be good, he will be. 

The third point is thoroughly to identify ourselves with our preach- 
ers. We find a most rich reward in so doing. When I first went 
to Turkey I went at once into the louring work ; that is, as soon as I 
had got language and experience cnougli for it. At that time our 
board gave us plentiful appropriations, and I traveled the way I was 
tanght to do, that is, carrying a servant along with mc, and not going 
into tlie pastors' families, but living separately wherever I was. But 
our home church made it impossible to do so any more — ^thcy took 
away the means — and now I think in that respect it was a great kind- 
ness. We were put Into such a position that the only way possible to 
tour, at least in my field, was to live with the preachers, except in such 
places as there were missionary families. And now, no matter what 
means we had, I could not possibly be hired to go back to the old way. 
You go there, you are four, five, six, or seven days with the pastor in 
his family, and the richness of the relation with the pastor, the results- 
of it, the mutual tove, the influence it has in the congregation, is so- 
great that in no case would I go back to the old way. [ 

Rev. Thomas Barclay, Missionary, Presbyterian Church of 
England, Formosa * 

1 am very glad to have this great truth enforced again and again.^ 
that the great work of evangelizing the heathen people is to be doncss 
by the natives themselves. 1 think it is very important that we shoul A 
understand it, because I think it would tend to popularize missionary^ 
work more and more at home, by getting the friends more and more" 
into sympathy with what we feel is so important. 

VVliat is evangelizing the heathen? it is making Christ known tc? 
tlie healhcri. Now, at the present day throughout the mission field, 
what are the means by whiclj Christ is being made known? Last year 
in Formosa there were more than 360 men and women baptized. Sup- 
pose you went around to tliose 360. one by one. and asked each one: 
" Where did you first hear of Christ Jesus? " I doubt if one of them 
would say he first heard it from the foreign missionary. A few 
heard it from tlic native evangelists, but the great majority of those 
would say : " We heard it and .saw it in the native Christians." Now, 
this being so, what does it naturally suggest ? Those of us who, per- 
haps, went out with the idea that wo only were to preach the gospel, 
must face the great fact and realize that if our mission, as a whole, is 
to make Christ known to the heathen, the best way is to raise this ac- 
knowledged agency to the highest slate of efficiency. That is, to raise 
the native Christians in such a way that ihcy shall make Christ known 
more and more efficiently. It is not quite enough that they should 
believe in Christ Jesus, they must he enabled to give a reason for the 
hope that is in them with meekness and fear, and they must certainly 
back up what they say by a holy life. And therefore it is that the 

* Fifth Arenuc PretbrtetiuQ Cliurch, Apffl a4> 






THEIR DEVELOPMENT 

foreign missionary who spends his time, largely, working in the 
native church and creating a higher spiritual life, is really doing the 
very best form of evangelistic work. 

Rev. Paul de Schweinitz, Secretary, Maraz'ian Church Mis- 
sion Board* 

We used to be exceedingly cautious, perliaps too conservative, in 
the employment of native agencies, but in the mission in Alaska there 
was. of course, no one who could read or write. The language 
sounds as if the people were clearing their throats. 

The missionaries have gathered around them twenty-one native 
evangelists, who, of course, can not read or write, but they listen to 
Bible stories and to sermons, and in their own hieroglyphics take 
these things down, especially the story of the passion of our Lord, 
and then they scatter among the villages, and at once tell this story 
from their hieroglyphics. The consequence is that although we only 
have twelve missionaries, men and women, very often when the 
missionary himself conies upon one of the native settlements, it is 
to find the whole village ready to receive him^ — not necessarily Chris- 
tian, but ready to receive the message, and it does seem to me that is 
wonderful testimony to the usefulness of illiterate evangelists. 

I Rev. D. Z. Sheffield, D.D., President, North China CoUege, 

■ TuHgcho, China.-f 

We are all agreed that in Christian lands where there is ever need 
of more Christian workers, the emphasis should still be placed upon 
belter Christian workers. Cert.T,inIy, while missionaries recognize the 
need of more missionaries going to the ends of the earth to do the 
Lord's work, they place the emphasis emphatically upon belter 
equipped missionaries. There is need of more native workers, but 
the emphasis must emphatically be placed u]ion the belter native 
laborers, equipped for their most difficult work. There is need of 
preachers and pastors. The missionary, as he enters the field, for the 
first few years, in ckarhig the ground and laying foundations, must 
work alone. But as quickly as possible he must gather to himself a 
few men who can be his interjjrctcrs. who can be his right hand and 
his left hand, who can go before him to prepare the way, who can 
go with him to introduce him, to prepare the people, and who may 
follow him to gather up and conserve his work. These men must b«e 
able to nourish the church; in my experience, one of the great dan- 
gers in the mission field is that our work will develop too rapidly and 
on too shallow lines; and in onler to make it deep, and have a pro- 
found hold on the hearts of the people, we must have trained pastors. 
There is an equal necessfty for an ever- enlarging body of trained 
teachers. At the present time, in the University of Peking, which 
was not swept away in the coup d'etat of tv.'o vears ago, not only is the 
main body of foreign teachers solidly from the ranks of the Christian 
missionaries, but the native teachers arc also from our Christian col- 
leges, because our Christian colleges arc producing a type of men that 
can not be found elsewhere. 



• FUUi ATenue PreibyterUo Cbiircb. April h. tCcninJ Prtibyicrlan Churcb, April a6. 



^ 





PEHMANENT RKULTS IN NATIVE WORKERS 

These teachers must be men and women of knowledge, knowledgt 
of revealed truth, of history, of naturi:, uf men, of Htcraturc. They 
must have culture — must he able to sec and lo hear, to remember in an 
orderly way, to use their imagination, their logical powers, their 
power of speech or address ; musi be cultured in schools with a Chris- 
tian atmosphere. 

It is often said by those who fail to appreciate the importance of 
educational work to give vitality and power to evangelistic work, that 
there is a serious danger of educating away from the people, or dis- 
qualifying for the work of bringing the truth of Christianity to the -^ ' 
people. Now this depends upon the character of the education. If j:^ 
Christianity is put into the very heart center, if spiritual results arc ^^ 
the supreme end of the education, those men and women who go out r^:: 
among their fellowmen and fellow-women, will know how to getr:^ 
down to their work, 

I have in mind one of our trained native preachers, who has had Z- 

fifteen years of training in our primary schools, our academy, out 

Christian college, our llieological school. This young man is splen- - 
didly equipped in his knowledge of the Bible. He Is a living concor- 
dance. He knows ihe truth in its ordijr, in its relation to history, in 
its development. He is a magnificent preacher, edifying the native 
church, and able to adapt himself to all occasions. In our chapel, at 
the time of the great examination, were several hundred of the proud. 
aristocratic Confucian scholars, clothed in their long garments, who 
" step with a square foot," as tbry say. so full arc they of their Confu- 
cian pride. Now this native preacher immediately adjusted himself to 
the circumstances. He was able to throw Confucian ethical principles 
and religious principles into the ears of these men, and strike their 
consciences, so that attention was immediately arrested. Here is a 
man who knows how to enter into their thoughts, to adapt the truth lo 
their minds. Then he goes out into the country, anrl he sees the 
ordinary Chinaman, his mind ignarant and blinded, the workman 
■with his cue wrapped around his head; and this preacher wraps his 
cue around his head, or ties a handkerchief around it, and squats on 
his heels, and with a vocabulary that is adjusted tn the mind of this 
ordinary Chinaman, he sets farlh the truth of Christianity. 

Rev. E. W. Parker, D.D., Missionary, Methodist Episcopal 
CftHrch. India* 

In the Methodist Episcopal Church Mission in Northern India the 
work is somewhat peculiar, as il has spread extensively among the 
lower classes of people, gathering in thousands of converts. This 
condition of things forced upon us the necessity of selecting and 
training native evangelists and pastors as rapidly as possible. This 
was made the more difficult as all of these people were of those castes 
who had never been taught to read and write. It seems remarkable 
that the Holy Spirit called to the general leadership of this work 
converts from Mohammedanism, well educated before their conver- 
sion ; but it was found that for special evangelistic and pastoral work, 
men of the same class as the converts were much more efficient. 

* Ftflh Avenue PrabjrMrian Cburcfa, April sf. 



4 

1 
I 

I 

I 





\ 



> 



I 



PLANS FOK CONTINUOUS TRAINING 263 

We early found it necessary to institute plans for the continuous 
training of the workers while engaged in work. The teachers and 
preachers were all formed into classes according to their grade and 
education, and annual examinations were arranged, so that while 
doing their work they would constantly become l>ctter fitted for their 
duty. The lower grade of evangelists known as " cxhortcrs " have a 
course which extends over four years. Wlicii this four years' course 
is completed, the candidate inav be promoted to the next higher grade, 
provided he has proved himself efficient in labors while thus growing 
in knowledge. 

The next higher grade of preachers is known as the " local 
preacher." This class is fdlcd with those who have been promoted 
from the cxhortcrs' class, and with young men who come from our 
better grade of schools and are liccn.sed without passing the lower 
preachers' course. The subjects to be mastered by this class also re- 
quire four years of study while still in the work, an examination 
being given each year. A failure in any one year requires a second 
year of study on the subjects of that year. 

For the more successful working out of these plans for training 
workers, two gatherings of teachers and preachers are held in 
mo.«t of the districts each year. The first one known as a " work- 
ers' meeting." or " sun^iiier school," is held during the warm 
weather and is designed especially for teaching those who most need 
help, for considering important subjects and difficulties connected 
with the work, and for deepening spiritual experience and life in 
Christ. The lectures, the instruction classes, the Bible examinations, 
the services for spiritual growth, all have the one object in view, the 
training of men and women for the work of Christ in .saving souls. 

The second gathering for workers is held in the cool season, usually 
in a grove in camp, and a district business conference and a Chris- 
tian mda are combined. In the conference the different grades of 
preachers and teachers mentioned above have their annual examina- 
tions on their regular courses of study, and if their work has heen suc- 
cessful their licenses are renewed, and their appointments for another 
year arranged. In this District Conference every licensed man has 
the same vote that a missionary has, and thus all learn to do church 
work and to bear respon.sibility. The tiiela part of this gathering (the 
word is taken from the Plindu mdas — meaning fellowship) is made 
as far as possible a spiritual ser\*ice all the way through. All go 
out from these gatherings with new power and new enthusiasm for 
The Master's work. When a local preacher has completed his four 
years' course of study and has proved himself efficient in the work, 
he may hope for ordination, or to be received into the annual con- 
ference, where another four years of study awaits him. and where, 
when his study is completed, he has the same ecclesiastical rights 
and privileges as has the foreign missionary. 

This plan gives eight years of training before a man is ordained and 
twelve years before hs can become a fully equipped minister. 

During the year 1872, fourteen years after our work commenced, a 
theological seminary was organized at Bareilly. an important center 
of our work in Northern India. The object of this seminary is to 




J 




t64 PERMANENT RESULTS IN NATIVE WORKERS 

prepare a stronger and a better educated class of ministers for the 
leadership in our evangelistic pastoral work. For some years a 
normal department for preparing teachers was also kept up. From 
the day of its organization to the present this institution has done most 
efficient work. Candidates for this school are secured from our 
higher-grade day schools, and from the ranks of the exhorters and 
local preachers already in the service. Many of these come with 
their wives, and the women's class forms a very important branch 
of the institution. The three years' course of study in this seminary 
is well adapted to India, with its various faiths and grades of society 
and work. This school has during these years sent out about three 
hundred well trained men who have completed the full course and 
taken the diploma^ and about one hundred more who have taken a 
partial course. It has also sent out about sixty trained teachers and 
quite three hundred young women trained as co-pastors. 

Such in brief is the plan for training evangelists and pastors for 
our very extensive work in Northern India, where we now have more 
than 100,000 converts and a large number of inquirers to teach and 
to build up in the faith of Christ. 

One illustration may aid in securing a clearer view of our plan. 
In the district under my own charge, there are about 2,500.000 pcopl 
residing. We have special work in over 2.000 villages, and the 14,427 
native Christians reside in 1.371 villages. The work is divided into 
twenty-one circuits, and again into 112 sub-circuits. Of the five 
missionaries residing within the district, three are connected with 
institutions of learning, but aid as they are able in the general work, 
and only two missionaries are free for evangelistic work. Our plan 
places one tried, efficient, ordained native minister at the center of 
each of the twenty-one circuits as preacher in charge or pastor. Each 
one of these circuits is again divided into from five to ten sub-circuits, 
and an exhorter or local preacher as sub-pastor resides within the 
bounds of each of these sub-circuits and works systematically the 
twelve to fifteen villages in his field. During the rains about forty of 
the younger men with their wives are formed into classes at two cen- 
ters for daily instruction, and at the District Conference in November 
no less than 150 workers will present themselves for examination in 
their various classes. These examinations include the women workers 
as well, though they are not licensed. 

Our workers' list would not be complete were we to leave out the 
" Hadi " or " Leader " in the village. We are doing our best to 
train one man in each village religiously as a leader for his own vil- 
lage. These men can not read or write, but are taught to sing, and 
pray, and tell of the love of Jesus. The work of this leader is to hold 
prayers with the Christians and inquirers in his own circle. These 
leaders are. of course, all unpaid workers, but the training of such for 
this special work is doing great good. 

Rev. E. Z. Simmons, Missionary, Soutkrrn Baptist Com^en- 
tion, China.* 
I want to emphasize just one phase of the missionary training for 

*PUib Avenue PietbyierUn Church, April 14. 







KX AMPLE OF THE MISSIOXARY NECESSARY 265 

our native helpers, and that is the phase of example. For more than 
twenty years it has been my plan always to take a number of bretliren 
in our work in Canton with me to the country, asking for volun- 
teers. Sometimes we will liave a half-dozen of these to go and spend 
a week in this country work, sometimes two weeks, and we always take 
some of the preachers ; and I believe it one of the best ways in which to 
teach people how to work. We read the Bible in the morning, and 
have our lesson, and then go two and two to the villages, and towns, 
and markets, and preach ; and then conic back in the evening, and have 
a report from all as to the work they have been doing during the 
hours from the morning until the evening session. And it seems to 
me that one of our best ways in training the native preachers is to 
preach with them and have them preach before us, and give them 
that friendly, loving criticism that we ought to give them ; and in this 
way we will make them love us and we will love them more, and we 
will get better work out of them. 

Rev. E. B. Haskkll, Missionary, American Board of Commis- 
sioners for Foreign Missions, Bulgaria.* 

I wonder wheilier we should not measure our success by our 
ability to make ourselves unncccssar>' in the field and put the work 
into the hands of the native brethren who must carry it on, I simply 
wish to make this one point prominent, that we should have our aim 
distinctly before us. What we are trying to do in this field? Do we 
expect to stay here permanently? Arc we not here to evangelize these 
people, to raise up an indigenons native church, a church with its own 
pastors, who will do its own work? And, if so, is it not our first and 
chief duty to train men from among the people lo take the work in 
hand and continue it? Should \vc not have it before our minds that 
we are not permanent factors in this work? We are merely starting 
the work which the natives must carry on, and we must continually 
try to prepare them for that responsibility. Leave the work in their 
hands, let them have as much of the counseling as possible. I do not 
advocate giving them money and letting them spend it themselves, as 
long as they need help from outside. W^e must get them tn seize 
the idea of self-support and to work to bring their own native 
communities up to it; not giving them the idea that they may have 
money and spend it without raising it themselves. 

Rev. Joseph King, Organising 'Agent, London Missionary S^ 
ci^ty, Austraiia* 

When I first went to Samoa, thirty-seven years ago, it was the set- 
tled policy of the London Missionary Society to withdraw the English 
missionaries as soon as possible. To-day we are supporting more 
English missionaries there than we were then, and I just rise to ex- 
plain the reason for this. 

We must move very slowly in withdrawing the foreign help. T was 
at Samoa a few years ago, sent there by the directors, with another 
brother, to inspect the missions. We gathered togetlier two hundred 
and fifty native pastors in conference, as we arc met here to-day. 

* Flf Eh Avenue PrabTterUa Church, April n 




J 



«66 PERMANENT RESULTS IN NATIVE WORKERS 

The question was asked those men whether they thought the time had 
not come for the withdrawal of some of the English missionaries. 
Now, those people are very poetical, and our brother who rose to re- 
spond spoke in simile. He drew a picture of a well-known Samoan 
lily, and described the beads of morning dew sparkling on the leaves 
of the lily. He then described the rising of the trade winds, by which 
the lily leaves were smitten and by which the beads of dew were lost. 
" Now," he said, " that is like the Christians in Samoa, those beads of 
dew. The work will come to grief if you withdraw the protecting 
care of the English missionaries." And he pleaded with us that we 
should continue still with them for a time. We must never forget that 
the apostles were first evangelists and then preachers and shep- 
herds. " Feed my sheep." " Feed my lambs." Brethren, we owe the 
blessed epistles of the Apostle Paul to the fact that the apostles were 
much more than evangelists; they were shepherds caring for those 
infant churches. God has permitted us to evangelize these people, and 
we must continue to send them shepherds to care for them and teach- 
ers to teach them until they are strong enough to care for those native 
churches. 

Training and Work of Nttiv* Qiristiaii "Women 

Miss A. E. Belton^ Missionary, Methodist Church in Canada, 
Japan.* 

The subject of this paper presupposes the opinion that the native 
Christian women do work or that they ought to do so. 

When the people are baptized and enter the church, just emerging 
from the darkness of unbelief, superstition, and sometimes of igno- 
rance, they need training, guidance, oversight, and who shall give this 
if not the missionary? 

This work is one of the most important that can fall to the lot of the 
missionary, and it calls for infinite patience, tact, skill, and grace. 
The missionary may be led into the error of so vigilantly overseeing 
and controlling every detail of the work, as to leave little scope for the 
development of individual character in the workers, making them 
either restless and dissatisfied, or so dependent as to be useless without 
her support. But with judicious guidance and wise counsel the 
worker may be led on step by step in the performance of Christian 
duties, doubtless often trying the patience of the missionary, but just 
as often developing unsuspected ability, and tilling a sphere of use- 
fulness among her own people to which no foreigner could ever attain. 

We shall consider the work of the native Christian woman : First, in 
the Sunday-school. The requisites for a good Sunday-school teacher 
might be summed up as follows: (i) Faith in God and in the pos- 
sibility of children learning to love and serve Him. (2) Knowledge 
of the Bible. (3) Some skill in teaching and in maintaining order. 
(4) Courage, tact, and ingenuity in devising ways and means of 
gathering children into a school. 

Some of these requisites can be imparted in a school or through a 
live teachers' meeting, but the heart of the missionary herself must 
be afire with enlluisiasm and full of render love for the children, and 

•Central Pnabr^eiiaii Cbnrch, April m^. 




she must be strong in faith that it is not the will of the Father that 
one of these Htllc ones should perish. By some means the missionary 
must become aware of the difficulties which present themselves to the 
mind of the individual worker, and of the private views of each in 
regard to Sunday-schoo! work. It is well to supply the best lesson 
helps available, to hold a weekly teachers' meeting which shall test 
preparation, give ideas as to how the lesson should be taught, and to 
encourage tlie teachers by giving accounts of Sunday-school work in 
other lands. 

Second, as Bible-woman. The work which can be done by Bible- 
women is of great importance. The reasons why a native can often 
find more ready admittance to the homes of the people than a mis- 
sionary can, are probably apparent to every one and need not be dwelt 
upon iierc. By telling what Christ has done for herself, by reading 
and explaining portions nf Scripture, and thus showing the beauty and 
purity of Christian teaching, the liible-wnman ran stimulate a desire 
to attend church services or women's meetings. She can sometimes 
win the affections of the people by rendering service in cases of sick- 
ness or emergency where a foreigner, through lack of familiarity with 
the ways of the people, or through their pride or superstition, would 
be unable to assist. 

But in order to do efficient work it is necessary that the Bible- 
woman be in close touch with the life and aims of the missionary, ft 
is of the utmost importance that the missionary possess her confidence, 
else she will surely cause dissension. 

Third, as leader of meetings. To be a successful leader in a meet- 
ing requires more than a mere knowledge of the subject in hand. It 
differs much from personal conversation or from leaching a class, and 
a Bible-woman may do good work in getting the women out to meet- 
ings and in preparing them to understand what they will hear there, 
and yet fail in keeping up attendance if she leads the meeting herself. 
It will therefore often be found best to have the missionary herself 
take charge of the meeting, in part at least, although with experience 
and training a native Christian woman may do excellent service in this 
department. In the case of a public meeting where the people have 
assembled in large numbers, men as well as women, will, in many 
countries be present, and unless the Bibie-woman be middle-aged and 
experienced she will not care to take charge alone. 

Fourth, uneducated workers. Generally speaking, a worker should 
have at least as good an education as those among whom she labors, 
although instances may be found in which a Christian of lowly birth 
and little education has been used of God to bring salvation to many 
who were counted her superiors. Merc book learning can not in itself 
fit anyone to teach the mysteries of the kingdom, and a woman whose 
heart is full of the love of God and of a desire to tell the good news 
to others will be blessed in her efforts even though she be uneducated. 
Unless a woman be quite elderly a certain amount of instruction can 
be given her, while those who are younger can spend part of the day 
in study and part in active work. The best education is not too good 
for the Christian worker, but if she can not get the best she must not 




>tfS 




PERMANENT RESULTS IN KATIVE WORKERS 



therefore be debarred from using all that the Lord has given her in 
His service. 

Fifth, the native Christian at her home. As lime passes and the 
girls return to their homes for hobdays or leave the school to enter 
new homes, they carry with them to different parts of the city or to 
neighboring towns the influence of years of training in the home o 
the missionary. They can sometimes gather the children at least, i 
not the women, in the vicinity of their homes, and teach them to sing 
hymns, to repeat verses of Scriptures, and to understand somewhat of 
the wonderful story of Divine love. When an evangelistic worker ap- 
proaches such a district she finds that the preliminary work is done, 
and that many are wiUing to listen to her words. 

Missionaries can never evangelize the whole of any nation. They 
begin the - /ork, but it must be carried on to completion by the native 
Christians, and it is well for us to keep this in mind, in all our plans 
for work. We are but laying the foundations, and it is our part to see 
that ihcy are laid so deep, and broad, and strong that the work of 
those who follow after may go on surely unlil all the nations have be- 
come the kingdoms of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Mrs. T. M. McNaik, Misshnary, Presbyterian Church, U. S. A., 
Japan* 

Under a somewhat peculiar nomenclature, and with more or less 
vagueness of knowledge on the part of readers of missionary report*, 
as to her powers and duties, the Bible-woman has come to he r 
nized as an important auxiliary to missionary effort on most foreign 
fields. It has taken nineteen centuries of training in Christian home 
and school to bring to definite recognition the fact thai a strong, 
capable, energetic womanhood is necessary to ever)' successful effort 
for the uplifting of the downtrodden, the removal of plague-spot* 
from humanity, and the enlightenment of those that sit in darkness. 
In many respects the Bible-woman is one of the most significant ex- 
hibitions of the power of the gospel to uplift and develop that the 
history of Christianity can show. 

Comparing herstatiis with that occupied b^ her mother or with her 
own condition before she discovered herself, in the light of revelation, 
to be an individual with personal rights, a responsible moral nature, 
and an immortal soul, the Bible-woman is the new woman in heathen 
lands, and the reason for her being is that the heathen world has need 
of her. 

The preparation of the Bible-woman for her many and varied 
offices must, in every sense, be special. It is requisite to the most 
satisfactory and successful discharge of her duties that she be middle- 
aged. Oriental sense of propriety demands this. Slie has therefore 
lived a long past in an atmosphere of repression, not infrequently 
oppression. Gross superstition has been her teacher and blind obe- 
dience 10 inexorable and often degrading custom her highest ideal 
of virtue. 

Her conversion to belief in the Lord Jesus Christ does not change 

* Ccaukl PrtsbTtcTiaa Cliurcl), April 94. 



i 



4 





TRAINING AND WORK OF NATIVE WOMEN 869 

r environment, nor does xt, at once, change her natural habits of 
tliought, or her moral standards. 

Her chief preparation fur work is her knowledge of human life, 
drawn usually from a peculiarly si(fnificant experience of its bitterest 
disappointments and deepest sorrows. But she knows also what the 
divine Christ has done for her, and she longs (o impart this knowl- 
edge to others, and to this end, with admirable courage, she begins, 
handicapped on every side, at the very alphabet of what will be to her 
a liberal editcation. 

There was a time when her instruction was given to her orally and 
she was regarded as little more than a voice ; later, yet in a not very 
distant past, she was intrxTSted with the office of reading to other 
women parts of the Holy Scriptures with such simple comments as 
she might be able to make. There were results from these humble 
efforts, and it began to dawn "upon the consciousness even of her 
native brethren in the Lord that in the depreciated woman of her 
race there was hidden a vessel fit for the Master's use, and native 
evangelists began to welcome her assistance and missionary men to 
recommend her education. 

Hereditj- and training have combined to give to the Christian of the 
West strong assurance of belief in a divine Being; and the story of 
the Son of God, and of His wondrous work among^ men. entered into 
his earliest conscious life and aided in the deveiopment of his in- 
tellectual powers. To pass from assurance of belief to trust is not 
difficult. Uut with the hcatlien it is not so. Gods many he has been 
taught to propitiate and bribe, but God, the living God. holy, just, 
merciful, and true, is not in all his thoughts, nor was He in the 
thought of his forefathers for countless gciieralions. The soil into 
which the gospel seed falls in heathen lantls Is in Mie year A.D. 1900 
exactly what it was in the earlier years of onr I-ord. Now, as 
Ihcn, heresies and strange doctrines spring up of them.selves and are 
wafted across the sea to hinder Ihe cltorls of missionaries and native 
evangelists. Tliey invade even the limited field of work of the Bible- 
woman. She often finds her smattering of apclt^etics and Church 
history, if not a weapon of defense, at least a citadel to which she 
may retreat when attacked by the crude arguments of the sophomoric 
scientist and embryo philosopher that infest the land. Said a wise 
little woman in the stress of battle : " I am not a scholar, I can not 
argue on these points ; but I can show you what learned men who un- 
derstand these things have said." and turning to her bonks she dis- 
comfited the di'^mrber of her peace and work by calling his attention 
to tiie ancient date of some of his proudly vaunted new views. 

But the training of a Bible-woman is not confined to books. 
Though she have the tongtie of men and of angels, and be able to 
teach, and preach, and train congregations tn sing hymns, she will 
fail of her mission if she be not in some marked degree an exponent of 
Christian character. From the narrow confines of an Oriental wom- 
an's home she enters the training-school. It is a new world wherein 
righteousness of life and conduct must be measured by new stand- 
ards. Self-interest and family interest must give way to Interest of 
a composite household made up of women from every province, with 






»70 FERUANENT RESULTS IN NATIVE WOKKESS 

customs and tastes differing from her own. that rise up daily to offend 
her. The high-born and ihc lowly woman must work side by side in 
the classroom, the study, and the kitchen, and self-seeking must give 
place to nutiua! service given freely ; a peculiarly difficult duty to a 
people to whom guid pro quo is almost as bone and sinew lo the 
natural man. To crown all, her life for ihrcc or four years must be 
daily and hourly under the direction and influence of women bom 
on the opposite side of the globe. 

If the first year in the training-school is often a trial, the last year is 
not seldom a triumph. Between the two lies a period in which the men- 
tal as well as spiritual vision of the future woman evangelist is en- 
larged. 

Instructed, disciplined, and transformed, the Bible-woman leaves 
the schoolroom to enter upon a life of sclf-tlcnial, and responsible 
and absorbing work for God and humanity. That she meets her obli- 
gations is evidenced by the demand for her services, and her reward 
is truly in Heaven, for her wage is but a pittance. 

The training-school is a crucible of tlie Master from which issufiij 
much refined gold. 

Q}lportcursi Tbeir Chdcc and tnitAag 

Khv. T. S. VVvNKOfJi', D.D.. British and Foreign Bible Soeuty, 
India* 

There are more copies of the Scriptures in the hands of the peopk 
of India than of any other book whatsoever. That is a wonderfnl 
fact. There are marc people to-day in India reading the Christian 
Bible than are reading any other bonk. Of this circulation, about 
one-half is through colporteurs, and, speaking roughly, it may be said 
that the other half is through the direct agency of the missionarT,'. 

You will see from that the immense importance of the colporta^ 
system, of its development, and of its great efficiency. 

For the success of colponage three things are necessary; First, 
the selection of men. It is not necessarj' that they should be very 
learned, but they must be earnest and tactful. Next, there must be su- 
perintendence. A man having been appointed must be carefully 
looked after by a direct system of superintendence that shall guide, 
and direct, and sustain him. TJiere is needed in the third place, some 
elementary method of training. 

We have had considerable experience, in India, in the training of 
onr colporteurs. During the rainy season, when it is impossible for 
tlicm to be out much in the country, wc gather them together in OUT 
depot in Allahabad — in our own particular North Indian Society — 
and for two weeks they are with us, and there arc three points on 
which we specially insist r Devotion, study, and conference. 

The first great thing is lo bring them closer to the blessed Lord ; to 
develop and deepen within them the Christian life, the power of the 
gospel within the soul, which is the great power of all Christian eflfort. 
Then, there is the course of study in different directions: the ten 
commandments, the life of Christ. Bible drill, and class instrucHon 
and conference, taking each man and geLting him to report to Others 

' Mwliwa Atcouc Reforacd Church, Hay i. 



INDEPENDENT NATIVE WORKERS syx 

sis experiences, and conferring personally with the men who are 
doing the work in all the points which relate to their daily experience. 
I The greater efficiency thus attained is shown by their rapidly increas- 
ing sales of the Bible, and fully justifies the labor and cost of the 
summer school. 

btkpeadcDt Nattvc Wot&crt 

Mrs. F. Howard Tavlor, China Inland Mission* 
i We have been especially dwelling upon the training of native work- 
ers. It is a wide subject and a very important subject, but I want just 
for a few minutes to speak of a class of native workers that we need 
to see greatly increased, and that, I think, we ought to pray to God 
for, a class of workers who need no training. 

About twenty years ago. in the north of China, in a very populous 
province, a man was converted to God in a very remarkable way. He 
was a scholar, a highly educated Confucianist. He had been all his 
life a bitter opposer of Christianity, and of everything foreign. He 
was In middle life, a confirmed and hopeless opium smoker. He had 
tried all the great religions of his country'. He knew all about Con- 
fucianism and Buddhism, and the other lesser sects by which he was 
surrounded. He was marvelously converted to God and marvelously 
baptized with the Holy Ghost. He went straight on from that mo- 
ment when he gave himself to God. In a few months he was preach- 
ing the Gospel. He could read the Bible from cover to cover, and the 
Holy Spirit taught him and illuminated his mind. He got some help 
from the missionaries, but the Holy Spirit was his teacher. Nine men 
out of every ten in that piovince smoke opium. He said that he must 
take hold upon these men and save them from the power of opium and 
,get their souls for Christ. The Lord used him marvelously. He 
[threw open his own house and took in Christian men that had been 
brought to God through his own preaching, and he trained them as 
missionaries. He had at times as many as seventy students in his own 
house, teaching them daily from the Bible and training them espe- 
cially in tlic work of helping opium smokers. He opened at his own 
[expense forty opium refuges over five provinces, We visited many 
,of those refuges. At the time we were with him he was employing 
two hundred men ; and all these men had been brought to Christ by 
that man himself and trained for that work. One of those refuges 
'that we visited was in a city where there never had been any mission, 
aoid in a village where tliere was no missionary. This refuge had 
been working about six years when we were there. We met about 
two hundred men there. I said to the man in charge : " Are these 
I Christians?" He said: "They are members of the Church." I 
iBaid: "Have many of them been opium smokers?" He said: 
'" What do you say? " I said : ** Have many of these two hundred 
men been opium smokers? " " Why," he said. " every one." They 
were all saved from opium smoking in this refuge and became mem- 
bers of the Church. 

Annther place we visited had six hundred Christians, most of 
whom had been brought in through his influence. 

* Ftftll ATcnuc PresbTtcrua Cbuicli, April sf. 




J 



flfa PERMANENT RESULTS IN NATIVE WORKERS 

Now, that man was outside our missionary organization altogether, 
though he always worked in connection with it. I do believe if wc 
prayed for more of Ihesc men wc should gel more of them, and a 
man like that is a miglity force. 

Mh. Eugene Stock, Secretary, Church Missionary Society, 
London* 

St. Paul gives ihe key to this subject in his letter to the Corin- 
thians: "Now, there arc divcrsitits of gifts, but the same Spirit. 
And there are differences of administrations, but the same Lord. And 
there are diversities of operations, hut it is the same God that work- 
eth a]] in all." I am sure that in all our discussions that text will be 
tlie key to our argnment. 

In a Church Missionary Society, the missions of which extend over 
a considerable part of the world, we naturally have a very large num- 
ber of diversities of operations. Wc have no one system which cov- 
ers all our mission fields ; hut a great many systems, according to the 
varieties of the field. One may sec the man, for example, who can 
sit down at the revision table and translate the Bible into some elab-, 
orate Indian language, and discuss the niceties of Greek and Hebrew 
with our best scholars. On the other hand, when we go on a few 
miles, we come to a village where you find a simple man. who, per- 
haps, can not read; but at atl events he knows the love of Jesus and 
can tell the people about him and lead ilieir prayers. Both of these 
varieties, and many between them, have I seen, and I am sure the 
more we recognize these diversities the better. You naturally find 
the more learned teachers in countries like Japan atid India, where 
edi:cation has gone on apace; but if you were to go to the further^H 
northwest of Canada, you would find there a tribe of Indians. people^H 
who have given two or three thousand, members to the Church of 
Christ; and you wouM find among them Christian leaders without 
any pay, simply the leading men in their families; as they wander 
abont with their shooting and fishing, they lead the daily prayer of 
the people and give to them such little instruction as they themselves 
have received from the missionary. 

Or, again, go to Africa, and there you will find many hundreds of 
the simplest evangelists going forth in the name of the t-ord. not 
only all over their own country, but into the regions beyond, hun- 
dreds of miles around, just telling ifie simple gospel of Jesus Christ. 
Some good people offer tnoney for the support of these evangelists of 
Uganda, But Bishop Tucker says. " We do not want it. We prefer 
that the teachers should be entirely supported by their own people." 
But the circumstances are different and we can not do that in China. 



4 



* Fifth Av«auc Pmbyterlan Church, April »^. 




^^V CHAPTER XXXIV 

I PERMANENT RESULTS IN NATIVE CHURCHES 

I Orgafllxfttioa—AdminlBiraiioa—DiKipUae— Special Evils — Polygamy. 

Organitatioo tad Adminlstratioa 

(Rev. Frederick Galpin, Untied Methodist Free Churches, 
England* 
The foretpn missionary has a double duty : First, to evangelize the 
heathen, and second, to build up the Christian character of the con- 
vens. 

Evangelistic work on the surface seems the most attractive, at 
least to a preacher who lives in a great center of population. But 
the building- up of Christian character is of the utmost importance, 
and its results will tell and continue to influence the world when the 
voice of the evangelist is silenced by death. 

It is almost impossible to describe the value of a living church. 
The converts gathered in arc to become the instrument of evangelistic 
work, the vessel filled with the gospel treasure, and the temple of the 
Holy Spirit. 

The Church must realize that it is a part of the most sacred body of 
Christ. It must present a strong and positive testimony to the world. 
A mere negative witness which declares native religions to be false, 
and which attacks and sometimes ridicules customs and behefs that 
are still held as sacred by many, is not overcoming evil with good. 
While the convert must be honest and true, and should not take part in 
any custom opposed to the mind of Christ, he should show an attitude 
of love and sympathy to those who are still in bondage to the old cus- 
toms. Unless the mission church can hold an unblemished reputation, 
its power to testify for God and righteousness is lost, and the mis- 
sionary has failed, and the enemy will laugh and say: " This man 
began to build, but was not able to finish." 

I do not intend (o present a paper on organization, but I will venture 
to caution the mission church organizer against excessive denomina- 
tional enthusiasm. If strong emphasis is placed upon the points of 
difference which exist in various missions, the organizer may make 
a society of strong sectarians, but they will be poor Christians. An 
idea! church will stand an uncompromising witness against sin. with 
a spirit of hunger and thirst after righteousness; with a heart of !ovc, 
throbbing with the sympathetic mind and spirit of Jesus Christ: a liv- 
ing power to help in all good work, and with its denominational ma- 
chinery so concealed that one could not say whether it was a branch 

• 7lfib Avenue tVeibytcrian Churcb, April aj. 



i 




174 PERMANENT RESULTS IN NATIVE CHURCHES 

of the Episcopal, Presb>ierian, Baptist, or Methodist church, 
but only that it was a branch of the " true Vine," and as ready to 
unite and co-opcratc uitli a churcli of any other denomination, as 
two dcwdrops would be to blend and unite in an open flower on a 
summer morning. 

I urge simplicity in ritual, combined with reverence; in order 
that decency may go hand in hand with spiritual earnestness and 
strength. 

When we attempt to edify and strengthen the small society of con- 
verts gathered at any mission station, we find the work difficult and 
progress slow. Only a small proportion arc able to read, and it is 
not easy to impart a knowledge of the Scriptures. I have known se\'- 
cral instances where country people in Chinese villages could not 
remember or commit to memory a single verse of Scripture. The 
Chinese in Ningpo, who want to say that they have forgotten what 
was imparted to them at school, quote the following: '* I gave all 
my lessons back to the schoolmaster when I left school." So it fre- 
quently is with the converts. But with continuity and systematic 
patient teaching the missionary will in the end be successful. Let 
him begin with a stanza from a hymn, and afterward a short prayer 
printed on a card which may be left with the convert, who should be 
requested to read it over a few limes until it is well impressed upon 
the memory. I would advocate a series of primers on Christian life 
and doctrine put into native poetry, for I nm sure that such a method 
would be a great help to the majority of the converts. Many of the 
popular Buddhist IxHiks are prepared in this style snd are much used. 

The initial work of church organization and the building up of 
Christian character and spiritual life is most frequently a slew 
process ; but the hardness of the work of sowing and watering is not 
to be compared to the glorious increase that God will give. 

The next step in organization is the selection and training of native 
helpers, and this needs caution and discrimination. I suppose that all 
missionaries know what it is to be pursued by a feverish anxiety to 
secure native helpers ; poisibly most or us have not given heed to the 
great apostolic injunction, " to lay hands suddenly on no man." 
Probably there may be one of the society who has had a fair educa- 
tion and now fills the office of schoolmaster. This brother may be 
able to please the missionary because of his readiness in explaining 
and illustrating the theory of the gospel, but the chances arc that this 
schoolmaster is sadly ignorant of the spiritual meaning of the mes- 
sage. Such is not simply an imaginary instance; I have met with 
many of this order. 

This leads me to say that educational work must commence as soon 
as possible, and its first results will be a number of divinely taught 
young men, who will help powerfully toward church organization. 

As to mission church admmi?tration, for the sake of the future of 
the Church the missionary should train the churches with a view to 
speedy self-government and self-propagation. 

Some missionaries possessed of a strong individuality assume in 
themselves all the functions of the executive; they are in themselves 
iMshop, priest, deacon, and elder; %vith their strong personalitj' 



1 

! 






ADMISSION AND DISCIPLIKE 

and fullness of energy they have not the patience to bend to the drudg- 
'lery of training' natives; therefore they take all the responsibility upon 
^themseUes. But this only means disaster in the future, for when the 

strong man leaves the field his work falls to pieces. For the sake of 

the church and for the future of the church we must subordinate self 
'ftnd selfisli tendencies and bend our energies to get the best wc can 

out of the native Christians. 




'Adxrasdoa and Discipline 

Rev. John McLAtmiN, D.D., Missionary, American Baptist 
lAfissionary Union. India* 

The character of the churches of the futnre in India, China, and 
Other lands will depend very largely upon the spiritual life and devo- 
tion of the native ministry of the churches of these lands ; and the 
iltumber and efficiency of the ministry will in turn depend upon the 
•Apiriluality of the membership, and that again upon the care taken 
[in receiving members into their churches. 

There is a power in India to-day, the significance of which few of 
us realize ; 1 mean the native Christian church. This church, or these 
,churches, arc asking for freedom. In resjionse to our demand for 
:*elf-support, they ask self-government. If the In<lian churches cut 
Eloosc from the Western apron strings, and they will, how necessary 
(that they should be robust, self-reliant, pure, and full of abounding 
f spiritual hfe. The same condition of things obtains in Japan, and will 
in every land as the churches increase in membership and intelligence, 
and it is our business as wise master budders to mold them for our 
Lord. In the discussion of this question it will be well to bear in 
mind that while circumstances will vary, yet because the Lord of the 
Church is one, the aim of the Church one. and the grand consumma- 
tion one, therefore we should expect the fundamental principles on 
which the Church is based to hi' the same as in the apostolic churches. 
The note which ran throughout all the prciching and leaching of 
;Our I-ord and His apostles was the new birth, the new life, and the 
new man. This is the dominant thought, voiced by Peter on the 
Day of Pentecost and echoed by John in the Revelation. The pur- 
poses of the Church's existence indicate the character of its member- 
ship. It is to exhibit to the heavenly powers and intelligences through 
all ages the manifold wisdom of God. tn show forth to all men and 
[all ages the excellencies of Christ Jesus our Ijord, His power, His 
wisdom. His righteousness. His grace and love. All this can be 
predicated of but one class of people, namely, regenerated ones. 

But what shall we do with doubtful cases? I suppose that we must 
either wait till the doubt is removed or accept the responsibility of de- 
cision. But again, is it legitimate to receive persons who do not pro- 
fess faith in Christ, but who are willing to become nominal Christians, 
in order that they may be taught :nore perfectly and sometime be- 
come genuine Christians, or in order tliat their families and relatives 
may be brought under Christian influence ? In India, among aborigi- 
nal and out-caste tribes, many are ready to accept Christianity and put 
themselves under training, in order to gain the powerful help of the 



Fifth Atciiik Prcst>Ttcrl&a Church, April as. 




J 



7f6 PKRMANENT RESULTS IN NAtU-E CHURCHES 

missionary to make head aorainst the oppression of their enemies, the 
higher castes or the native oiticials. A missionary from North India 
writes : " We are learning that we must not baplizc people who are 
willing 10 become Christians unless we can provide them with pastors 
and teachers." The idea hero seems to be to baptize them and teach 
ihem in order to make them Christians. I believe all these to be non- 
Scripiural expedients a,nd lo be deprecated. I believe the clearer the 
line of demarcation Ijetween the world and the Church is kept, the 
better for both in every respect. The call of God is " come out from 
among them an-:! he yc separate." 

Rut if we may not receive them into the Church before they have 
given credible evidence of faith in Jesus, may we, on the other hand. 
erect other standards of admission? Shall we have an educational 
standard of admission, or a general intelligence lest, or a creed test, 
or shall wc have a probationary period, during which they shall be 
under observation ? I speak for myself alone when I say. decidedly, 
Not So far as I know, no one of these is either a test or a sub- 
stitute for piety. 

There is another menace to the purity of the Christian Church in 
India, which is very difficult to manage. I refer to what may be 
called the heredity principle. The custom is for the son lo follow 
the profession of the father. The carjicnter's son is a cari>enter. the 
barber's son is a hnrhL-r. and sri on. What more natural than for the 
sons to become Christian because the father did, and the pastor's or 
evangelist's sons to become pastors and evangelists on the same prin- 
ciple? Let us, then, jealously guard the purity of this organization 
designed of God to be the bearer of salvation to the nation, zealously 
using every legitimate motive to lead men to Christ, but just as zeal- 
ously shutting out what would weaken the body or grieve the in- 
dwelling Holy Spirit of God. 

Bearing in mind the purposes for which the Church of Christ was 
founded, we see at once the importance of discipline. Had there been 
no Church there would have been no discipline. In that case God 
would have exercised His own discipline. But we find the early dis- 
ciples exercising discipline, and so we conclude that the same is in- 
cumbent upon \\s. 

I. There are confessedly many difficulties in the way of healthful 
discipline in the native churchc«. (a) The low moral tone of the 
general community, which demands little or nothing from the Church, 
and the low standard of morality among many of the Christians, 
(b) The force of the caste feeling. The Church is loot»ed upon as a 
new caste, or a kind of social chib. and exclusion from it a social dis- 
grace, (c) Intermarrying of relatives is very common. Conse- 
quently many a church is made up of two or more of these families, 
or clans. To get them to exclude or reprove any of their relatives is 
diflicult. (d) The oM comm'^nal custom of punishing crimes against 
the community by fines militates against true discipline. The vilest 
Him* and worst crimes were punished or compromised in this way hy 
the village elders. There is a disposition to resort to this system 
imong some churches, (e) Another difficulty is the custom of leav- 
log the head man, the pastor in this case, to settle the matter. This 



ADUISSION AND OISCIPUKE 277 

often results in a settlement, with the advantage on the side of the 
pastor in thf shape of a feast and a present. 

II. The character of the offenses and therefore the nature of the 

I discipline to be enforced — shall it be mild and tolerant, or severe and 
exacting? Disciplir.e is an education, a process of training for the 
unruly in the school of Christ. It is also a vindication of the char- 
acter of God and His Church. 
Our first and natural ihcught is that because these people have low 
ideas of God's holinL-.^s. and, therefore, inadequate views of the sinful- 
ness of sin. we should be tolerant of their lapses from virtue. I'here 
was no gentleness in the thunders of Sinai nor tolerance with Korah 
and his company. For the ignorant guiUy God has pity, for the 
penitent sinner He has pardon, but for the impenitent saint or sinner 
He has punishment and exclusion. 

(a ) i'or grossly immoral sins, exclusion should be the penalty. No 
confession, unless voluntarily made before the discovery of guiU, 
shouhl stay pruccodings. Restoration should only be made on evi- 
dence of genuine repentance, and should be full and complete, though 
not necessarily to offices held before. 

(b) For less heinous sins, such as lying, deceit, dereliction of duty, 
and generally nnwonhy conduct, discipline may proceed as far as ex- 
clusion in obdurate cases or may stop short at admonition in cases 
of evident penitence. I tlo not think the punitive element should be 
introduced in cases of discipline, hence time suspension should be for 
observation only. 

1(c) Besides those enumerated above there is a large class of of- 
fenses arising out of the relations of the people to government and 
village officials, to tlie habits and customs of their class in relation to 
heathen customs and festivals. These people were accustomed from 
time immemorial to have a part in these feasts and ceremonies, and 
much of their living and much of their peace depend on how they 
act. Shall they work on Sunday or not? If not. they will lose their 

»half-ytarV dole of grain and be sued for debt. Shall the Taria Qiris- 
tian beat his drum or blow his horn at the marriage feast given by his 
overlord, or at the feast to the idol, when the nautch girl dances her 
lewd dance and sings her lewder songs before a still lewder idol? If 
he does not he will be beaten, his house burned down, and his work 

t taken away and given to another. If he yields will the Church disci- 
pline him, or shall he have the liherty asked for by Naaman in the 
house of Rimmon, his master's god? I have Tiot the time even had I 
the dis[>osition or ihe ability to answer all these quesfions. God's 
general call to all His people in all ages is: " Come out from among 
them and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean 
thing; and I will receive you, and I will be a father to you, and ye 
shall be to me sons and daughters." 

Pulkutir Evik 

Mr. W. B. Si^av. Secretary, China InJand Mission, 
The evils to he considered in this paper are polygamy, the opium 
habit, and foot-binding. Polygamy is practiced to a greater or less 




^^mm^M^M 



it 



178 PERMANENT RESULTS IN KATtVE CHURCHES 

degree in almost every heathen land, and is a universal custom with 
Mohammedans. The use of opium and ihe habil of foot-bindin|r are 
almost exclusively confined to the Oiinesc. 

1. The fact that polygamy exists in many lands greatly complicates 
the problem of how it is to be dealt with by the Clirislian m.issionary. 
and the subject is one iliat has been very frequently considered, but 
so far no general agreement has been arrived at as to the line of pro- 
cedure to be adopted.* 

At the Conference of missions of various denominations held at 
Calcutta, ill 1834, it was unaninioitsly agreed that a polygamisl con- 
vert should be allowed to retain liis wives after baptism, but tlial 
such a person should not be eligible for any office in the Church. 

In the London Centenary Conference of 1888 a prolonged 
discussion ensued ujKin the reading of the paper dealing with 
this Eubject.f Missionaries from India, Africa, and China took part 
and expreswd different views as to how the matter should be dealt 
with. The Lambeth Synod of Anglican Bishops, which met in i88fl^^ 
decided, by a majority, that baptism must in no case be administered 
to a man who was the Inisbaod of more than one wife; but that a 
woman, the wife of a polygamist, might receive baptism.^ On the 
other hand, at the Missionary Conference of the members of the An- 
glican Communion, held in London in 1894. when the subject was 
again discussed, it was evident that there still existed a wide difference 
of opinion among the members of that branch of the Church. 

It appears to me to be very improbable, from the nature of the 
case, that any general agreement as to one course of action is ever 
likely to be reached. First, because ihe reception into the Church of a 
man with more than one wife is nowhere expressly forbidden in the 
New Testament. Second, because the circumstances of polygamous 
marriage vary so greatly in the many lands where Christian missions 
come into contact with it. In the New Testament the words of our 
Lord Jesus Christ direct us back to the creation of the one man and 
woman, and He reaffirms monogamy as the true law of marriage. 
Wc thcrcrforc find all Chri^itian missions, without exception, abhor- 
ring and condemning (wihganiy. Any Church member proceeding to 
lake a second woman as his wife, is at once dismissed from Church 
fellowship. This is the universal practice in the mission field. But 
the further question still remains. Does the teaching of the New 
Testament necessitate that a man may not be admitted to the Church 
by baptism who. while still a iK-alhen, has taken more than one wife? 
Must the door be kept shut until every wife except one has been put 
away? The answer to this question demands the greatest care, in 
view of the fact that there is no specific prohibition in tlic New Tes- 
tament against his being received, and also because the consequences 
of den>'ing him admittance are so serious. 

Let us consider the case of a man who as a heathen has taken sev- 
eral wives. We assume that hd* acted in accordance with the well- 
established cusLoins of his own country and before any direct gospel 



n 



* Dr. W. Brown** Ilhtory of Chriittan Mi«lon», Vol. in., pp. 36^-366. 
1 Sec Report ol Conference. Vol. II., pp. 51-81. 
} Se« Report of Conference. Pp. *Si-jo^ 




POLYGAMY AND OTEER PARTICUl-AB EVILS 



279 



light had reached him. We place this man alongside of the saints 
of the Old Covenant. We sec .-Miraham and David each with several 
wives, and they are not condemned or rchuked because of their rcla- 
tionship.s. God had g^iven them a tmc, though not a full, knowledge of 
Himself. The heathen nian of whom wc are now thinking entered 
into his marriages when in possession of less light than these 
men of the Old Testament enjoyed. Wc surely must admit that God 
does not condemn the heathen, in their darkness, for doing that which 
He permitted in the lives of an .Ahraham and a David. Must we then, 
in every case, demand tliat in the light of the Gospel a man is bound 
to break np a relationship upon which he entered before the light 
reached him ; a relationship in which he was not, as a heathen, under 
condemnation? I submit that we are not called upon to take such a 
position. 

Every case should be carefully considered on its own merits and 
dealt with by those who are in a po& ;ion to take all the circum- 
stances into account in arriving at a decision. I do not suggest that 
polygamy is never to be regarded as a barrier against a man receiving 
baptism, but only this, that the details of the history of every applicant 
should receive full consideration before any definite action is taken. 
It must be kept in view that we are not dealing with a habit or cus- 
tom which a man can suddenly break off without affecting anyone but 
himself. This is a question where the rights and claims of the women 
and children have to be considered. Some who are completely opposed 
to the reception into the Church of any polygamist admit that the 
wives and children of such have rights wliich must not be ignored; 
and some e\'en claim that the putting away of wives must not be 
entertained for a moment, although they refuse to baptize a polyga- 
mist. Surely, if a man is doing wrong in retaining his wives, he 
must part with rhem at all costs; if he is not doing wrong then the 
Church may receive him. In certain circumstances it maybe arranged 
for the women still to be recognized as being the wives of a man who 
will provide for and support them, while cohabitation will cease with 
all but one. This procedure seems on the whole to me to be the one 
that ought to be adopted, whenever it is practicable. 

Polygamy is opposed to the Christian idea of marriage. A polyg- 
amist can only be admitted into the Church under exceptional cir- 
cumstances, and it may be left, as with the Moravian missions,* to the 
conference of the district to decide where such exception is to be made. 
The Mission Conference of the district should unite in deciding u]>nn 
a case rather than let it be lelt to the discretion of an individual mis- 
sionary. As the native church in each mission field grows strong in 
spiritual life, it will be best able to decide such questions. 

2. We turn now to consider the attitude of Christian missions to- 
ward the use of opium, and wc find that there is practically no dif- 
ference of opinion as to how iliis special evil is to be dealt with. It 
seems almost impossible to magnify its dreadful results in China, 
where it has gained such a terrible hold upon all classes of the popula- 
tion. On nio.st points the Christian missionary is called to enlighten 
tlie heathen as to what is evil and to awaken among ibera a scuse of 

• Repatt LoDdoo Mitt. ContcreDM, tm. Vol. II., |>, 66. 






PERMANENT RESULTS lit NATIVE CHL'RCIIES 



the right, thus enabling them to condemn and put away aistoms 
which are the fruit of the darkness of their hearts. In this particular 
case the heathen themselves see clearly the ruinous effect of the evil. 
and they condemn the habit of opium smoking most unsparingly.' 

On becoming a Christian the Chinaman sees far more deeply the 
real evil of this habit and his condemnation of it is only changed by 
being intensified. Accordingly we find the native Christians opposed 
in the most open and decided manner to the use of opium. It, of 
course, follows that tlie Christian Church in China everj'whcre ex- 
cludes opium smokers from its fellowship. It is also very generally 
the custom lo require Church members to refrain from growing the 
poppy in their fields. 

In this matter the native Christians are certainly quite as strong as 
the missionaries on the necessity for discipline, and sometimes they 
have been the first to propose that action should be taken. 

3. The custom of foot-binding has taken a tremendous bold upon 
the people of China and entwined itself into their social life. 

Among the Chinese a well-established custom acquires something 
like the authority that a regular law has in other nations; and it has 
been well said that *' though this foot-binding is no law, it is an iron 
custom." In addition to the power which long-continued usage gives 
it, diminutive feet are still re^rded. by the Chinese, as a marked fea- 
ture of beauty in woman, and as the women of the upper class arc 
most rigid in their observance of the custom, it also acquires the added 
force of respectability. Instead of there being a strong feeling against 
the habit, as in the case of the use of opium, public opinion in the 
past, has been all but unanimous in its favor. 

It is scarcely necessary to point out tliat in the observance of this 
custom there is no direct breach of the moral law : nevcnhcless it is 
evidently contrary to godliness and could only prevail among a peo- 
ple who are sitting in the darkness of heathenism. To mutilate the 
human body, and make theleet unfit lo perform the service for whidi 
God intended them, is manifestly contrary to the will of the benefi- 
cent Creator. The cruelty that is involved in the actual process of 
binding the feet is such as no enlightened Christian mother could 
inflict upon her child. Christian missionaries are of one mind in dis- 
approving of the custom and in desiring its abolition, but the native 
church has to be led up to the position of seeing the evil of this habit. 

There are, df course, two questions involved, first, as to the women 
whose feet have been bound in childhood, and who have been con- 
verted in later days ; and then as to how the mothers, who are mem- 
bers of the Church, are to act in the case of their own daughters. 

As to the method of procedure in dealing with this evil, the question 
is, are we to rely on the influence of the gospel in the heart gradually 
to accomplish the change which we all desire, or is the practice to be 
made one for Church discipline? 

In the case of tlie woman converted after childhood, whose feet 
are already bound, there are very few missionaries who would d 
to admit her unless she unbinds her feet. 



eclin^^ 



« S«c " An Cuniutlonof u Appckl 00 tbc Report of the Rajsl Camml9iioao& OphUB.* 
R«T. A. PMter. i*. t. 





I 



INTEMPERANCE AND OTUEK PARTICULAR EVILS aSl 

It is, however, most important that the native church should itself 
decide as to whclhcr discipline is to be exercised or nnt in this matter, 
and as far as our knowledge goes, the churches in China, witli few 
exceptions, are sliU indisposed to exclude those who continue the prac- 
tice. 

A beneficial and effective influence can be exercised by the mission- 
aries in declining to admit girls with bound feet info their schools, 
and the subject shouhl be dealt with from time to lime in preaching, 
and the wrnngness of the custom pointed out. A growing convic- 
tion against the practice is tvidcntly being formerl throughout the 
Church in China, wbich at no very distant date should result in its 
being purged from this relic of heathenism. Thus the gospe! will 
eventually accomplish the overthrow of an evil which the Emperor of 
China himself was powerless to displace. 

Mr. Joseph Ta>xor, Missionary, Friends' Foreign Missionary 
Association, India* 

In any consideration of tlte stale of the Christian Church in India it 
is essential that we should recognize that India is a continent rather 
than a country; an assemblage of many nationalities and languages; 
agreeing only in acknowledging the rule of the British Government 
and in being influenced by the pantheistic principles, and by the hered- 
itary bondage to family and custom, of the Hindu religion. My re- 
marks are not necessarily applicable to every Indian Christian com- 
munity, but arc intended to apply to the Indian Church as a whole. 

The four great moral questions which appear to me most seriously 
to affect the future internal welfare of the Indian Church and its mis- 
sionary influence on the surrounding populations, are intemperance, 
sexual immorality, retention of or reversion to superstitious prac- 
tices, and caste. In considering the question of intemperance, we 
have sorrowfully to acknowledge that the example of the European 
community has had a damaging influence on the more educated Indian 
Christians, by familiarizing them with indulgence in intoxicating 
liquors, and in lending countenance to tlie farmer drinking habits of 
many converts drawn from the lower social strata. In some districts 
the popular conception of a Christian seems to be that he is a man who 
drinks jntoxicants, eats cow's flesh, and wears trousers. It is a source 
of great regret that missionaries have in .some places given counte- 
nance to this definition, by the introduction of European customs into 
mission boarding-schools and orphanages, and by bringing pressure 
to bear on adult converts as to dress. 

To magnify details of eating, drinking, or clothing into momen- 
tous questions of the kingdom of Heaven is a mistake: but when we 
see what a stumbling-block to the Hindus and Mohammedans a 
drinking native teacher or preacher is, I feel that we ought to exert 
ourselves to free the Church from the baneful influence of intoxicants 
and drugs. Some of the societies working in the northern and central 
districts of India have long made it a rule to demand total absti- 
nence from every member of llie Church, thus removing one grave 
source of temptation and general hindrance to the spread of the gospel. 



• Fifth ATCnue Presbyterian Choich. April w$. 




J 



28a PERMANENT RESULTS IN NATIVE CHURCHES 




■ 38: 

H But it is to be feared that in many districts Indian Christians are 
H more and more acquiring social drinking habits, from which the)- 
H would liavc been free as Hindus, and which must necessarily affect 
H the welfare and gruwth of the Church in the future. 
H 2. Growing up surrounded by the demoralizing influences of Hin- 

H duism. and ihe licentiousness of Mohammedan life, the young men 
H of the Indian Church are exposed to the worst moral influences from 
H childhood. On the whole there is much to be thankful for, but the 
H many phases of the social purity question need the most emphatic 
V watchfulness from all ccncerned. In some form or other this evil is 
always lurking to sap the strength or undermine the usefulness of 
otherwise flourishing individuals or communties; and the New Testa- 
ment ideal of a pure manhood and womanliood needs constantly to be 
kept in sight, or delinquencies come to be regarded as venial, to the 
grave injury of the Church. 

3. Wherever many individual Christians originally belonged to the 
same Hindu family, or there have been mass movements toward 
Christianity, there will be found a tendency to retain old heathen 
customs ; to consult astrologers, or visit some special slirine in case of 
sickness; and it would seem almost impossible totally to eradicate 
these ideas. Indeed in cases of general calamity or special disaster, it 
has been no uncommon event for converts who appeared to be soundly 
grounded in the faiih to revert to tlieir old superstitious practices. 
Considering how the relics of eld superstitions still linger in Europe 
after centuries of Christian teaching, I do not think we have reason 
to be specially discouraged at this fact. It can only be overcome by 
strong personal faith in Christ on the part of the individtial; and 
by tlic education of time in the Church at large. 

4. When we remember how caste has driven Buddhism from the 
land of its birth after 1,500 years of conflict; how it has subdued the 
missionary zeal of Islam, and reduced the Syrian and Roman Catho- 
lic native churches to quiescence ; we have need to recognize the peril 
to which the Protestant churches of India, too, are exposed. 

We can not deny that, especially in South India, the influence of 
caste, even in the families of teachers and preachers, strongly inter- 
feres wilh the love and catlioHcity taught by our Lord and His apos- 
tles ; and that the tendency of many native churches seems to be to 
perpetuate and even intensify this ingrained legacy of Hindu thought, 
rather than to lessen or remove it. For this reason an admixture of 
the Western clement seems highly desirable in the native church; and 
a church organization in which Europeans have an eqnal share, would 
seem more likely to approximate to New Testament ideals than one 
embracing solely natives of India. Just as in the divine order the 
early Church contained both Jewish and Greek elements, so it would 
seem that in the present day this infusion of Western thought were 
needed. Where the discipline of the church is mainly vested in 
foreign missionaries and salaried native agents of foreign missionary 
societies, there will be found a lendeticy to conceal and cover up 
serious misconduct, much as schoolboys decline to tell upon a com- 
rade in the classroom. On the other hand, when discipline is ad- 
ministered solely by natives, there is found a tcndcnc>* to levy excessive 





THBIR RIGHTS AND PRtVILEGK 283 

fines on delinquents for comparatively venial offenses. If the foreign 
missionary bo willing to take his place in the Church with the beautiful 
spirit breathed out by Peter in the fifth chapter of his First Epistle, 
sinking every idea of his own national or spiritual importance in order 
to place himself alongside of the men whom God has raised up to 
guide the infant Church, I believe he will see, though not at once, 
a truer Christian spirit, a more general appreciation of and desire 
for holiness in the Church at large, than if he seek to reform or correct 
what he sees is wrong, without taking the Church at large into his 
fullest confidence. In Indian religious affairs it is the community 
rather than the individual that governs, and it is the community that 
must be educated in its truest sense (and not coerced), if we would 
see the self-supporting, self-governing missionary Church we are 
aiming for. 

Gcoenl Discussion 

Rev. G. B. Smyth, D.D., Missionary, Methodist Episcopal 
Church, China.* 

The method adopted by the church to which I belong for the train- 
ing of the native church in China may be described by the one great 
word ecjuality — entire and absolute equality between the native min- 
isters and the foreign missionaries. 

The system is simply the transference to China, for the present, at 
least, of the conference system in use in our church here. In the 
conference to which I belong there arc about seven foreign mission- 
aries and about ninety-five native preachers, and we are on an abso- 
lutely equal basis. We stand upon the same platform and all have 
the same rights, and yet in tlie seventeen years which I have spent in 
China I have never known a case when, as was anticipated and feared 
by some, there would be a division of the conference Into two parts, 
one native, and the other foreign. This system of entire equal- 
ity does produce two great effects: It tends to the training of a self- 
respecting ministry, because these men. having equal rights with us 
and not being in any sense whatever under our control, arc not looked 
upon by others and do not look upon lliernsclves as .servants of the 
foreigners, than which nothing could be more unfortunate in the 
Christian Church in China. They are looked upon as the equals of 
the foreigners. 

And then, again, it tends to produce a native ministry independent 
in thought and in action, fearless in discussion. Therefore, the sys- 
tem that I speak of has proved efiicJent, and, as I say. it may be 
summed up in the one phrase — equality of rights, equality of privi- 
leges; and it has tended to produce what we all hope will come, 
a self-governing native church. 

Rev. J. A. Ingle, Missionary, Protestant Episcopal Church, 
China.* 

I wish to speak briefly of the standard of admission which wc 
use in the American Protestant Episcopal Mission, in Han- 
kow, Oiina. What we should require of people should be re- 

* Firtb Avetnie Precbjterian Cburcb, April tj. 




A 



«S4 PERMANENT RESULTS IN NATIVE CHURCHES 

pcntancc toward God and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. But how are 
wc going to be satisfied of the repentance and of the faith of one who, 
aftrr hearing the preaching of the Gospel, wants lo be baptized ? You 
lay: *' Do you repent?" He says: " Yes, I repent." " Yes. I be- 
lieve." I have scarcely known any Chinese who would not answer 
those questions jtist a.s your question seemed to indiealc that you 
would have him answer them. The ordinary Chinese, as I have seen 
him. docs not know what sin is, dots not know what God is. You 
say : " Relieve on the Lord Jesus Christ." He doe^s not know what it 
is lo believe, in the sense in which you mean it. Y*ou say to him: 
" Jesus Christ died for your sins." And he will ask you who Jesus 
Christ is, naturally; and yoa begin to explain that he is God's Son. 
" Well, who is God? " He has never heard of God. And then he 
will say. perhaps, " How could such a lieing have a Son ? " Can 
you go uUo the mysteries of incarnation with this raw heathen, this 
man who has never licard of these things before? And wheii you 
say he died ninetten hundred years ago, then htr will ask: "Then 
how can He have died fnr mc who am only thirty years old? Why 
should he die for me? I have no sin." Over and over again I have 
asked the Qiincsc: " Are you a sinner?" and he said, " Ko," al- 
most invariably, because the word which we must necessarily use for 
sin means crime, and he was no criminal. And so we have found it 
necessary to adopt a system which is strikingly like that of the early 
Christian Church. It was the method of the undivided Catholic 
Church before there was any Pope in Rome. When I say it is the 
method of the early Church. 1 do not mean in the minute details, but 
in the principle of faith first. 

At nrst we teach the man nothing but the Ten Commandments. He 
is taught what sin Is. For six months he is ranked as a hearer. He 
is told very plainly rhat he is r.ot a Christian, that he will not be a 
Oiristian until he is baptized. When he comes to the church he sits 
in the rear part of the church, in a part which is set aside for inquir- 
ers. He is not allowed to sit in the front scats of the church, nor to 
stay during the entire scr\'icc. He is marked off as one who is nol 
yet a Christian. We arc meanwhile examining him in his home, in 
his shop. We send some one to his house ; wr watch him in the guest- 
room; wc watch him in church to sec what bis motives arc. After 
six months, if his character seems worthy, we examine him on the 
Ten Commandments. Then he is admitted a catechumen by a simple 
service. He is then moved forward in the church, and he is given a 
copy of the Creed and the Lord's Pr.iyer, and he is told that these are 
lo be his study for the next year. During that time we are still watch- 
ing him, studying him, an.i if his conduct is unsatisfactorj', he is told 
that his baptism will be deferred for a certain period, or until his 
conduct seems more satisfactory. So. after eighteen months, in or- 
diT\ar>* cases, the man is prepared for baptism. And he is examined 
lastly on the Creed and the Lord's Prayer. 

We do not make it an iron test. There arc men who can not leam 
all these things. Hut we have found that It has improved the quality of 
our men, and we believe it is laying the foundation of a strong and 
faithful church. 




DENOMINATIONAL RCLATIONS S85 

Rev. W. H. Findlay, M.A., Missionary, IVesleyan MissJo>:ary 
Society, India* 

1 agree as to the extreme importance of making- our native Chris- 
tians realize wliat the Church is — the body of Christ — and that in 
the Church they arc admitted to a high privilege and receive a solemn 
responsibility. But 1 do not know how we missionaries can lead them 
to realize tJieir position, ihcir honor, thtir duties as members of the 
Church of Christ, except through the channel of that church form and 
church organization to whiL-h \vc ourselves belong, I do not under- 
stand how I, as a Mcthotlist, could Ix: a warm-hcarled Christian unless 
I am a hearty Methodist. I have been bniught up in it ; it is the body, 
as it were, of my religious and spiritual life. U 1 attempt to put it be- 
hind me, in dealing with cxir native Christians, and try to make them 
members of a church to which I can give no name, except that it is 
the body of Christ, and which must remain to nie vague, colorless, 
powerless, I do not see how I can make them realize what it should 
mean to belong to the Church of Christ. 

There are said to be two perils connected with this. One is that 
wc would give the heathen world a weapon against us when they see 
on the mission field the divisions of Christendom, which pain us here 
a( home, repealed before tht-m there. I iH-lieve that is a visionary fear 
ahogcthcr. At any rate, as regards India, I have not in seventeen 
years ever had this accusation regarding Christianity brought to me 
by a Hindu, imlcss he had derived it from some Christian source; and 
for this reason, that however many the divisions of Christendom may 
be, the divisions of heathendom arc far more numerous. 

A second fear that is urged is, that if once we lead our native 
Christians to call themselves Methodists, Anglicans, or Congrega- 
tionalists, and to know and to treasure the history, the traditions, the 
sentiments of these diflferent churches, these divisions may be per- 
petuated on the mission field. I believe there is not the least reason 
to fear that they will. I have observed thai, although 1 tried to make 
my native Christians good Methodists, and, although for the present 
their Christian life finds its way through this channel, yet their 
Methodism sits upon them very lightly, and as soon as in the native 
church there is real indigenous life, as soon as spiritual and religious 
life has taken root in the country and the people are feeling an inde- 
pendent power to stand alone, they will shake oflf, as a garment, all 
these cloaks of dcnominationalism that we lay upon them — cloaks 
necessary at the beginning to cover them, to give them an outward 
form anil shape for their religious life — as soon as ever they them- 
selves reach independence and are able to step out for themselves 
and make their own fnrms and organizations, we shall hear nothing 
then of any of our divisions of the West. They will form their own 
organizations. 

Mrs. W. M. Batod, Missionary, Presfiyferian Chttreh, V. S. A., 

Korea.f 

Sometimes when years of faithful effort have been put in. with lit- 
tle or no results in broken hearts or changed lives, a sore temptation 

• Piilb Avenue Pretbyteriu CbufCh, Apfll (5. t Camcglc H«U, AprU *&. 



k. 




986 



PERMANENT RESULTS IK NATIVE CHURCHES 



comes to the missionary. He feds that the Church at home, whose 

agent he is, is watching him with impatient eyes, and wondering why 
his reports year after year continue to show little but hopes and an- 
ticipations. 

He sees natives around him, friendly and mildly interested, yet 
clinging tenaciously to tlicir Iieathen customs and beliefs, and a 
strong temptation comes to him to make it easier for them to become 
Christians by letting down the requirements of the gospel. He begins 
to tliink that Sabbath attendance at the ncighliorbood fair, cither as 
purchaser or vender, is perhaps not to be absolutely prohibited, since 
the natives complain that nnt to go would subject them tn serious in- 
convenience and financial loss. A compromise, of church in the 
morning and fair in tlic afternoon, begins to seem to him not alto- 
gether unreasonable. Or. here is a man who manifests his wilbng- 
ness to become a Christian if he can do so without disturbing his do- 
mestic relations, which happen to be plural. He is a leading man in 
the community, and the missionary feels that if he can secure him. 
numbers of the otlier villagers will follow. He begins to revolve the 
matter in his mind with a view to letting him in. Plausible reasons 
speedily suggest themselves. David and Solomon had concubines, 
and tlie Lord winked at the matter. This man had assumed these re- 
sponsibilities in the days of his ignorance, was lie warranted in deny- 
ing them now ? It would mean a great tearing up of the man's house- 
hold; the missionary knows and likes him, and feels disinclined to 
impose hard conditions upon jiim. He loses sight of the fact that the 
option of making conditions was not left with him, and so it comes to 
pass that the gospel is cunformed to the heathen, instead of the 
heathen to the gospel, and by and by we have llie spectacle presented 
of a native church made up of Sabbath-breakers and adulterers. 

Better a thousaiid limes the unbroken regions of darkness than such 
baptized heathenism as tliis. Better long years of fruitless labor than 
such sadly unchristian results. No appearance of prosperity, however 
flattering, can atone for such a .sacrifice of principle. It is easier lo 
keep out than to put out, and when it comes to admitting members 
into the Church, a missionary can not afford to present other than an 
uncompromising front to the various forms of evil that show them- 
selves, no matter how firmly rooted, in a heathen community. 

Mr. Robert E. Spefh. A.M., Secretary, Board of Foreign Mis- 
sions. Presbyterian Church, U. S. A* 

I do not know of any question that is of more importance in con- 
nection with the standards of conduct than the question of admission 
of the polygamists with their polygamy into the Christian Church. 
What guaranty have we that polygamy will not do in the Christian 
Church what polygamy docs outside of the Christian Church? Out- 
side of the Christian Church polygamy destroys homes and makes im- 
possible personal purity. Will baptized polygamy create Christian 
homes and promote personal purity? I i\o not believe that polygamy 
can be kept from doing in the Christian Church that which polygamy 
does outside of the Christian Church, Why, then, should it be let in? 

• Fittb Avenue Pre«byiert*n Cburcli. April ay 




People say because of the hardships which the exclusion of polyga- 
niists will forrc upon tlicm. But it seems to me that there is some 
confusion of thought there as to what it i5 (hat constitutes polygamy. 
The financial relationship between a man and certain women does not 
constitute a polygamous relationship. If a man has wanted to sup- 
port, financially, five women hcfore coming into the Christian Church, 
there is nothing in the fact of his baptism that makes it compulsory 
upon him to stop supporting four of them. The nominal relationshiji 
does not constitute polygamy. If four women have wanted to bear a 
man's name before he was baptized, his baptism does not make it 
necessary that they should stop bearing it. We do not ask a man 
who comes into llie Christian Church to stop supporting these women. 
We do not ask them to cease bearing his name, but we do insist that 
he shall cease living in that relationship which alone constitutes a 

» polygamous relationship with these womai, and shall confine himself 
10 a proper marriage relationship with one of tliem. It must be so. 
People speak about the riglits of the polygamist to enter the Church. 
I las a polygamist no right to enter, they s.ay ? Certainly he has, but 
he has no right to bring his polygamy with him. The door of the 
Christian Church is wide enough and ingh enough to lei in any man 
who wants to come in, but the door has never been built wide or high 
enough to let in a man who brings polygamy with him on his back 
and in his heart. 

»It is not possible for a man to love the Christian Church or to have 
any real idea of what the Christian Churdi is who can not say tliat he 
loves his wife as Christ loves tljc Church, or thai he is to his wife as 
her head, as Cirist is the head of the Church. Polygamy flings itself 
as nothing else does against the very foundations of the Christian 
Church, it is not possible for that mystical conception of the Chris- 
tian Church, which is the only vital one. to last under the upas shadow 
of polygamy. I say. lei the polygamist come in. but let him leave his 
polygamy behind him. 

Rev. J. H. Laugiii.in, Missionary, Presbyterian Church, U. S. 
A., China,* 

T want to lay down two propositions. The first is. that we have no 
right to deprive any penitent believer of the ordinances of the Chnrch ; 
and, secondly, that we have no right, in finding out about the penitence 
and the faith of the believer, to impose conditions beyond those im- 
posed by the Word of God. I believe that everj- penitent believer 
should be admitted, for we can not keep a man a perpetual catecliist. 
As to the second point, wo have no right to keep a man from the ordi- 
nances of the Church that tlic Word of God docs not keep out. Now, 
if we take the Old Testament as our gT.iidc. we know that polygamists 
were plentiful in the Church. Tf we take the New Testament as otir 
guide, there is nothing, as I believe, to keep out polygamists in a 
country where polygamy is in accordance with the law of the land. I 
think we may fairly infer from the passage that requires an elder to be 
a man of but one wife, that there were men witli more than one wife in 
the Christian CImrch of apostolic times. And, further, when Patil and 

• Fifth Aveaue PresbylerUn Church, April »$, 





288 PERMANENT RESULTS IN NATIVE CHLTRCHES 

Bamabas weni up to the council at Jerusalem and laid the matter of 
adiBiitiiig Gentiles into the Christian Church, there was no prohibition 
of polygamy mentioned by James and the others in council with him. 
Now, 1 lliink that il some of the speakers to-day lived in 
China and were as thoroughly familiar with the conditions that pre- 
vail there as i\tc missionary is bound to be, they would have a more 
sympathetic attitude toward the wife of the polygamist and the chil- 
dren of (hat wife, who have not been mentioned. You may take the 
marital relation from the wife and allow her to be still supported by 
the husband, but you have inflicted an injury upon that woman that 
you have no right to inflict, and the fritnds of that woman will so re- 
gard it : and you would find yourself — the native Christian would find 
himself — involved in a lawsuit, probably, to start with ; and the 
Church would find itself in the face of an opposing sentiment on the 
part of all the people around that you could not overcome. 

Rev. a. Ewbank, Missionary, Church of England South Amer- 
ican Missionary Society* 

I am not here to tell you how we deal with discipline in South 
America, but to give full illustrations, that you may know that there 
is a need for discipline; and by discipline I mean the original meaning 
of the word, tcacliing. We are punished that we may be taught to be 
better. 

Missionaries who work in Terra del Fuego, among a race only a 
little better than the beasts, in some respects lower than the beasts, 
have to deal with discipline. The old men are the men of aulhorit)* 
there. They choose for themselves all the young women. It doesn't 
matter how many they have as their wives, the young men can have 
no wives except the old, discarded women of the old men. When a 
wife gets old she is discarded by her husband, and then a young man. 
if he pleases, can marry her. I ask you to consider discipline among 
a tribe like that. 

We pass up South America into Chaco. Among its various tribes 
the Lengtia people find that they have a great many more men than 
women. So that instead of one man having many wives, you occa- 
sionally find one wife having several husliands. How are yon to deal 
with these people? It is their law and their custom. How are you to 
bring in the Gospel of God to them and make them understand? 

We go a short distance thence and are in the district of the Suhin. 
There we find that the women arc largely in excess of the men, and 
here we have one man with many wives. 

Cross over the Andes into Chile. Here the highest type nf Indian 
of South America is found. All the men who are wealthy enough 
have several wives each. The number of wives a man may have is 
therefore a question of rank. How are yon to deal with the people 
here where the chief. looked up to and respected by all the people, has 
several wives? It is only the poor man who can not afford to buy 
more who has to be content with one. 

These are some of the problems thai we. as missionaries, have to 
face in South America in this question of discipline. 



• Plflh Arenue Prc&brterian Cbunh, Aprfl is. 




J 




The Principle— A Self-sustaining, Self-aourishing, Self-pro pag a ling Church— 
The Siiuatiofi as lo Self-support in the Various Fields— Methods of 
Application of the Principle— Various Aspects of the Subject. 



General Prifldplcs of Self-support 

Rev. George B. Winton, Missionary, Methodist Episcopal 
Church, South, Mexico * 

In this paper the term self-support describes neither self-supporting 
missionaries, nor self-supporting native preachers, but self-susiain- 
ing. self-nourishingf, self -propagating dmrches. 

Our sources for the \:nderstanding of this subject are two, the Bible, 
and the experience of Christian workers. Under close scrutiny these 
two almost blend in one. The hints and half-disclosed methods of 
the Acts and Epistles show that the apostles had no fixed, divinely 
foreordained schedule of work. They met their problems as ihey 
arose. He who expects to find in the New Testament a complete 
missionary manual will be surely disappointed. 

It is important, ncvertlitless, that such indications as the Scriptures 
contain be studied, and that the results of our own experience be tab- 
ulated for comparison therewith. 

As the heaviest tinancial biirden a church has to carry is the sup- 
port of its pastor, we ask, first of all. Does an infant church always 
need a pastor? May there not be a period of growth in which a pas- 
tor, In the full sense, is a too expensive Uixury? The silence of 
Scripture at this point is significant. In the whole range of the Acts 
and Epistles there is no passage where this office, as we know it, is 
referred to. It is true that Paul mentions " pastors " amonp; the of- 
ficers of Christ's Churcli — his gifts. But the word in Ephesians 
(iv. ii) means less than it does to-day. For his own infant organi- 
zations, the Apostle habitually appointed " elder?." using always 
the plural. As time passed, however, some of these officials developed 
special aptitude in the ministry of the Word. They became prophets 
and teachers, as well as elders. As elders they were also overseers 
or bishops, and so, little by little, the pastorale emerged, combining 
preaching and oversight. Likewise, as the congregation grew 
stronger, they began to assume the support of these men. who then 
gave themselves wholly to spiritual things. 

Ne^v churches founded among people who have but little of this 
world's goods might do well to follow this apostolic precedent. A 



•Carn«^e H&n, April 97, 



J 



J90 SELF-SLTPORT OF NATI\T CtlVRCHES 

mine of spiritual literature is now accessible, to be read to the infant 
church by such officers as may Ijc appointed. By means of these 
readings, and by prayer, and wirnessing, and spiritual songs, helped 
from time to time by the visits of the missionary, (hey must nouinsh 
the church's life. At a later stage, various churches may associate 
themselves together in a circuit, and thus secure the help of a pastor 
long before any one of them could command all his time. This plan 
was much used in the early days of American Methodism. 

An incidental advantage of this season of growth previous tn the 
full development of the pastorate is the stimulus which is put upon 
every member of the congregation lo take a part in the worship. By 
exercises in which all share, the church is edified and imbclicvcrs are 
impressed. And in this school of training the future preachers of 
the Word are found out and prepared for a wider sphere. 

But it is not to be denied that the chosen plan for the full develop- 
ment of Christ's body in the world is the ministry of an individual 
man to a single congregation. The blessing of centuries is upon the 
one-man pastorate, .■\ilowing this, and that such is the proper aim 
and ultimate product of all preliminary growth, we observe that the 
Scripture is very plain to say that " they which preach the gospel 
shall live of the gospel." And from the same passages we learn that 
this support should come from the people whom they ser\'e. We have 
taken near a hundred years to discover that the second half of this 
precept is just as binding as the first. Finding the infant churches 
unable to sustain a pastor, missionaries have had two courses open to 
them; first, to watt till the churches were more fully developed Iwfore 
giving them one ; second, to pay their preachers for them. The sec- 
ond course has almost universally been taken. On a fair estimate, 
three-fourths of all the problems which now beset our work arise 
out of the use of foreign money to pay native preachers. When prac- 
tical difficulties tbtis multiply about a procedure which not only lacks 
the sanction of God's Word, but positively contravenes its teaching, 
it is time to pause. 

It will be interposed here that the strict construction of this would 
require missionaries also to be supported by those to whom they 
preach. Inferences like this have their origin in the theory that mis- 
sionaries and native preachers belong in the .same class. But they do 
not. Their offices arc clearly di.stinct. In the first place, the work of 
the mfs.sionar)' is that of an evangelist, not that of a settled pastor. 
When the church which he has helped to found becomes well grown 
and fully organized, there will be no place found for him. Its proper 
development involves no provision for his support. Again, the mis- 
sionary is a foreigner, and despite native speech, native food, and 
native dress, a foreigner will he remain. His accountability is to a 
distant church. That church sent him nut. and by every dictate of 
reason and justice should support him. Tie has no compunction at re- 
ceiving help from it. But like Paul, it were better for him tn die than 
become a burden upon the feeble congregations where he labors. 

To distinguj.sh thus clearly between the position of rhe foreign 
missionary and that nf the pastor native to the soil, is prejudicial to 
neither. It disposes of the argument that because a board supports the 




J 



ITS CENEKAL PRINCIPLES 



251 



missionaries it is bound to support the rmtive pastors. Such an ar- 
rangement might ver>* well be agreed to as a makeshift and during the 
urgency of new work. But much harm ]jas been done by it; First, 
to the churches. It has enervated and stunted them. They have 
lacked the stimulus of a healthy activity. After their organization is 
completed they usually pass under this system into a period of ar- 
rested development. Some of those formed in the early part of this 
century are no nearer to perfection than then. Secondly, to the preach- 
ers. The ministry has sometimes been positively blighted by the mis- 
taken kindness of missionaries and boards. A hireling spirit has 
taken the place of zeal for God, Many have mn who were not called. 
Uncomfortable antagonisms have arisen over the distribution of 
funds, accentuated by the race spirit in its uglier phases. 

We have come to a point where there is no excuse for the repeti- 
tion of these errors. The Spirit's leadings in both Scripture and his- 
tory show the right way. Mission churches should have pastors only 
when they are able and willing to support them. If all our boards 
would ag^-ee upon this principle it would be of easy application on 
the new fields of the twentieth century. Just how the change to a bet- 
ter way is to be wrought among those churches already accustomed 
to lean on the strong :irm of a foreign board can not be shown in a 
sentence. It should not be by a sudden revolution, lest much be lost 
that has been gained. Every field, every denomination, pretty nearly 
every station, will find its own problem pecidiar in some sense. We 
must solve them as best we may. under divine guidance. A constant 
agitation of the subject among both preachers and people ; instrnelion 
as to the needs of the rt^ons beyond, calling for sacrifice on the part 
of those who have already received Christ; explanation of the value 
of national independence, in Church as well as State, thus turning 
again to good uses pride of race and country — these and other 
methods will readily suggest themselves. Very few of our converts 
have been properly trained in systematic giving for any cause. And 
while too much should not be expected of schemes for ministerial 
self-support, the preachers also will have to help. They must be will- 
ing to endure hardness; poverty and cellbacy-^not for vows but for 
conscience' sake — may yet have their uses. 

The essential thing for the accomplishment of this much-needed 
change is that we should all be agreed as to fundamental principles. 
Much will be gained if there is no unwise rivalry between different 
missions in the matter of native helpers and their pay. We need also 
to be united in spirit as well as in theory, that Christ's prayer for those 
who should believe on Him through the disciples' word be fulfilled in 
us, of every nation and of every ecclesiastical group, " that they all 
may be one." 

I have proceeded upon the assumption that if our churches can be 
brmight to the point of sustaining their pastors, they will also meet the 
other demands of church work. Next in fruitfulness to the paying of 
preachers' salaries and of incidental expenses, is the building of places 
of worship. Nothing gives a congregation ^n high a regard for the 
privileges of the sanctuary as having sacrificed money, labor, and 
ft time in preparing a temple for God's worship. 



393 SELF-SUPPORT OF NATIVE CHURCHES 

From Scripture, therefore, and from experience, 1 ask your agree- 
ment to the following summary of principles ; 

1. The use of mission funds should be limited to the support of 
missionaries, the issue of literature, tlie founding of schools and hos- 
pitals and tlicir support, and some help in the erection of churcb 
buildings. 

2. Converts should from the first be instructed in the necessity of 
sharing the burdens of Church work. 

3- The self-support of native churches should be facilitated by sim- 
plicity of organization, to the extent even, if necessary, of delaying 
for a time the full development of the pastorate. ^ 

4. The application of these principles should be absolute in all new 
fields. In those already occupied, agreement should be had at once 
by the officers of the difTcrent boards and their representatives, upon 
such policies as will tend to develop thorough self-support in the 
place of the present helpless dependence. 

Tbc WorUnsr of Self-ntpport in the Field* 

Rkv. H. N. Babnum, D.D., Missionary, American Board of 
Commissioners for Foreign Missions, Turkey.* 

The idea of self-support took shape in the Harpoot field sooner 
than in any other station in Turkey. The practice had been to pay 
almost alt the bills incident to the prosecution of tlie work inaugurated 
by the missionaries, in the expectation that the people would volun- 
tarily propose to assume the burden themselves as soon as they should 
appreciate the value of the blessings brought to their doors. This ex- 
pectation was not realized. The native Christians supposed that the)' 
had fulfilled their obligations when they attended the services opened 
by the missionary, and sent their children to his schools. The injunc- 
tion. " Freely ye have received, freely give." was supposed to apply 
to the missionaries and not to themselves. The Americans were rich, 
the natives were poor, and it was a favor to the Americans to give 
them their presence and lend their moral support. 

At the breaking out of the Civil War in America in iSCi. six years 
after the beginning of Che work in Harpoot, wc had the impression 
that our board would he able for some years to do little if anything 
beyond paying the salaries of its own missionaries. Nearly all our 
helpers were theolngical students, who studied seven months and 
labored five as preachers and teachers, the winter being altogether the 
most favorable time for village work. We had a large theological 
class, and wc told the members that we could not assure them a salary 
for any definite time, and we also gave the same information to our 
people in the villages. A muleteer, who was a zealous Protestant in 
a village where only a few families had separated from the old 
Church, said: " I will give board to a young man. if you will send 
one." This was a new and valuable thought for us, so we suggested 
it to our friends in the other outstations. and it found ready accept- 
ance, so all the students were soon located with a small salary from 
us, and their board or its equivalent in money from the people. Tliis 
was the first definite step toward self-support in this field, except that 

» Carnegie Hilt, April n. 




» 



I 



ITS WORKING IN TBE FIELDS 393 

when the first pastor was ordained the previous year, with great effort 
cne-half of his salary was secured from the people. 

This experiment, although undertaken under llic stress of the Civil 
War. was so vahiahle in its results as to persuade us tliat it was provi- . 
dential, and it led us to adopt self-support as a definite policy. Along 
ivith this we pressed upon them the idea that the support of their own 
institutions was not the measure of their responsibility, but that the 
duty of evangelizing the land rested primarily upon tliem, and that we 
were here as their assistants for a limited time. Of course this idea 
was not at once adopted by tlie people, hut it grew upon them, and as 
it grew it m3<Ie them more active in their eflForts for others. Each 
church organized for work in the villages near to it, and the churches 
together undertook the evangelization of Kurdistan as a foreign 
missionary work. The plan of giving tithes also found great favor, 
and we had the hope that in a few years we shouM be able to commit 
the work wholly to the native churches. 

A reaction, however, owing in part to influences from other parts 
of the country, and in part from the native want of perseverance, set 
in some twenty-five years ago, and this, along with tlie poverty of the 
people, the stagnation of business, the want uf enterprise throughout 
the country, and a large emigration lo America, made the effort more 
difficult than it had been. Still we persevered until something like 
seventy per cent, of all the expenses at the central station and sixty 
outstations was paid by tlie people. 

Then came the well-known events of November, 1895, when the 
land was devastated, and the whole missionary fabric, especially in 
this fitid, seemed to be in ruins. Besides the missionary premises 
which were destroyed, thirteen chapels, six parsonages, and twenty- 
two schools were burned, Besides the ten pastors and preachers who 
were killed, a large number nf the most rclialde and worthy men in the 
different congregations were killed. Almost every Christian house 
was plundered, and thousands of houses were burned, and many men 
to escape death embraced Islam. Many of those who had been most 
forward in the support of the institution of the gospel became de- 
pendent upon charity for their daily bread. For a time, we were 
obliged to assume the entire support of nearly every laborer in this 
entire field. Confidence was destroyed and business at a standstill. 
Chaos reigned everywhere. 

The recovery from such a condition in such a country is very slow, 
still our people are showing wonderful self-denial in taking up again 
the burdens of the past. The statistics for i8y8 show that si.xty-nine 
per cent, of the expense for the support of their own institutions was 
borne by the people. This, however, should be said, that this large 
percentage is due in part to the dropping of the weaker outstations, 
reducing their number from sixty to forty ; in part to the decrease of 
laborers, through the death of some and the emigration of others ; and 
also to the diminished appropriations of our board. This statement is 
for the Harpoot station, where the missionaries are in perfect accord 
in this matter. It requires constant pressure in every department and 
in all parts of the field, or there would bo a reaction. 
The development of self-support among unevangelized people can 




A 




294 SELF-SUPPORT OP NATIVE ClICRCHRS 



never be completely successful unless the native congregations fully 
accept the principle that the work is their own. and that the mis- 
sionary society is simply their helper for a brief period. Many shrink 
from assuming such a responsibility, while others are stimulated by it. 
There are several ways of promoting this idea. 

1. Let the native church take the form and adopt the policy suited 
to its environnicnl and the national Ixrnt. Real independence is not 
merely paying the bills ; it is moral as well as financial. If the organ- 
ization is American or European, and not national, it will be difficult 
to make the people feel that it is really their own. We plant the 
seed, but the plant draws its nourishment and takes its form from 
the soil in which it is planted. It is a growth, and not a casting in a 
matrix. If the church is genuine, it has life. This life may be fos- 
tered and helped, but the attempt to give it a particular shape hinders 
its growth. 

2. Let the congregations select their own agents, with help from the 
missionary, and fix their salaries. Self-support is absolutely unat- 
tainable unless the expenses arc within the ability of tlic people to 
pay, and unless the pastor and teacher arc willing to conform their 
style of living somewhat to that of the people for whom tliey labor. 

3. Emphasis is given to tliis idea if the salary is paid to the treas- 
urer of the congregation and not to the pastor or preacher himself, 
for the aid is to the community and not to himself. 

One leading difficulty in carrying out the policy of self-support is 
in making the people realize the independence of their gospel Insti- 
tutions, and their own individual responsibility toward them. The 
payment of salaries to religious teachers is something almost un- 
known in uncvangcltzed lands. Presents are made, and money is 
paid for special services, but nobody in particular is responsible for 
any stated sum. The priest or mollah gets what he can from his 
people, and it is the concern of nobody whether it is much or little. 
Time and ptTsistence are essential to the inauguration of a more 
liberal system and the cultivation of a sense of personal responsibility. 

A sttcond difficulty is that the native agents are not satisfied with 
the salaries which their people arc ready to pay. They are slow to re- 
gard their relations to be with their congregations alone, and not with 
tlic foreign society. The people, also, are slow to realize that the 
needs of their preachers and teachers are greater than their own ; that 
they must have books; and that as they are to be leaders in civiliza- 
tion as well as in Christianity they ought to adopt a style of living 
somewhat in advance of that into which they were bom. 

A third difficulty is the poverty of almost all who bear the Christian 
name in a country' like Turkey, and especially of Protestants. The 
fact is patent that but few Christians have been oppressed as have 
been the Armenians. As in the time of our Saviour, it is " to the poor 
that the Gospel is preached." Many outside of our congregations are 
persuaded of the truth, but remain outside simply because they are 
not willing to bear the financial burden which they know will come 
upon them if they join an evangelical congregation. 

As to the " outlook " for the future. Our congregations are al- 
ready practicing great self-denial, and as things now are, we can not 



d 




ITS WOKKING IN THE FIELDS »95 

reasonably expect more from them. Probably the same would be said 
by our brethren throughout the mission. Growth is very slow, and 
until there is such an awakening as shall bring into the Protestant 
ranks a large nunilxT of tbtisc who are now inlellectually persuaded 
of the truth, or until there is a radical change in the material condi- 
tion of the country, we can nui expect rapid advance in the direction 
of self-support. 

Rev. J. Morton, D.D., Missionary, Presbyterian Church in 
Canada, Trinidad* 

I have been laboring for thirty-two years in the Island of Trinidad, 
among East Indians who were brou^'ht there to labor on the sugar 
estates, indentured for five years. They come, as you may well be- 
lieve, poor. There was one man called Rupee Walla, the man who had 
a rupee, because it was quite an extreme circumstance thai an emi- 
grant should bring a rupee with htm. I wish to say at the outset, so 
as to save details, that during last year our converts contributed on an 
average $6.22 per communicant. I don't know whether that would 
be regarded in the country parts of America as very small or not, but 
considering the people who give it. it is something. 

I am sure we arc very much obliged to e\'crv one who has given 
us information with respect to this subject of self-support. One thing 
was recalled to my mind, the statement of an eminent divine in Eng- 
land when asked near the close of a peace-at-any-price meet- 
ing to give his opinion. He rose and said : " Gentlemen, I am in 
favor of peace, peace at any price — yes, peace at the price of war." 
Well, I am in favor of self-stipport, self-support at any price, even 
self-support at the price that you do not get it for a while. I do not 
see how it is possible in the circumstances of our island, with a popu- 
lation which has increased during the last thirty years from 25,000 
East Indians fresh from India to a population of 85,000 East Indians, 
to carry on that work except largely on the basis of providing for the 
new population, which means evangelistic work. Even if we couEd 
gather all our people together in centers, much more might be done; 
but what of the mass that is pouring in on us? We have four or- 
dained men. We have alKiut fifty catechists. We use that word to 
distinguish them from tho.sc that are ordained, and we have sent a 
catechist to San Lucia, to Grenada, and to Jamaica among the heathen 
people. How arc these laborers to be sustained there without being 
fitted? Without that they can not be expected to do the work. If we 
take the best men we can find, and tell them: "You are too good a 
man to be digging part of the day in a ditch ; you must go and give 
your whole time to this work," we must feed them. The only question 
is whether we are to wait until our native community* is strong enough 
to evangelize an extra number of 2,000 per annum coming in. or 
whether we will take the gifts of the people at home who are telling 
us: "Take our money and spend it for the evangelization of the 
people." 

I believe in self-support. My father taught me T should support 
myself, and I have done it since I was twenty years of age. I have 

* Cca:.*::i Ftmbytcilaa Cbordi. April rr. 



ag6 SELF-SUPPORT OP NATIVE CHURCHES 

sons, and I tell them ihey must leani sclf-supporl, but I did not expect 
them to support themselves until such means had been taken a& would 
give them a fair slart. Let it be clearly and distinctly understood that 
self-support certainly is to our advantage; but we will not all get it in 
the same way. Let it be enough for us that every true missionary is 
working for self-support in the Ix-st way he can, and that he will gel 
there, we hope, safely and successfully in time. 

Rev. Hurkrt W. Brown, Missionary. Presbyterian Church, 
U. S. A., Mexico* 

In the Presbytery of the City of Mexico it was almost impossible to 
get the churches to state that they would contribute anything toward 
the support of their institutions. Some oflfered to give fifty cents a 
month, oiliers twenty-five cents a month, others twelve and one-half 
cents. But we published the list and sent it around to the churches 
with a request that they would give each month at least the amounts 
assigned them. Tjiat was the entering wedge. 

A little later the mission adopted a plan of self-support by which 
the native churches should give the first year 5 per cent, of the pas- 
tor's salary, and the next year 10 per cent., and so on until 50 per 
cent, was reached. After that it would be determined by circum- 
stances whether it would be best to go further or not. I am glad to 
say that many of our churches in Mtxico during the past year con- 
tributed 25 per cent, of the pastor's salary. For example, in Mexico 
City the church raises $25 a month toward the salary of llie pastor, 
Mr. Morales, of whom some of you have heard as the Moody of 
Mexico. 

But we felt that was not enough. We needed some point of union 
for all the churches, that they might be united in some work, and onr 
Presbyter}' organized a Mexico home mission board. Last year they 
raised between nine hundred and a thousand dollars, and supported 
two workers. 

We had twenty places in which those two men had to preach, and 
there were other ranches and towns asking for the Gospel ; and we 
needed $2,000 for the next year. How could we raise it? In our 
church in Mexico City, we have a little Society of Christian Endeavor 
composed of ten members, and lliey talked the matter over and they 
made the astounding proposition to raise a thousand dollars if the 
other churches of the Presbytery would raise a thousand dollars more.^ 
It seemed impossible, but two Sundays before I left one of the me 
bers gave me as treasurer of the home mission society the $500 which 
they had promised to raise. I asked: *' How under the sun did you 
do it?" as did several other people. They answered: "Faith and 
works; that is what did it," and they never told me any more; they 
would not give me their secret. 

Others might give different testimony, but we see no reason why 
witliin a few years a number of our churches should not be entirely 
self-supporting. 

Some churches might have what they call spiritual self-support, 
which means that the man who does the preaching supports himself 



ich 1 



*C«otnI PcnbrurUik Cburcta. Apfll *f. 



ITS WORKING IN THE FIELDS 



le congrejjation do nothing. I suppose that is a very easy kind 

Clf-support to secure, and 1 do not sec mucli spirituality in it; but 

financial self-support is the hardest and most delicate problem 

that wx tiave had to solve, and it has cause<! a great deal of trouble. 

I It has lost to us sonic preachers of the gospel in that country who 

were not willing; to beg for their dues — that is, to take the necessary 

fmeans to secure ihcir own salaries — ^antl so they withdrew from the 

rtninistry. But others have had backbone enough to stay on and to 

|«y : This must be done ; it is our work. This is the Church of Christ 

in Mexico: if it is ever lo succeed and to have a permanent basis it 

must be sclf-supiwrting. 

Rev. Sumker R. Vinton, Missionary, American Baptist Mis- 
sionary Union, Burma* 

As a result of the work of the past, which from the very start has 
been self-supporting througli and through, we have to-day in Burma 
one hundred and twelve distinct Baptist churches with six thou- 
sand six hundred members. Twenty-five of these cliurches have or- 
dained pastors. The bulk of the other pastors are seminary trained 
men. supported b)' the cliurches. Tlie most of the American money 
that goes lo this mission is for the salary of ihc missionary. There is 
also one special evangelist, supported by the mission. He is an Amer- 
ican-trained native, who is practically the same as an American 
missionary, and the right-han<I man of the missionary now in charge. 
Two hundred dollars is given by the Women's Mis.«iionary Society for 
the support of native Bible-women, and there has been a grant of 
two hundred and fifty dollars a year to the town school, but for some 
years past we have told the Society that when they want the money 
somewhere else they can take it and not give us that appropriation. 

These one hundred and twelve churches arc absolutely self-suj)- 
porting. Not one cent of American money goes to the support of 
pastor or church. They are so organized that the stronger churches 
help the weaker ones to pay their expenses. More than this, they 
support their own primary schools, almost every church having its 
primary- school. In the earlier years it was quite customary for pastor 
and teacher to be the same man, but with the development of the work 
there are to-day many churclies which have their own pastor and have 
their own school-teacher in the village as well. More than this, they 
support the town school for which the appropriation of two hundred 
and fifty dollars has already been mentioned, this being a boarding 
school of from one liundred and fifty to two hundred and fifty pupils, 
the scholars paying a tuition fee of about six dollars and a half per 
year. More than this, in token of their regard and love for the men 
who have labored and given their lives for them, llicy are to-day 
erecting a memorial building for school purposes, entirely without the 
aid of American money. Something over ten thousand dollars has 
been spent on this building already. When completed it will cost 
twenty-eight thousand dollars. 

More than this, when the assnciation met a few weeks since, 
twelve native missionaries had been supported lor tlie past year by 

■ Pittb AvcaiM PfMtrjrtciUa Cburch, April 37. 






SELF-SUPPORT OP NATU'E CRCRCHES 

these native Christians. On account of the reports of these native 
missionaries, the money was raised at association for two additional 
missionaries. The people are not wealthy. They are a^iculturisu. 
Many of them do not sec five dollars in cash in ihc whole year, though 
we have a few who do sec more actual money. I think the secret of 
this success is that from the heginning this principle has iK-en pushed, 
that the people should pay according to tlieir aliility, and should have 
churcii buildings and should support men as they are able to pay for 
them. The giving has been straight out-and-out giving, from self- 
sacrificing principles which have been preached over and over again 
to those natives as of ihp elementary duties of Christianity; and 
the missionary spirit has been inctdcated in them from first to last. 

that they are saved not for themselves only, but saved to serve the^ 

Lord Jesus Christ. ^^M 

Rev. Julius Soper, D.D., Missionary, Methodist Episcopal 
Church, Japan* 

From 1892 to the present time we have been giving great attention 
to this very vital subject. Whatever may be said about the old 
method, I am glad to say that through it, with all the mistakes that 
have been madt-, we have raised up in Japan to-day a strong, vigorous, 
intelligent ministry, and we have thousands of earnest, intelligent 
Christians. To-day every one of our churches gives something toward 
the support of its pastor and its evangelists. We have several self- 
supporting churches, We have eight or ten that will be self-support- 
ing, we firmly believe, in two or three years. During the past four 
years we have raised on the field in Japr-n, not all. but mo.st of it given 
by Japanese, thirty thousand dollars. Is it not something to be 
proud of. when those people so appreciate the Gospel that they are 
giving of ihcir substance and are helping to siistain the work which 
we inaugurated there twenty-seven years ago? 

The question in reference to self-support in Japan to-day is simply 
a question of numbers. That is all. Some churches have forty 
members, some sixty, some seventy-five, some one hundred and fifty, 
some two hundred. Whenever we reach a membership of one hun- 
dred and fifty or two hundred we can have self-support. But there 
are very few congregations with only Ihirty-fivc or forty members 
that can stipport their pastor. So to-day, while we welcome self- 
support to the front, while we press it in our Quarterly Conferences 
and in our General Conferences and at every meeting possible, our 
great aim is to get our ministry and our people baptized with the 
blessed Spirit. And as soon as we can get these churches filled up 
self-support will settle itself. 

Rkv. Thomas Barclay, Missionary, Presbyterian Church in 
England, Formosa.^ 

There are several points which I wish to bring before yon, and the 
first of these is. that the disposal of all money coming from England 
in support of the mission lies, from beginning to end, entirely in the 
hands of the foreign missionaries. We alone decide how that money 

• Fifth Avenue Presbytcriaa Cha«h. April wj. t Camegie Hall, April ■?. 




is to be spent. We may consult the native Christians, but they have 
no voice in the decision as to how that money which came from abroad 
is to be employed. And, in the second place, we always draw a 
clearly marked line of demarcation between two classes of native 
workers ; in one class are the evanpfelists or teachers, and in the other 
class are the ordained native ministers. The former of these classes wc 
regard as our agents, to a certain extent. We train them and employ 
them and decide as to where they shall serve; ivc make ourselves re- 
sponsible for their entire salary, for when wc send them, for instance, 
at the beginning of a work, we can not expect that the Christian 
Church should be entirely responsible. The churches begin by bear- 
ing the current expenses, and then, by such arguments as have been 
prcse:iled, we teach them the duty and privilege of self-support, and 
so well do they respond that we often find that some of these native 
catechists have one, two, or even six months' salary paid, at the end of 
the year, by the native Christians. But it is different when we come 
to the native ordained ministers. According to owr Presbyterian 
views, such men stand exactly on the same platform as we do. The 
native minister is an ordained minister of the church. I have no more 
authority over him than he has over me. Therefore, our church 
from the beginning has made it a principle, in order to conserve this 
independence of thought and action, that such ordained ministers 
shall be entirely supported by the free-will oflferings of the people 
who call them to be their ministers. In some cases two or three or 
more congregations unite to call a minister, but in all cases he is paid 
not one cent of English money. Of course, this creates a difficulty 
sometimes in regard to the qtiestion of the compensation of pastors ; 
but the result ultimately seems to be satisfactory, especially in one 
direction ; it simplifies the relationship between, the native pastor and. 
the English missionary. 

Rev. Dr. Charles Bdrchgrevink, Norwegian Missionary So- 
ciety, Stavangcr, Noru'ay* 

As a representative of the Norwegian Missionary Society's work- 
ers in Madagascar, where 1 have betn a missionary thirty-one years, 
I will give some facts regarding the state of our work tn that island : 

Norway is a little country as to population. We arc only about two 
millions. But the Norwegian churches are doing a pretty large mis- 
sion work. In spite of our small number, and in spite of our having 
very few rich people, our churches contribute about $150,000 a year 
to foreign missions, of which amount about three-quarters are con- 
tributed by the women. 

Our work in Madagascar is carried on by about forty missionaries 
and ten unmarried ladies. Among the missionaries there are two 
medical men. 

OtTr baptized Christian community on the missionary field amounts 
to a little more than 50,000 and we have nearly the same number of 
children in our schools, of whom most are heathen. Wc have be- 
tween 800 and 900 churches, most of them small, in all of which the 
Word of God is preached every Sunday. Of our native workers be- 



* Ccstnl Prabj-lerifto. Churcb, A^II aj. 






SELF-SUPPORT OF NATIVE CHURCHES 

tween seventy and eighty are ordained pastors. The rest are teachers 
and evangelists and number about 1,700. The number of persons 
baptized in 1898 was more than 5,000. and, if 1 am not mistaken, the 
number ivas much greater in 1899. 

Lepers abound in Madagascar, and our mission has been able to 
give bodily and spiritual care to more than 500 of those miserable 
creatures. About 400 out of this number are communicants. We 
have a separate home to which the children of lepers are brought 
immediately after their birth, and it seems that by means of a strict 
separation from tiicir parents these little ones may be saved from the 
fearful disease. In our two hospitals about 10.000 sick people, yearly, 
are nursed or treated as out-patients. We have two bearding schools 
for girls. The girls remain with us from the age of three or four 
years up to sixteen, when most of them are married to Christian 
men. Our mission press prints all necessary school-books. As to 
Bibles and New Testaments, wc are greatly helped by the British 
and Foreign Bible Society. 

You will easily sec, that in so extended a work as this, carried on 
by a small and not rich conimnnity, it is not only from a missionary, 
but also from an economical, pnint of view, of the highest importance 
to get the churches to support themselves. The native Christians 
have done a good deal, for instance, in the building of churches and 
schoolhouses. But in paying the salaries of pastors and teachers 
there is still much to desire. If we had not the rival mission of the 
Roman Catholics in Madagascar, we should have a much more easy 
task in teaching our native Cliristians to support their own institu- 
tions. But the Roman Catholic missions are very rich and they will 
gladly spend money in order to get the better of us. But in spite of 
tins I do not think they can succeed altogether in checking our efforts. 
The fteling among our Christians is growing stronger, that it is 
their duty to help ihemsclves. and it is encouraging to see how they 
are beginning, and not least the women, to awaken to this duty. 

Our native Christians fctl thL-msclvcs a missionary church having 
responsibility for the heathen tribt-s in the island. So in their 
last yearly assembly they resolved to take it upon themselves to evan- 
gelize a large iiealhen district in the neighborhood, supporting schools 
and churclics there; and wc do not think it right to do anything to 
stop tlicir zeal in this respect, thousrh it might be said that their first 
duty is to support their own schools and churches. There is great 
hope that our mcflical mission will soon be self-supporting. In one 
of our stations the native Christians have built their own hospital and 
support their own doctors and nurses. .\t one of our hospitals the 
expenses are home by whnt is paid for attendance. 

It must be remembered that in Madagascar there are hindrances lo 
self-support, probably greater than in any Asiatic country. Not only 
are the inhabitants poor, but they have not been accustomed to give 
anything to heathen worship. And besides we have the rivalry of the 
very strong mission of the Roman Catholics, where even'thing is 
given gratuitously. Bv introducing the " short-cut method " to self- 
support without rnnsidcring the difficulties, we would drive a consid- 
erable part of the Malagasy population into the arms of the Romanists, 




ITS WOKKINC IN THE FIELDS 301 

thus shutting oursdvcs out from the great work now proceeding m 
Madagascar. Self-support in the mission field shall be the staning- 
point for new efforts on the part of tlie Norwegian Missionary Society 
in Madagascar, and may have the result, I hope, that in less than ten 
years our churches in Madagascar will be able to support their own 
pastors. As to the school work and expenses for building purposes, 
a longer time will be needed, But also in these respects there are 
signs that our churches in Madagascar will be able to stand on their 
own legs, if we give them a little time. 

Rev. H. G. Underwood, D.D., Missionary, Presbyterian Church, 
U. S. A.. Korea* 

Every church in its mission work is desirous of establishing, in the 
fields in which it has missionaries, a self-supporting, self-propagating, 
and self-governing native church. 

We do not then, in presenting this paper, pose as the special advo- 
cates of self-support as though it were not believed in by those who 
differ from us, we simply raise a question as to whether self-support 
in the end can l>e most satisfactnrily reached by the granting of gen- 
erous aid at the heginning, or whether better results can be secured by 
pushing self-support from the very opening of the work. 

This paper presents an object-lesson of a field where the principle of 
self-support was strenuously pushed from the very first. 

The plan of strenuously urging self-support in every department 
and insisting upon the same has nowhere had a fair trial. Dr. Nevius, 
although he never claimed to be the originator of this plan, was 
doubtless the one who brought it most prominently before the mission 
world, and yet it certainly never had a fair trial in his own district of 
Shantung, China, where some of his own fellow- workers in the same 
mission were working on the opposite principle. 

In the beginning of our work, before we had fully matured our 
plans, Dr. Nevius paid us a visir on his way to America in the summer 
of 1890. His bonk, " Methods of Mission Work," had already given 
us many valuable hints in the initiation of our work, but the full 
meaning of his system was mnre fully explained on his arrival. After 
a careful consideration, our mission decided that we would have in 
the end a more firmly established church by following this plan. 

Wc have been fortunate in that the missionaries who have conic out 
since, as they have seen our work, have nearly all taken the same 
view. Still further, the other Presbyterian churches that have come, 
and the Baptist mission have heartily adopted the same plan. Thus 
with the exception of the two American Mcthndist missions, and per- 
haps the mission of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, all 
the missionaries in F-Corca have adoptcil the one plan. It might be 
said that under these circumstances the system was having a fair tria.1 
here, but difficulties attend the working of a system of self-support 
side by side with another system in which, in various ways, money 
from the home land is freely used. 

The system as now followed by our mission is not exactly what was 
originally known as the Nevius system, but has grown out of the 

* Cime^e HaU. April ar- 





SELF-SUPPORT OF NATIVE CHURCHES 



needs of the work, and has been developed with it, and is on the whole 
more thorough than the systein of Dr. Kevius's " MelJiods of Work." 

The Koreans are extremely poor. There are no large guilds of 
wealthy merchants, and a small sum of money is there a fortune, A 
man with a capital of one or two hundred dollars would be considered 
well to do, and almost a gentleman of leisure. The poorer classes from 
which in the main our church members comc> live largely in low- 
thatched mud huts wiih one, or perhaps, two small rooms with a hole 
in one side covered with paper in Hcu of a window and a small rough 
lattice door. Shantung is, I believe, classed as one of the poorer 
provinces of China, and yet Chinese merchants, carpenters, builders, 
and others from that section who have come to Korea, tell us that the 
Koreans are far poorer than the men of their own province. It cer- 
tainly can not be said thai the measure of success that has been meted 
to our work is due to Korea's wealth. 

The general principle on which we work is that the missionary is a 
leader who has to gather his workers from among the people. Each 
missionary is allowed one paid personal helper, although some of our 
missionaries have no paid helpers at all. When a man's work be- 
comes so large that with thirty or forty, or in some cases more, 
churches to oversee he is unable to superintend the work with only 
one helper he may be granted an extra paid helper. No evangelist or 
pastor is paid by foreign funds. The term " foreign funds " applies 
alike to the board's money, funds provided by friends at home or 
drawn from the missionary's own pocket. The missionary needs his 
helper in order to keep in touch with his field, and properly to oversee 
his work ; bnt the real evangelistic work, and the pay of evangelists 
and the work of carrying the gospel into new districts, we place on 
the shoulders of the native church. The cost of their churches and 
chapels, as well as their primary schools, is borne by the natives, and 
during the last few years we have asked the natives also to carry on 
the native church schools, although in the beginning of these schools 
assistance may be rendered to the extent of one-half their expenses. 
From the very start we have tried to put the burden of propagating the 
gospel upon the natives. We have been willing to lead wherever pos- 
sible, and we have striven to make every Korean realize that the gospel 
has been given to b:m. not for himself alone, but in order that he may 
carry it to his neighbor, and that it is his privilege to become a co-^ 
worker with God. ^M 

I believe that the progress of the work in Korea is very largely du^^ 
to God's blessing the methods that we have adopted. The very fact 
that the burden of preaching the gospel is put upon the natives has 
given to us a church of earnest Christian workers who are fast carry- 
ing the gospel throughout the whole land. To-day, out of i88 imper- 
fectly organized Presbvterian churches. t86 are entirely self-sup- 
porting. In them we have an adxilt membership of nearly 3,000, of 
whom 865 were added during the year. 

As illustration of the attitude nf these churches toward church 
building, the history of two of the buildings may be mentioned: ^m 

I. The Chang Yun Church. Some ten or more years ago, wha^| 
this church had a membership of ten or a dozen, they sent to let me 






ITS WORKING IN THE FIELDS 

know that they were tlcsirons of securing a church building for their 
neighborhood. When I found tliat they were expecting the mission to 
provide them with a church. I informed them that they must put up 
their own building. They said it would be impossible. 

A few years later the Rev. Mr. McKenzie. from Canada, arrived in 
Korea and settled in the Utile village where this church is situated. His 
earnest Christian life there soon brought a cliangc among the vil- 
lagers, and it was not long before ihcy decided to build a church. One 
gave the trees as ihey stood, others offered to go and cut them down, 
others volunteered the use of their ox carts to haul them to the site, 
a poor widow woman gave the lot on which the church stands, others 
gave grain to feed die men who volunteered their labor, a few gave 
money. This church was a substantially built chapel in the center of 
a farm village of about sixty houses. liefore a month was passed the 
building was too small, and steps were taken for its enlargement. Be- 
fore a year was out its capacity was doubled and two neat school- or 
t class-rooms were added. 
The church to-day is one of the strongest that we have in Korea. 
In addition to paying all its own expenses, it supports an evangelist, 
who. under the direction of the elder and deacons, travels from vil- 
lage to village. It supports its own church School. In addition to this, 
it is very liberal in assisting other churches and chapels, and the mem- 
bers take up collections for mission work, and on two occasions — 
• that of the Indian famine and the Turkish atrocities among the Arme- 
nians — collections were voluntarily taken up in this church. When 
it is remembered that the people are largely paid in kind, and that 
wages there are less than ten cents a day, such voluntary contribu- 
tions alone represent no small deprivation and hardship. Brother So, 
the elder in this section, lias informed me, however, that if the native 
convert would but be as generous in the worship of the true God as 
he was formerly zealous for the heathen deities, the Korean Christians 
would have more than enough money to build their own churches, 
carry on their own schools, and when all this was done they would 
have qiute a sum left over toward the salary of the missionaries whom 
they need as leaders. 

2. The Sai Mun An Chtirch. The little building on the mission 
compound in Seoul in which the Christians had been meeting became 
too small, and in 1895 it was necessary to enlarge it. We called tlie 
church together and told them that the enlargement was needed, and 
in discussing this, it appeared evident that a new building would be 
necessary, that would cost in the neighborhood of i.ooo yen. We 
asked them what they could do. .\fter considerable discussion con- 
cerning the plans, the natives told us that they had raised a little over 
20 yen. We were proud of the effort that they had made, and the 
missionaries took steps toward raising the balance of the money for 
the new building among themselves. A site was secured, when • 
day at a httle prayer-meeting, our deacon. Yi Chun Ho, sU 
Koreans, as well as the missionary, by the suggestion that 
alone should put up the new church. I said : " You hav* 
and you believed that you had done all that you couh' 
most 1,000 yen to put up the church, can you do it"" 



JS 




SELF-SUPPORT OF NATIVE 

was : " We ask such questions as ' can you do it ' about men's work, 
but not about God's work." 'llie proposition was enthusiastically ac- 
cepted. The women agreed to have in the kitchen a basket, and of 
everything that they cooked to set aside a small portion which was lo 
be sold for the church : boys look packs upon their backs and gathered 
lip stones that could be used in the building ; men wlio iiad never dooe^ 
a stroke of work volunteered to do what they could. Some Chris: 
carpenters said they would g'.adly work for the churdi for nothin; 
every other day. while on alternate days they would work outside and 
thus support their families. The mission gave nothing but the siie, 
the tiles, and a few limbers. The missionaries threw off their coa!* 
and assisted in the work, and on Christmas Day of the same year wc 
were privileged to dedicate the Sai Mun An Church that had been 
put up entirely by the natives at the cost of 750 yen. The example set 
by the Chang Yun and Sai Mun An diurdies, and almost at tbt 
same time by one or two congregations in the province of Pyen? 
Yang has been followed wherever Pre-shjlerian work is starting, all 
over the land ; and it is not an uncommon ex|>ericncc for the mission- 
ary on visiting a station to find that the natives have ready a church or 
chapel for him to dedicate. 

The following are some of the principles followed in our work: 

1. We do not impose the completely organized church, as we hart 
it in the home land, upon the people. Among all the i8S churches un- 
der the Presbyterian Council we have not a single fully and com- 
pletely organized Presbyterian church in Korea. The organizalicB 
is as simple as possible, and the leader may be one of the deacons or 
an elder if there is one. 

2. We endeavor to plan our chitrch architecture in accordance with 
the ability of the natives to build and the styles of houses generally 
used. For our large centers we have well-built, solid, tile-roofcd 
churches, but in the small villages we have small thatched-roofed 
chapels. 

3. We try to place the responsibility of giving the gospel to thf 
heathen upon the Christians ; our aim is that every Christian shall be- 
come an active worker. As a result, from a number of congregation' 
the most intelligent Christians will be sent out to other places, while 
in some of the churches evangelists are permanently employed by the 
church to give a!I their time to tliis work. In some cases where a 
helper is allowed by *he mission, the missionaries associated will givf 
half the salary allowed for each of two men. some native church « 
individual Christians supplying the other half. 

4. It is the mission policy that wherever congregations warrant it 
there shall be church schools supported by ihe church, and under the 
supervision of the missionary in charge, or the stewards, deacons, 
elders, as the case may be. 

5. It is the aim of tlie mission to provide high schools or acadcmi 
at its larger stations. The mission must provide the foreign teach 
the salaries of mo.st of the native teachers, the beginning of an cdu 
tional plant, but from the beginning the lighting anil heating, janitor: 
wages, and tlic board of the pupils will be borne entirely by the natives^ 

Q. In the training of our workers we meet with the most serious 











m, 



problem, as yet unsolved. We sec no reason to believe that in the 
early Church there was a regular stated pastorate, and we are not 
yet urging this upon the Koreans. In God's own time a regular pas- 
torate will be cstablisheci, but at the present time we have no distinct 
theological seminary in mind. Once or twice a year, the leaders in 
our country and city work are gathered in Bible- and training-classes. 
These classes generally last about a month, and with the Bible as 
textbook, wc trv to direct the studies of our leaders and to fit and 
prepare them ^or their work. The practical element Is never lost 
sight of, and these class-meetings are always made times of special 
evangelistic activity in the cities in which they are held. Similar 
classes have been lately started for women workers, the expense of 
which to a great extent has been voluntarily borne by the natives. At 
the present time it is our aim to develop these leaders by means of 
these summer and winter training and Bible-classes, supplemented 
by the practical training that we can give them by having them ac- 
company us in our itinerating evangelistic tours and assist us in the 
organization of churches. As the work develops and better-trained 
men are required and a permanent native pastorate is demanded, the 
more regular theological seminary will be necessary, but not till then. 

7. A decidedly new departure in mission work has been made in 
requiring the natives to pay for books and publications a price that 
very nearly approximates the cost of production. 

8. The same clement is made to appear largely in our medical 
ork. The natives arc expected to pay for all their medicines, food, 

etc., while in the hospital and at the dispensaries ; no one of course is 
turned away, but the rich are expected to pay full price for medicine 
and for vists to their homes. 

We have striven in Korea to follow the example and principles of 
the Apostle Paul. We are convinced that those principles arc not 
obsolete, but are founded on a discerning view of human nature, and 
that however he might modify his methods, the great missionary 
Apostle, if he were now alive, would adhere to the principles on which 
he did his missionary work and laid for all time the foundation of the 
Christian Church. 

O. R. AvisoN, M.D,, Missionary, Presbyterian Church, U. S. A., 
Korea* 

It is, perhaps, rather strange that such a. little thing as money 
should be the thing which should determine whether missions shall 
succeed or shall not succeed, but if you will think of it a moment, 
you will see what I mean. You send a missionary to a country, and 
he takes his money with him. He selects a man and pays him to be 
his langitage teacher. He wants a Christian helper, and pays him 
to help him preach. By and by he gathers around him a few Chris- 
tians, and in a little while they want a church building in which to 
worship, and again the missionary puts his hand into the treasury, 
brings out the money, and builds a church. Then they want some- 
one to take care of the church, and there are the current expenses of 
the church to meet. Again the missionary is called upon; getting 

• CeotraJ Prcsbjteriui Cburch, April ■?. 




A 





SELF-SUPPORT OF NATIVE CHURCHES 

mission money, he pays the running^ expenses of the church. By and 
by they want a preacher, but before they can get the preacher they 
nuist have the man educated, and so the missionary comes again to 
the front and builds a school and equips tt and puts in bis teachers 
and produces more teachers and preachers, and then he gives them 
to the church. But having taken these men from their work and 
educated them and put them into the church, where they are not able 
to carry on their ordinary work, why, of course, the missionary again 
must come on and pay these men. Very soon the missionary, in- 
stead of being simply looked upon as a preacher of tlie gospel for 
these people, introducing a principle into their minds which is to de- 
velop and make them into a diffijrcnt class of men and women, is re- 
garded as the banker of the church and of the people, and this is 
viewed as his chief use. 

Now then, do not mistake me in this point; I don't say every one 
of these expenditures may not be legitimate in its place; but it very 
soon happens that the people who are converted, seeing this free use 
of money, naturally want to get a share in it. It is not hard for a 
man who does not believe anything' particularly, or who does believe 
everything, perhaps, to believe in Christianity. He is ready to pro- 
fess bis belief in God, in Christ, anything at all, if he can see five or 
ten dollars a month at the other end of it. And so there is a tendency 
for men to coine to the Church, or to apply for membership in the 
Church, and to be very religious and very devout, so that they deceive 
even nnssionarics. Such men get into the Church with the idea of 
being preachers, or teachers, or anytliiug that has money at the end 
of it. So we are apt to develop men who are not sincere in their pro- 
fessions of belief. Then they are sent out to preach and are paid by 
the missionary. Those Co whom they preach, knowing that they arc 
paid for their preaching, smile, saying: "That is all right ; he knows 
what he is about," being suspicious of his motive in preaching. How 
much will they believe of what he tells them ? 

Away up in Korea in the village of Sorai there lived a man by the 
name of So. He was the first to believe in Christ in Korea, so far as 
we know. He was converted in Manchuria under Mr. Ross, the 
Presbyterian missionary in Mukden, and he came down to Sorai 
village and began to preach there. In 1893, a Presbyterian by the 
name of Mackenzie came to Korea as a missionary. After looking 
around him he said he would go up to Sorai, and he got into the 
house of this Mr. So. Mr. So gave him the best room be had. He 
boarded him, taught him the language, used to go out with him among 
the people and preach with him. became his helper generally. ThCD 
Mr. Mackenzie said to him at about the end nf the month. " Mr. So, I 
want to pay you now for last month's work." " Well," he said, " you 
don't owe me anything." *' How is that? " " Well." he said, " T am 
not taking anything for this work : I am not working for money." 
" But." said Mackenzie, " I have lived in your house : you have sup- 
plied me with fuel, you have supplied me with food: you have been 
my language tea:ber: I have taken up your time and T must pay you 
for it : I can't have this thing go on in this way." " Well," said So. 
" I can not afford to take your money." " But," said Mackenzie, " I 




I 
I 



I 



\ 



WORKING IN THE Pll 

can't have you any longer then to work for mc." " Well," said Mr. 
So, " you pay me just what it costs for your board and I will call it 
square; but I can not afford to take your money for preaching. If I 
take your money and go uut and preach they will all laugh at me; I 
will lose my influence ancl the work will stop." Mr. So, although he 
was a Korean and a native, saw distinctly and clearly just what I 
have said : that it is money which determines wht^thcr the people be- 
lieve or disbelieve; that is. the use or abuse of foreign money. It has 
been a good thing for Korea thai that man saw the point so distinctly, 
and he cleared the way for the further introduction of the principle of 
self-support in the native church. Wiih that spirit, do not you be- 
lieve that the work will go rapidly on? Do not you think that the 
people would believe more readily in what he tnld them? The result 
was that wc have in that ncighlx>rhood now the strongest church in 
Korea, self-supporting in every particular. 

One speaker has said that self-support is impossible in a country 
like China. It altogether depends whether you believe it can be done, 
and whether you are wanting to do it or not. How can you expect it 
to be done with one-half your men pulling one way and one-half the 
other? Of course, it couldn't be done in China under those circum- 
stances ; but it is being done in Korea. The point is this, the use 
or abuse of ihe money which you are gathering and sending to the 
mission field is after all the factor which determines whether the 
gospel shall succeed in impressing those people or not. Although this 
is the work of God, it is like everything else ; it requires to be carried 
on, so far as man is concerned, according to general underlying 
principles, and God's Spirit will flow out along those principles and 
into the work and enliven it and make it powerful. 

Rbv. Arthur H. Ewinc, Missionary, Presbyterian Church, 
U, S. A., India* 

Human nature is so constituted that short-eut methods appeal to 
every one of us. 

It is also a fact that some minds arc so constituted that methods 
entrance them. The theory of missionary effort which has been urged 
represents the ^hnrt-cut nicthnd, and I quite understand how it has 
appealed to this great audience ; I feel exceedingly sorry, at this 
moment, that the meetings of this great Conference are in reality but 
meetings to stimulate onr interest in the great cause, because it is im- 
possible fairly to face this question, one side only of which has been 
heard, in such a meeting as this. 

I wish to say with reference to the establishment of churches in all 
parts of the world that in order to have Christian culture and de- 
velopment constant instruction is absolutely essential. I appeal to 
the pastors present to say whether they are willing to leave their con- 
gregations without constant supervision and instruction. I feel sure 
there is only one possible answer to this. And do you think it possi- 
ble that Onistian life will be developed in the foreign field among our 
out-caste Christians of India and China when they do not have con 

• CaracgU Hall, Apdl ay 



Jk 




3o8 SELF-SUPPORT OF NATIVE CHURCHES 

stant instruction by well-trained men and constant supervision of 
pastors ? 

You say to me that the method of Dr. Nevius, as we find it in 
Korea, has many self- supporting churches I I say to you that if in 
Korea lliosc communities of Christians are receiving constant instruc- 
tion and supervision — for tlijs is the fundamental principle — then that 
work will continue; if not, then the same thing will happen as hap- 
pened in Dr. Ncvius's work in China, citlicr it will be broken up or 
the old method will have to be restored in order to save the remnants 
of a falling cause. 

Dr. Nevius's success was a providence and not a method. The 
missionaries from Korea will excuse me for speaking of this, but I 
have it at first hand and know it to be true, that in Korea, until the 
China-Japan War, there were about eighty or one hundred Christians. 
After Japan defeated China by Western methods there was a great 
turning to the religion of the West, and the people were willing to 
come in; and now the method is being exploited there, as a reason of 
this success. In Manchuria, where the same influences were felt, the 
Scotch and Irish methods are in force, and the Scotch and Irish Pres- 
byterians are carrying on their work with much greater success than 
has appeared in Korea. Therefcjre I say we must look the question 
fairly in the face and not be carried off our feet by what seems to be 
temporary success of a human method. I believe that in the provi- 
dence of God a full and complete answer to Dr. Nevius's methods has 
come just at the right time to save the mission boards at home and 
the Church at home from being carried off their feet and hindering 
the work which God has been planning. 

There is a distinct line of development and evolution in the building 
up of churches. Different churches look at the crisis in the Punjab 
in different ways. No one knows how to read us aright, but think 
we are at the lowest stage of human society. What we need above 
all else is that we should be able to send to every Christian community 
a man well qualified, and paid, if you please, by foreign funds, in 
order to instruct and maintain the people. Not that we do not also 
aim at self-support. I have had the pleasure of editing our news- 
paper in North India for the past four years, and the question for 
constant discussion in it by Indian Christians is the question of self- 
support. They are stirred up over it; they will evolve its successful 
solution, but not by short-cut methods. 

Rev. C. F. Reid, D.D., Missionary, Methodist Episcopal Church 
{South). Korea* 

Among the many facts developed by this Conference is the fact 
that one hundred years of missionary effort has endowed the Church 
with a magnificent capital in the way of mistakes corrected and ex- 
perience that touches nearly every point of the great missionary ques- 
tion. I believe that all the Protestant missionaries in Korea stand 
committed to the principle and the practice of self-support. Why do 
we stand so committed? When the missionary went into that field 
he had behind him the experience of the older missions, and the ob- 

• nrtb ATCoiie I^nbrKriao Clmrclj, April a?. 





ITS WORKING IN THE FIELDS 309 

servation that he made taught him that sclf'support means aggressive 
work, self -propagation. 

Something more definite should be said about the plan of procedure 
with respect to self-support in Korea. There are two great societies 
chiefly represented in Protestant missioti work in Korea, the Pres- 
byterian and the Methodist. The Presbyterians have adopted 
a modification of what is called the Nevius plan. The Metho- 
dists did not have to adopt anything, because the Nevitis plan 
was, in fact, borrowed from them and was simply . a carrying 
out of John Wesley's proposition : " A penny a week and a shilling 
a quarter. The class and the local preacher." So all the Methodists 
had to do was just to go on with what tliey already had and carry out 
their work along the lines that have made Methodism something of a 
power in the world. Wherever we could get just a few people to- 
gether we organized them into a class, and we selected the best man 
in that class to be the leader. And then we introduced something 
else, and that was the contribution box. The contribution box was 
made a prominent feature at every service, and the Korean was 
taught that before he prayed he had better first pay. And so it was 
that the native church in Korea never knew anything else. It has 
been intimated that the growth of mission work in Korea dated after 
the China-Japan War. 'I'hat was a revelation to the Korean mis- 
sionaries. We have never thought that the war had anything to do 
with mission work. Let it be borne in mind that modern Protestant 
missions did not begin in Korea until 1884, just ten years before the 
war, and that ten years after we began our work there were already 
something like 800 converts. Now, compare this with China, where, 
after working along (he lines of the old regime for thirty-three years, 
they had three coiiverts. After ten more years their native converts 
migiU reach something like three or four hundred. But in an addi- 
tional five years in Korea our converts numbered over 5,000. 

We believe that there must first be a constituency before there 
could be a proper minister; and so it is that we teach our native Chris- 
tians that they must first be able to support a pastor before they are 
to ask for a pastor. And after organizing them into classes we try 
to induce them to further organize : several classes combining and 
putting themselves in a position to support a pastor among themselves. 
We also teach them tliat the proper thing to do is to provide them- 
selves with a house of worship. And so all over Korea, wherever 
there is a little band of Christians, they arc almost sure to have a 
house of worship. Our own mission is simply an infant in point of 
years, being only about three years old; and yet at the end of three 
years we have seven organized societies. Five of these seven societies 
have already pnDvided themselves, without one cent of cost to the 
board of missions, with a house of worship. 

Re?v. W. K. McKfBBEN, Missionary. American Baptist Mission- 
arv Union, China* 

The mission to which I was sent was one of the older missions, the 
American Baptist Mission in Southern China; and from a large 

•Fidh Avenue PrMbyteri an Chureh, April 97. 





3IO 



SELP-SUPPOBT OF NATIVE CHURCHEiS 




P 



variety of circumstances, seemingly inevitable in that period, it had 
been conducted without any practical effort to procure the support of 
the preachers by their own people. Five years ago there were sev- 
eral of us who thought the time had come when wc should make a 
heroic effort to secure from the people themselves the support of the 
preachers. 

Then we began six months in advance, at the Quarterly Meeting. 
About the first of July, we had two or three sessions exclusively de- 
voted to this question, praying over it, thinking over it. planning 
abou". it. Those brethren there were a very doubtful set of Thomases 
about the possibility of their being supported by their own people. 
Good preachers ibey were, not all of them educated in colleges, but 
good, thorough, evangelistic preachers. They said. "If we have got to 
depend on those Chinese brethren to support us, wc might jusl as well 
go out and dig dirt for a living and preach when wc get a chance to." 
" No," we said, '* brethren, think better of it, and make the effort." So 
we told them that beginning with the first of January following wc 
should expect that all churches and all stations which wanted to have 
preachers settled with them — pastors in fact, though not always in 
name— must be prepared to support their pastor or preacher alto- 
gether or to the extent of their ability. We repeated this course of 
instruction when the October Conference came around, and we told 
them they must be ready the first of lanuary. When the first of 
January came there was one church that was ready to take a man 
and support him altogether, not the preacher only, but also their 
school teacher. Then several others were able to support their preach- 
ers to one-half the extent of their salary, and there were others 
less than that. With that small beginning we have gone on. until 
now, after three years of time, it has come about that it is the rule 
that churches and stations expecting preachers pay almost all their 
support. There are now in the five stations connected with the Swa- 
tow work at least a dozen churches which are virtually completely 
self-supporting, a dozen more largely so. And I want to say the 
Chinese brethren arc able. What they save from idolatry as Chris- 
tians will enable them to pay four times over what is necessary to 
support their churches. 

Mr. Wii.i-iAM Henry Gr.\nt, Assistant General Secretary, Ecu- 
menical Conference* 

We think, many of us, that we are on opposite sides of this ques- 
tion, whereas, as a matter of fad, I think if we would put our agree- 
ments together we would find that we are nine-tenths agreed. I 
should like to see the man, woman, or child, that would get up in this 
assembly and advocate that we should not have higher training of our 
missionary agents, either missionaries, or pastors, or evangelists. 1 
do not believe the man exists. Wc all believe thoroughly in educa- 
tional work in its place and in its time. We all of us believe in giving 
our pastors on the field the very best and mo.st suitable training for 
their work. We all of us believe in evangelizing first, before we sup- 
port something that is not evangelized. Lincoln was once asked bow 

• Fifth Aveoue PrMbyierian Churct. April aj. 




THE MEVIUS METHOD jit 

long a man's legs ought to be. He said they ought to be long enough 
to reach from his body to the ground. Now, if some of these chil- 
dren that arc thirty or forty years old, that have been nursed at the 
breast for that length of time, have not got long enough legs to reach 
from their bodies to the ground, it probably is because we are holding 
them too high up in the air, and they would have unnatural extremities 
if their legs were to reach from their body to the ground. It is not a 
question, therefore, in the earliest stages of the work, merely of cast- 
ing an infant loose to support itself. TJie iufant must be fed by the 
sincere milk of the Word. 

I visited both these fields of Korea and Shantung to study this par- 
ticular question, and I am convinced that what is called llie Novius 
method, which is really ihc Shantung method, is thoroughly estab- 
lished in the Shantung field. Every question that I asked confirmed 
the main idea of the system in Dr. Ncvius's book, which is practiced 
very largely by the Presbyterian Missions, tlie American Board Mis- 
sion, and the English Baptist Mission. I found that the main factors 
in that theory were carried out. Many disagreed with some things Dr. 
Nevins had done, and that were not recommended in his book. There 
was a part of his field that was a failure from other causes entirely. 
because the people in that field were perhaps subjected to the greatest 
immorality that existed anywhere in China. But, on the other hand, 
the basis of the present self-support of the pastorate of Shantung had 
been laid before the larger number of the present body of missionaries 
came on the field, and they have received great blessing and bcncfil 
from that work, unconsciously, and have entered into it unconsciously. 
But if they could project themselves on another field, if they could 
visit such a field as Mexico, or some other parts of China, where an- 
other basis has been laid, they would think themselves happy that 
they had been delivered from such difficulties as these other missions 
contend with in rectifying the mistake of supporting pastors out of the 
mission treasury. The Shantung missionaries, almost to a man, be- 
Heve in self-support, and are carrying out self-supix^rt The only 
difference is in the introduction of that term, Nevius method. 

Rev. R.M. Mateer, Missionary, Presbyterian Church, U. S. A., 
China* 

I wish to make a few remarks concerning the work of Dr. Nevius 
in China. In the first place, Dr. Ncvius's work was a providence and 
not a method- — absohiTcly nothing to do with the method. He worked 
for seven years along the line of his method, and he didn't have a 
single convert, and there is not a single convert through that method 
in that region to-day. Later on he was called by the providence of 
God to engage in relief work in a new region, and in that work he 
took in some seven or eight hundred members, but there is not a 
self-supporting churcli in Dr. Ncvius's field to-day. There are sev- 
eral self-supporting churches m that region now, but not one of tliem 
the result of the work of Dr. Nevius. The other members of the mis- 
sion have tried to work his method. .\ few years ago they asked me 
to try my hand at it. I took hold and held revival meelijigs, and in the 

• Canwglc Rati. April »f . 




3ia 




or KATIVE ClIURCUES 



course of three years succeeded in establishing a pastor there, but he 
left the work; no amount af persuasiun would induce him to stay 
there, because of that work of Dr. Nevius. The history of this mat- 
ter is vouched for by missionaries on the ground. It has been seen 
in manuscript by leading missionaries of all denominations. It is not 
a short ait to self-support. 

In the second place the great aim of missionary work is to leaven 
these great masses and prepare these people for receiving the gos- 
pel and for inteUigent acquaintance with it; it is to bring them to the 
knowledge of Christ, and to build them up in Christ; and any mis- 
sionary or any board that comes down from this high level and makes 
its work first and foremost a question of money or no money is pros- 
tituting the cause. 

In the third place I want to say that it is not chiefly a matter of 
method, but of men ; the man who has the stuflf in him will succeed. 
Men who are practical and enterprising will succeed in securing self- 
support among the churches. They must adapt themselves to the 
condition and circumstances and to the stage of the work in which 
they engage ; there is no patent method in these processes in the field 
any more than there is at home. The impression seems to prevail in 
some quarters that there is a great deal of hypocrisy and mercenary 
motive among the churches on the mission field. I am prepared to 
state as my deliberate opinion — and you are very much afraid of this — 
I am prepared to give testimony of missionaries in general that ilierc 
is ten times more hypocrisy in the Church here at home than there is 
in the Church in heathen lands. The Christians in heathen lands give 
far more and with much greater sacrifice than the churches at home. 
They do ten times more personal work without pay than do the Chris- 
tians here at home. Wliy, right over here in Brooklyn the churches 
arc canvassing the city, but are tlie canvassers doing it free, are they 
doing it without pay? No, they are paid four cents for every bell they 
ring. H they ring one hundred bells in a day they get four dollars; 
and they ought to have it; they can't afford to work for nothing; 
they have to live. Neither can the Christians out in China afford to do 
it. They are called upon to evangelize these great masses ; but they 
must be paid for it, they must get their bread ; they must live. 

Rev. T. W. Pearce, Missionary, London Missionary Society, 
China* 

Hongkong is a mere dot on the vast surface of the ocean. Hong- 
kong has no history. It had scarcely any inhabitants until 1852, 
when it became British soil, or rather, British rock. Hongkong 
must not be judged by its geographical limitations. The gospel has a 
strong hold on the Chinese in Hongkong, and for some years there 
I have been associated with a very large self-supporting chttrch. it 
has been the joy of my life during the past six and a half years to be 
the associate of a native pastor, having myself no local standing in the 
church itself. The Christians there built their own church building. 
At the congregational meeting in that building on Sunday, the sight is 
a most inspiring one, and the church has its evangelistic agencies and 



• Fifih Ar«fluc rrcttrfterUD Church, April a?. 



ITS WORKING IN CHINA 



313 



is doing a great deal of Christian work of the sort that each church in 
New York presumably is doing. But for all that, I am not what has 
been called a short-cut man. Financial strength is, after all, not the 
only, not the real strength of a self-supporting church. It is more 
important to have purity and a high standard of discipline. Some- 
times it is difficult and sometimes it is comparatively easy to get finan- 
cial strength when you do not get more important strength. 

For eleven and a half years I had to do with churches which were 
struggling toward self-support and which had not yet attained thereto. 
And I think certain principles are involved if you are to seek a re- 
adjustment in old mission fields. We must cordially recognize the 
good that has been done under what is being called the long-cut sys- 
tem. It is only by intelligently recognizing the good work that has 
been done under a system which we are striving to modify or improve 
that we shall reach belter results. 

Now, let me say a word about native evangelists, with an emphasis 
on evangelists. In the south' of China this question could not possibly 
be up for discussion, if it had not been for native evangelists supplied 
during many years with funds from Great Britain and America. 

■ The native evangelists, preaching year after year in the great city of 
Canton, in halls with doors thrown open on the crowded streets, 
brought multitudes from distant villages to a knowledge of the truth, 
and many to a belief in Christ, and through their preaching churches 
were established. You first paid money to employ native evangelists. 
Then there grew up Christian churches as the result of their work, 
and now the question seems to be, or at least one question is, whether 
you should continue to pay native evangelists with money from the 
West. As evangelists, yes ; as pastors, no. Keep the two distinct. 
Keep preaching-hall and the church building distinct, and keep the 
evangelist separate from the pastor. And that is a step toward the 
solution of the question. 

Rev. I. T. Headland. Peking Unhcrstfy, Peking. China* 
We have had in our university in Peking, since I went there, 
twenty-eight graduates. Those who graduated, for the most part, 
were kept in school by money furnished from Christian lands or 
from foreigners. They are all taught English and they are all able 
to go into business and business is ready for all of them. Out of the 
twenty-eight, twenty have gone into church work at salaries from 
one-third to one-fifth of what they could get in business. One of 
them had an offer in business of fifteen ounces of silver a month for 
the first year, twenty for the second. twenty-fi\'e for the third. He 
began preaching for five ounces of silver a month, After three 
years he gave up the five ounces of silver, preached for nothing, 
taught English among the official families for his living, and during 
the first year of this kind of work subscribed thirty ounces of silver 
toward the building of a new chapel in a different place, and toward 
the building of a dispensary at the same place, and collected from his 
official friends two hundred ounces of silver, which completed the 

* Pinb AT«aa« FreitarterJKa Cbufclii April 17. 







SELF-SUPPORT OF NATIVE CHURCHES 

building of the dispensary. After five years he submitted to being 
pulled up from thai work where he was making' much more in teach- 
ing English, and put into the most difficult church that we had in the 
Northern China Conference. 

Another young man who came to our university, came to the 
United Slates after his graduation, was graduated from the Dc Pauw 
Theological School, had an offer of one thousand dollars a year in 
the United Slates, but went back and began preaching in China, 
where he was paid eighty-four dollars a year ; and out of that amount 
he gave enough to sitpport a boy in the Peking University, as he had 
been supported. 

What I wish to say is that the people of the United States ought 
to value self-sacrifice more than sclf-supf-ort. 

Mr. Duncan McLaren, United Presbyterian Church of Scot- 
land* 

Our Church and Board believe strongly in the need of self-support. 

With regard to evangelists, we in some cases pay salaries, in others 
we do not, depending upon circumstances ; but in all cases where a 
church seeks to call a native pastor we lay upon that church the duty 
of supporting the pastor and providing other expenses in connection 
with the church. Some of our new churches do much more. 

In one of our mission fields, the whole trxpense to us last year, in 
addition to the payment of the Scottish missionaries, was thirty 
pounds, or $150. We have 180 evangelists there, and the salary of 
each one of those, save two, is paid by the members of the church, 
and those two we have no doubt will be paid by the church 
during the coming year. The members of this church not only 
support their preachers, but they erect the buildings, and when a 
new church is opened, they make it a point of honor that no debt 
shall rest upon that church. On the opening day they come in crowds, 
not only themselves, but the people for many miles around, and it 
requires a big collection plate to receive all the offerings. Those who 
have coin put it on the plate. Those who have not coin pay in kind. 
One win bring a fowl, another a goat, another an ox, another some 
of the fruits of the earth ; and when this goes on for an hour or two 
the value of all is summed up. and if not found suflScient the meeting 
i.«i continued until there is siifficient produce to pay what debt remains 
on the new church. In that way they understand what is required of 
them, and we have never found it to fail. 

In Manchuria ihc grace of libera!itv is not quite so conspicuous, but 
another grace is, that of personal service. There they pay the salaries 
of the native pastors. They do not pay the salaries of all the cvan- 
pp!ipts; hilt what is hrtter than that, the members of the church 
understand that they themselves must he evangelists and go out. both 
those who reside in town and those who reside in the country, and 
carry the gospel through the neighborhood : and in the most distant 
valleys the missionaries find that the gospel is there before them. 
Wherever they ^o they have the pleasure of finding that some one of 
those native members has already proclaimed the glad tidings. 

■ Fifth ATcnue Preataytrrian Cbtircb, April »?. 





SOME PRACTICAL QUESTIONS 



315 



I 



I 



I 



I 



Twenty-five years ago there was not a Protestant Christian in that 
country. Now we have between 19,000 and 20,000. 

There is but one Protestant church in Manchuria. The two mis- 
sions are united, the missionary and the ciders of the native congrega- 
tion form one Presbyten.-, and there is but one mission. The people 
are not disturbed by thoughts as to which of the various evangelical 
churches have the most claim on them. The mission in Manchuria 
is a comparatively new mission. Wc have no old idea to uproot. 
Our missionaries began with great wisdom, and sought from the 
very beginning to lay the foiiiulations firm and sure, and were in no 
hurry. They believed in the principh'-s that were laid down : and now 
there is an abundant harvest. During the pas' year there were up- 
ward of 4,000 baptisms, and at the present time there are be- 
tween 9.000 and 10,000 applicants for baptism in that country 
where, twenty-tive years ago, the name of Jesus Christ was unknown. 

Rev. Wir.LiAM Asiimore. D,D., Missionary, American Baptist 
Missionary Union. China* 

I sometimes have wondered what Paid went to Arabia for. He 
mentions the fact, just the bare fact. He says: " I went three years 
in Arabia." I shall not atttmpt to answer the question, yet from my 
experience on the mission fit-Id, I have sometimes wondered whether 
it would not be well for a man to have three years to forget, to unlearn 
some things ; for in onr entrance unto the licathen we carry with us 
a great many notions which wc have to unlearn. 

When we go out to a new field, wc have no converts. People 
say sometimes, Why not let the ht-athen support their own churches? 
But there are no persons lo give anything. The missionary at the 
first has to be everything. He is bishop; he is pastor; he is sexton; 
he is the church clerk and church treasurer ; he is everything. H any- 
body becomes a believer, he has to receive him into the church. If 
anybody needs discipline, he has to administer it. And yet people 
sometimes say that most any kind nf a man will do for a missionary. 
The best man you have got will do fnr a missionary, because all these 
kinds of work come right on the missionary's shoulders. So do not 
think it strange that n^issionaries make mistakes at first. 

I think the art of evangelizing large masses of dead people was a 
lost art when missions commenced — that is. among Protestants. When 
I was in China I put this question to eighteen persons : " When you 
were in the theological seminary, were you taught the art of evan- 
gelizing masses of tmcvangelized men?" and seventeen out of the 
eighteen said No. One man said he had been taught in Spurgcon'a 
college in London how to evangelize. I said to the others : " What 
were you tatight? " Most of Ihem said : " We went to learn how to 
he pastors." Now in every community, nine men out of ten are dead 
men, and one man. we will say, is a live man^lhat is, a regenerated 
man; and in the heathen field, ninet}'-nine out of a hundred may be 
dead men. But dead men need evangelists and live men need pastors. 
The case is very much as though a physician were told : " The plague 
has broken out among us : we want a man to come who knows how to 



l: 



•Central Presbrterjan Church. April 37. 




3l6 SELF-SUPPORT OF NATIVE CHURCHES 

lake hold of this plapriie anti stop it," " Well," says the physician, 
" 1 have nol been taught very much about fighting plague, but after 
you gel the man curecl, I am the man to bring him along." There has 
iwen the difficulty. We get out there with just this class of prepara- 
tion and we have to learn a great deal. 

Every missionary starts out iit this way. After a time the mission- 
aries get a few converts. First there will be two or three converts, who 
arc old and can nut do anything. Then there will be five or six con- 
verts; then nine or ten. They can not du anything ; they can not e\'en 
hire a house, and so it happens from the very necessities of the case 
that the missionary has to do everything himself. But at some time a 
wise missionary will say: " Now you must begin to do something to 
kelp." The very way it Is put is a mistake. Twenty-five or thirty 
years ago T saw there was a mistake there, and I said : We will turn 
that thing right around the other way : instead of your helping us, we 
will help you. and you are to take the lead and wc arc to say how far 
we will help you. I found out afterward that made a marvelous 
difference. After a while the missionaries will enter upon the work 
of weaning the churches — that is, getting them to walk for themselves 
and take care of themselves — and it is no easy task to wean a church in 
a heathen field. We had a little church there where the people could 
not even manage to pay a small per cent, of the expenses. There were 
about forty members in the church. There were two men who got 
' $4 a month apiece for the support of their families, and there were 
about twenty women in tlie church and several of them widows, and 
tiiesc persons did not get more than about $i or $1.50 for their own 
I support. Now how they cinild support a pastor out of Chat was a 
puzzle. I got to wondering over this question, and the problem that 
came before my mind was just this: Is the question of a church's 
existence or non-existence to be a question of money? Shall we sayA 
If you have money, live; if you have no money, die? It is not an 
easy question to wrestle with, and I was dissatisfied. Then I began to 
recall all that I had seen and known about the methods of churches at 
home, and I remembered how they did in our State convention. They 
had the expression, "Self-supporting churches." What is a self- 
supporting church? A church that has money. I used to hear some 
poor little church come to the convention — a church of twenty-five or 
thirty members, men and women, all poor — and the question would tw 
asked : '* How much can you raise? " " We can raise about two hun- 
dred dollars, all of us put together." " Can you not raise any more 
than that? '* " No." " Then die! We can give you a hundred; can 
you not get a minister to come for that? " " No. we can get nobody.l 
We came to see if you can't help us." " No. there is no help for youj' 
no money, no grace!" My spirit rose up in rebellion against this I 
plan, and I began to wonder if this is God's plan. Has God made the ' 
life of a church depend upon a man having some money in his pocket? 1 
Is there anything so small or insignificant that when it comes into the [ 
world God doesn't teach it some way to get a living? I began to rea- • 
son in this way: God teaches a little chick how to feed itself. The 
highest organism in this whole world, and perhaps in the universe, so 
far as we loiow, is the Church of Jesus Christ ; can it be that an organ- 




BOME PRACTICAL QUESTIONS 



31? 



ism like this has no means of support unless it has dollars and cents? 

Then 1 went to studying the Bible, and I found out what had no! 
struck mc before : ihat after all God has provided in the Bible a way 
for His church to nourish itself. Instead of this term " self-support," 
meaning thereby, money. I would substitute the word " self-nutrition." ■ 
In the Episde to the Ephesians, the fourth chapter, you have the' 
basal principle. It is this: *" When he ascended up on high, he gave 
gifts unto men." That is the starting-point. When Christ ascended 
on high, He shed forth the Holy Spirit. When the Holy Spirit camcy 
down upon the people and filled their minds and hearts, one could] 
Ipreach, and one could pray, and one could interpret, and one could , 
Wo some other thing, and thus they went on. In the twelfth chapter of 
(firs: Corinthians, you have the method in general stated. So I got 
ihold of it, and I said to myself; Now, after all, here is this treasure 
I trove hid away, and wc have been following the old home metliods. 
God has been teaching us all the time and wc haven't seen the way. 
Read on a little farther. In the fourteenth chapter wc are told how 
to manage the service. " If, therefore, the whole church be come to- 
gether into one place, and all speak with tongues, and there come in 
those that arc unlearned, or unbelievers, will they not say that yc are 
mad ? But if all prophesy " — then it goes on to tell what to do. 

Someone will say: " If you try that plan, some one will talk the 
meeting to death." No, Paul provides for that. He says: " If any- 
thing be revealed to another that sittcth by, let the first hold his 
peace." Now you see how provision is made for conducting services. 
The church must believe in spiritual gifts; and I have said to some of 
the churches here at hnnie : " If you haven't any churcli, gel into your 
own houses, get a kitchen or barn ready and meet together and edify 
one another and sing together, and see if God does not come down 
upon you with the power of His Holy Spirit." 

Some may say the people will not come to hear. I tell you, if the 
Spirit of God is in a church people will come, and they can not help it. 
There is the secret of it! \Y\^y. brethren, we arc in line with every- 
thing else nowadays except the Spirit of God. Instead uf telling our 
"Tittle churches to go and die and starve to death, I would say, get to- 
gcther and believe on God and believe His Word, and see if God ' 
doesn't pour you out a blessing until there be no room to contain it. j 

Now for applying this principle to our tittle churches. I am an 
evangelist ; I am not a pastor, and I never will be a pastor of a native 
church; my business is to preach the gospel; my business is not to 
have dominion over the faith of the church. If I have any kind of an 
apostolic or missionary authority. I am a trustee and hold the author- 
ity only until the church is able to manage for itself. Therefore, I say 
to the church, grow up. brethren, as fast as yon can. Some of our 
missionaries have trouble with the native churches, or a church is 
jealous of them and docs not want them. Take this plan and they will 
not be jealous. Tell them, T want you to take care of your own selves 
as soon as you can, so that I can go mit to try this work on somebody 
else. So much for the church. 

Evangelists I class with myself. Missionaries and evangelists may 
be supported by the money from abroad — that is to say, an evangelist 




A 



p 



JlS SELF-SUI'POKT OF NAtlVE CHURCHES 

who has to go out among the heathen. Some of our good brethren 
have the idea that if an evangelist goes out to preach he should be re- 
quired to board himself. One of our young missionaries said to me 
once that the evangelist should pay half of his board. I said : " Why 
don't yoit do so yourself? '' He had not thought of it in that light. If 
I want 3 min to go into those towns and villages and beyond that 
mountain range and preach the gospel from lovm to town and house 
to house, I must give him something to eat ; he is a workman that is 
entitled to his keep. 

When it comes to pastors and churches, I change my whole atti- 
tude toward them. 1 say; " Brethren, the churches are yours, the 
schools are yours.*' 1 had a great tussle to break away from the old 
plan. We had taken charge of the schools; we had done everjthing, 
but I made up my mind that the school system would have to change; 
instead of their helping us, we would help them. 1 said to them: 
*■ Now this school is yours. God gave those children to you ; He didn't 
give them to me. I am not called upon to educate your children for 
you, brethren, btit by all means go lo work and do what you can." 
T.liey said : " Teacher, if you don't take the lead in this matter, there 
will be no school this year.'^ " Well." I said, " there will be no school 
this year if you can't take the lead." There was no school that year. 
It was the same the next year. The third year they came to me and 
said : " Teacher, we are going to have a school." " All right, 
brethren, we will help you." It is all summed up in this one tiling. 
We now help them. At my station at Kityang, just before 1 left tliere 
in 1895, a deacon, a barefooted man, a little like Peter — Peter was 
probably that way — came to me and said; "Teacher, now you are 
liere to-day, you are going to take charge of the service." I said: 
" No, I am not ; you arc going to take charge of the service, and I am 
going to sit on one side there, and you are going to lead this meeting, 
and when you get ready you are going to call on me and 1 am going 
to be your servant." He did. 

We have not made miich progress to be sure, but it is th,e right plan, 
and the people are learning how to do their own exhorting, how to do 
their own praying, how to do their own preaching, how to manage^ 
their own affairs ; and I believe that if we pursue this plan God's Spirit I 
will be poured out upon these little churches and we will see them/ 
prospering as never before. 

Rev. George Chalfant, D.D.. Pittsburg, Pa* 
T am not a missionary, but having two sons in North China, two 
years ago I had the privilege of going up to Shan-tung with my wife 
to visit our children and grandchildren and staying with them some 
four or five months. In one of the districts in this region the people 
all build their own churches as a rule. They do not ask and they do 
not get foreign help for building churches. I didn't see a single 
church in Shan-tung that had been built by foreign help; that is, 
churches in the country districts. Churches at the mission stations 
which arc for other purposes as well, the mission boards help build: 
but the great mass of churches in the country arc built by tlic people 



4 



4 



•Cealral Prwbyterian Church, April tj' 





SUGGESTIONS ON THE SUBJECT 



319 



themselves. T preached in many of them. I didn't preach in one that 
cost, furniture and all, $50, not one ; but the people arc satisfied with 
them ; they are good enough. 

Now, in that north country, the people of a certain congregation 
came together. They had built a church and furnished it. and 
promised to pay for It out of the fall crop. They had hired a native 
teacher for their church and promised to pay him out of the fall crop; 
and four months' salary was due. and rhe floods of the Yellow River 
came and not only took the fal] crop, but took their other crops and 
the soil itself. Now the punishment of debt in China is severe. These 
people came together and said : " We must be beaten, we must be im- 
prisoned, because wc have nothing with which to pay this debt ; what 
shall we do? " From day to day ihey discussed this great problem. 
My son knew the circumstances. The little mission school in Penn- 
sylvania where he had labored had given him $12.50 to spend in any 
good work. He took it and laid it down before them. It paid the 
whole cost of furnishing and building the church, paid the salary of 
the preacher, and k-ft 50 cents in the treasury ; and those people sent 
up their praises to God. It kept them out of prison. Will men tell 
us here that was not a good act? Yet men say that was not the thing 
to do. to help those people pay for their church or to pay for it all. 

In Shan-tung there is a farmer. He lias a little farm, about an 
acre and a half of ground. On that he has to keep his whole family. 
Now. by working Iiard himself he can manage 10 eke a living out of 
that little ground. He is a magnificent man, an educated man, a 
thoroughly equipped man, and tlie missionaries want him. They 
need him everywhere, they need his wisdom and consecration ; but he 
says: " Well, I would likt- to do it ; I would like to spend all my time 
that way, but if 1 go away from home my family starve. If 1 leave 
them there, my son and my wife can manage to get some kind of a 
living out of the little ground without my work, but I can't live my- 
self. Now. I will do this: I will go wherever you want me to go, 
and I will try to do my best for the Lord's cause if you will just give 
me enough to buy a little food to eat and a little to pay whatever ex- 
penses I have for a donkey to ride." They do that, and that man has 
planted churches and done a glorious work all around, as every mis- 
sionary of that section will tell you. Is it wrong to give foreign 
money in that way? I say again, leave this matter in the hands of 
these missionaries; they are men of wisdom and judgment and know 
all the circumstances. 

Sucgeitjoos Bearing on tbe Subject 

Rev. Wilson PiiraneKj D.D., Presbyterian Church. V. S. A.* 
Are we not inclined to set up a standard for our churches on the 
foreign field which will not apply to our churches here at home? 
What would be the result if wc should adopt in our home missionary 
field the principle that has been suggested? How many churches 
would we have eslahlishcd in New Mexico, in Utah, in Alaska, and, 
indeed, in all the older States, if wc required the members on the 
ground to support their own work? Only a few montlis ago I sat 

" Fifth ATtnae Preabytcrijui Chnrefa, April sj. 




320 SELF-SUPPORT OF NATIVE CHURCHES 

down with the committee, and we appropriated at one silting $171,000 
for that month for our home work. The larger part of il went to 
churches which had been dependent on the board, not only one or 
two, but ten, fifteen, twenty years, drawing more for a single year 
and for a single church than wc would expend on several churches 
in the foreign Beld. 

My dear friends, I know the circumstances differ in the different 
fields, and yet there does seem to be a general principle — are we not 
more severe in our dealings with our foreign churches than our 
churches at home? I can not but feel that the churches abroad have a 
claim upon tins rich country of ours, where we educate our men-^ 
why, more than half the ministry of cur Presbyterian Church has 
been receiving aid in their course of education from our Educational 
Board. I can not but feel that this great and rich country, the United 
States, with its thousands of millions of dollars, owes to the foreign 
field, not only more missionaries, but better support and belter equip- 
ment for all branches of the work, educational, evangelizing, and 
every department of the work. 

Rev. W. W. Barr, D.D., Corresponding Secretary, United Pres- 
byterian Church of North America* 

It is admitted by our missionaries in the Punjab, India, without 
any exception, that they made a mistake in the beginning of their 
work in that land, in starting upon the principle of supporting from 
money sent from this country all the labor employed in the mission. 
The great diflficulty has been to get away from that wrong position in 
which they began. I will not say that they have not had success, 
even in that line, because a mission that has been in existence less 
than fifty years, less than half a century, and has 6,000 church 
members or more now, three presbyteries and a synod established, 
with all other forms of work, schools, etc., going on successfully, can 
not be said to have been an unsuccessful mission. And yet, notwith- 
standing this, it is true that to-day the missionaries are convinced 
that they ought to be acting upon another principle, and that is the 
principle of native self-support. The great difficulty, however, was 
to know how to get from the old position to the new, 1 will simply 
tell you in a word how they have succeeded largely in doing that : 

They got their laborers together for prayer and conference in rela- 
tion to this matter, and they prayed earnestly for days together for 
the direction of the Spirit of God in regard to this and for the out- 
pouring of God's Spirit upon them. The result was a marvelous re- 
vival in that mission. It spread all over the mission field. Every- 
where the power of God was felt. Now. what has been the result? 
Within the past two years not less than six of the native pastors who 
were working on a salary paid almost entirely from the United States 
have come forward and said to the mission : " We will receive no more 
money from you. We see now that a native church can never be 
sustained in this country on that principle, and we are going to cast 
ourselves upon our people, poor as they are, and we will take from 



• Filth Avenue Preabyterlan Cburcb, April tj. 



i 



SUGGESTIONS ON THE SUBJECT 



3«t 



our people whatever they will give tis in the way of support." The 
result has been that they are working, a number of them now, on 
less llian half thu salary which they were receiving; and yet it is ad- 
mitted by themselves that they are working more efficiently, have 
more of the power of Gocl's Spirit with them, than they ever had 
before. That is the way in which they are passing in that mission 
from the old line to the new. And, brethren laboring in all that part 
of India, let me advise you to try that plan. It will succeed if the 
neighboring missions will take the same position and try to have their 
ministers do the same thing. But. if there be alongside of that mis- 
sion those who are receiving much higher salaries, you can sec that 
the temptation will be constantly for the laborers in our mission to go 
to other places. Try to be uniform in relation to this, and the ques- 
tion will be solved. 

Rev. F. F. Ellinwood, D.D., Secretary, Board of Foreign 
Missions, Presbyterian Church, U, S. A. 

I wish to say in the fewest possible words that after nearly thirty 
years of experience as Secretary of the Board of Missions, having 
under my special care by correspondence, fields in which both the 
short-cut and the long-cut methods have been tried, my decided pref- 
erence is for the cultivation of what is known as the short-cut. I ob- 
ject to the phrase, because I think it is misleading. I think a better 
phrase would be " beginning right " and " beginning wrong." 

I think there should be great discriminalion observed in judging of 
this subject as it is presented in different fields. For example, the 
great success in Korea as compared with India or Syria is not wholly 
in method. Perhaps it is not mainly in method, but very largely in 
the fact that in Korea there is no great overshadowing religion as 
there is in Brahmanism. On the other hand, I think there is need of 
discrimination in judging on the other side. In Dr. Nevius's work 
there was the difficulty, first, of uprooting an old system. And that 
seems a matter of herculean difficulty. I think it would take a cen- 
tury to uproot the evils of the system of coddling which has been too 
much practiced in some old fields ; and it would not be fair to under- 
take to institute comparisons between them and such fields as Korea. 
One missionary in an old field told me that he had sometimes been on 
the point of recommending the abandonment of all their stations, and 
the beginning anew in virgin soil, simply in order to get rid of old 
mistakes. I can tcalize the importance of his idea, though perhaps 
in actual experiment it would not he wise. 

Having made these discriminations. I wish to say that I think the 
injury of a too generous support from abroad to native preachers is 
very great. A missionary said to me that one of the worst evils in 
the work in South America is that the native preachers find it easier 
to rely upon a good fat check from New York than to work up their 
support among the people, overcoming the resistance of their cupid- 
ity ; and lliat so long as money is sent from abroad the people will be 
willing to be carried in arms and wilt in.sist upon being carried. 

Again, such support from abroad is an injury to the confidence of 

* nith Ai-eauc pTesbjrtcrlui Cfaurch, April »j. 




3" 



SELF-SUPPORT OF NATIVE 




the people. I had a talk not long ago with a good brother, whom I 
love, from India, and I was defending ihc Methodists' mctliods in 
India as being, 1 thought, more flcxihle. The idea was presented on 
his part that the work, perhaps, was not quite so solid; but his good 
wife was with him, and she said, " Ah, my dear, do you remember 
that we were at tJie Methodist Conference year before last? " " Yes." 
'■ Do you remember that eight men, native preachers, made up their 
minds to take no mort; foreign money, but to cast in their lot with their 
people? And the next year we saw those eight men arise before the 
Conference again to say in triumph. ' We have tried it and we rejoice 
in the experiment, for, before, the people had felt that we were some- 
how alien to them, we were hving on foreigners' money. But when 
we told them of our wish to cast in our lot with them and take just 
what they could pay. they opened their arms of welcome to receive 
lis, and have taken delight in supporting us. and in giving us a far 
warmer symi>athy than they ever did before. We have never had 
such a year of blessing.' " 

Then the mistake of paying too much salary lies right across the 
path of the due preparation of men for their work. A complaint has 
come to me within a week, even while 1 was urging upon our mission- 
aries this idea of inculcating seU-suppori, that a missionary of another 
society came to our church and took two of our brightest men into his 
service and paid them good, liberal salaries, and they have gone, hook 
and line, and all our work of preparation is thwarted by that act. A 
later letter said, ''The prospect is that a-c shall lose all the male mem- 
bership of our church because a neighboring mission employs our 
men when they are crude, and green, and ignorant, and puts them on 
good pay. It is demoralizing our whole work. Not only that, it is 
an injury to the efforts to bring down the work to a more moderate 
basis." And let me say just this one thing, the China Inland Mission 
say — they have not made this complaint here on any floor, but I make 
it— tliey say that almost the most difficult thing to bear in their posi- 
tion is that other missions around '.hem offer higher prices to their 
men, who then go out of tlieir reach and out of their service. 



Proent Status of SelT-support in Missloo Churches 

Rev. Walter R. Lambuth, M.D.. D.D., Secretary, Board of 
Foreign Missions. Methodist Episcopal Church {South)* 

The spirit of self-support is the spirit of missions. In its truest, 
highest expression it means more than the desire or ability to be 6nan- 
cially self-sustaining. It involves a sense of obligation for the ex- 
tension of the kingdom of God which subordinates every desire, and 
brings under contribution every force, for the achievement of the su- 
preme and determining aim of missions. Christian liberality is one 
of the surest tests of spiritual vitality: but the measure of its power 
is the intelligence with which it is administered. There are principles 
and motives imbedded in the gospel which must be incorporated by 
the missionary into the life of the native church, without which all 
attempts at self-support will be mechanical, meaningless, and short- 
lived. 



m 



* ClLfncgit UaU, Af ril ny. 





ITS PRESENT STATUS 



323 



These principles are bound up in ihe organic relation of the Church 
to Christ — its living head. A missionary conscience is as much the 
need of an expanding church abroad, as it is of a contributing church 
at home. If there is no conscience, it must be created, or alt is lost. In 
his epistle to the Romans, the great Apostle exclaims : " I am debtor 
both to the Greeks and to the barbarian.<i, both lo the wise and to the 
unwise. So, as much as in mc is, 1 am ready to preach the gospel to 
you that arc at Rome also." To the churches in Asia Minor behind 
him, and lo the believers in the regions beyond him, this master mis- 
sionary taught the obligations of self-denying effort for Jesus's sake, 
and for the sake of the gospel. 

There can be no true and permanent missionary spirit without con- 
viction. Failure in self-support is largely at this point. It is not a 
failure in method — almost any common-sense plan will work under 
diligent, persistent supervision, provided there be a conscience be- 
hind it. Every church which has been scripturally and wisely planted 
not only possesses a missionary conscience which responds to the de- 
mands placed upon it, but will demonstrate by its fruitage its divine 
origin and its riglit to live. 

It is in the light of this broader view of the question that the Com- 
mittee on Self-support in l>chalf of the conference of officers and rep- 
resentatives of the foreign mission boards and societies in the United 
States and Canada, held annually in New York City^ have sent out 
a circular letter to the missionaries throughout the world requesting 
information concerning the history of self-support, the difficulties en- 
cotmtered, the prevailing sentiment, the methods adopted, and the 
outlook. 

From the data received, we have, after a careful study of the facts 
as reported, reached the foUowbg conclusions: 

First. The missionary body throughout the world has come prac- 
tically to be agreed in accepting the principle of self-support as fun- 
damental. 

Second. In new fields the agreement extends to the necessity and 
application of a well-defined policy ; while in the older missions there 
is hesitation, due in many cases to a doubt as to the wisest methods of 
self-support and the extent to which they can safely be applied. 

Third. The native church during the past decade has shown a 
marked growth in the sentiment of self-respecting maintenance and 
of an aggressive missionarj' spirit. 

In some cases radical measures have been adopted by over-zealous 
workers, resulting in soreness and disaffection in the native church. 
At no point in missionary administration is sympathetic, tactful lead- 
ership so necessary. The boards and the missionaries arc largely re- 
sponsible for the dependent life wliich lias been fostered by years of 
subsidy. Its tendrils can not be readjusted by a violent wrench, but 
they can be trained and rc-vltalized by the expulsive power of a new 
affection. Tlie reports before us show that wherever the native church 
has been led back to a scriptural basis there has been a return to apos- 
tolic methods in an apostolic spirit. 

India has Ifjccn for over a century the arena in which Chris- 
tianity liaa met the strongest forces of heathenism and won some of its 




3«4 Self-support of kative churches 

greatest triumphs. The keynote from this great field is one of en- 
couragement. Dr. J. P. Jones, of the American board, writes: " Self- 
support has been the chief ostensible aim of this mission for many 
years. The ideal of eslabhshing a native pastorate supported apart 
from foreign funds, has been practically realized, so that our twenty- 
three pastors find their support entirely among the people." A native 
home missionary society makes grants in aid to weak churdics and 
supports more than a dozen evanccHsts. 

The policy of self-support is advocated not as an end in itself, but 
as a means to the more speedy and complete occupation of the field. 
A distinction has been kept up between pastors and catechists, in 
that the former, being organically related to the native church, are to 
be supported by the natives, while the latter, as pioneers in the de- 
velopment of uncultivated territory, arc cared for by the mission. 
There has been an increase of missionary contributions from 4,276 
rupees to u,559 rupees, or a growth of 250 per cent., while the 
Christian community has increased 40 per cent. 

The difficulties in India brought out in the several reports are the 
extreme poverty of tlie people, expensive habits of living acquired by 
some native pastors, an educational system whicli makes all benefits a 
gratuity, a scale of salaries higher in the bej^inning than the cliurches 
could ever reach, and a lack of unanimity of purpose in the members 
of so many missions. 

The policy and methods of the Canadian Baptist Mission, as out- 
lined by Rev. J. E. Chute, illuminate the question of difficulty 
and achievement. Leadership increasingly thrown on the natives 
rather than an assumption of it by the missionaries; the persistent 
inculcation of the principle of self-denying effort ; the development of 
a manly Christian spirit; the assignment of definite work, as chapel- 
building; and tlie utilization of the harvest festivals as a means of 
creating conviction and sentiment. One church is reported as self- 
supporting, for years; a second with a pastor, evangelist, and three 
teachers, has just declared for self-support; a third gives half of all 
the money spent within its limits; while a fourth, which formerly did 
little or nothing, nearly supports its pastor, and " the spirit of self- 
support is growing ah over the field. ' 

Rev. E. W. Parker, of the North India Conference of the Methodist 
Episcopal Church, brings out the fact of a self-supporting {icriodical 
literature in several languages.of a number of self-maintaining educa- 
tional institutions, and that no appropriations are made by the mis- 
sion for the erection of churches. The methods adopted in field work 
arc the utilization of unpaid leaders doing voluntary work in their own 
villages; the formation of large circuits, including several villages in 
each, making it possible to support a pastor; and systematic effort in 
securing a definite and regular contribution from every member by 
collectors appomted for this purpose. 





I 



CHAPTER XXXVI 
THE IRRESISTIBLE PLEA FOR ADVANCE 

Proofs of God's Favsr and Blessing— Outlook (or the Coming Century— The 

Claims of the Hour. 



I*too£i of God'i Fxvot tnd Blescinf 

Rev. a. T . Piehson, D.D., Ediior^in'Chief, Missionary Review 
of the World, New York* 

I am lo speak on the Superintendmg Providence of God in For- 
eign Missions. What docs tny great subject mean? God is a 
threefold Creator. He created the world of matter that we call the 
spheres. He framed the world of time that wc call the ages. He 
framed and molded the world of light, which wc call being. The 
providence of God is a department of activity in which He adapts 
and adjusts the worlds of space and the worlds of time to the worlds 
of being, and all through to the Divine purposes and designs of His 
administration. The undcvout astronomer is mad because he sees 
spheres, but not the centers around which they revolve. The unde- 
voul biologist is mad because lie sees the extrcmt- cf life, but traces 
it neither to its source in God, nor lo its final seat in God. The unde- 
vout historian is mad, for all history is a mystery until it is read as 
His story. 

We may well expect to trace the march of God through missionary 
history, for the work of missions is the one great work which Go<l in 
this world has supremely filled. It is the work that has His authority. 
It is the work that draws its energy from His power. It is the work 
that claims His active co-operation in all its movements. It has upon 
it the seal of Divine sanction, and we may well expect it shall receive 
the additional seal of the Divine approval. Through thirty years it 
has been my study to notice and trace, devoutly and constantly, the 
story of missions, and I say in the presence of this vast assemblage 
that'of all the evidences of Christianity that have ever smitten unbe- 
lief, as between the very eyes, the study of missions has transcended 
all other subjects. 

Now, if we take this century as a cycle of God, the march of mis- 
sions we may well compare to a march, for the Monarch has been 
moving before us. He has His vanguard, the precursors that pre- 
pare Mis way. He lias His bodyguard, immediate attendants upon 
His person, and He has His rear guard, the resultant of His activity. 
T say "His activity." for one impression that has been left upon my 
mind by these long studies on the subject of missions has been that 



*CarD«g1c Hill, Aprfl sj. 





3«6 THE IRRESISTrBLE ri.EA FOR ADVANCE 

all human being's are only His instruments and His tools, and He is 
the one great VVorknian. When In the first Missionary Council ever 
held, Paul and Uamabas returned from the first missionary tour and 
gathered the church in Amioch together, we are told that they re- 
hearsed all that God had done with ihem. and how He had opened 
the door of faith unto the Gentiles — not what they had done even for 
God, not what Iht-y had done even in co-operalion with God — but 
what God had done with them, and how He had opened the door of 
faith to the Gentiles. And if you will follow that vltsc in the I4lh 
of Acts through Ihc first twenty verses of the I5lh of Acts, you will 
find twenty cases in which the man'clous triumphs of that first mis- 
sionary tour were rccordcdf and in every case it is God that opens 
doors ; God that prepares the hearts of men ; God that gives develop- 
ment ; God that comforts ; God that blesses and sanctifies. Peter says 
that God made choice of his mouth whereby the Gentiles might hear 
the word of the gospel and believe, and James concludes by a magnifi- 
cent series of quotations which begins with. "Known unto God are all 
his works from the beginning of the world." And he. therefore, 
who studies the history of missions and docs not sec God presiding, 
counseling, governing, has missed the centra! factor in the whole prob- 
lem, and is llierefore altogether off the track of a true investigation. 

Now, may I tax your attention for a few moments, calling your 
minds, first, to God's preparations for missions ; second, to God's 
actual co-operation in the mission field : and, third, to some of the 
results which prove the Divine benediction upon all faithful service. 
God has been in the wliole work. 

As to the prqiarations for missions, they reach through whole 
minenniums ; hut I want particularly to note some things which 
have occurred comparatively near our own day. Missions could 
scarcely be desired. I might say, when the Church was as yet 
a deformed Church, and when all evangelical doctrine had been 
buried for hundreds and thousands of years, we might say, under 
the rubbish of ritualism and rationalism. Therefore, there had 
to be, first of all, a reformed Church. John Wesley, in England ; John 
Kno.x, in Scotland ; Lnthcr, in Crermany : Savonarola in Italy : in tiicse 
great strategelical centers of the Continent of Europe and the isles of 
the sea, God raised up comparatively simultaneously these great re- 
formists. Now, there were other things that co-operated with the 
reform of the Church to prepare the way for missions: The fall of 
Constantinople, in 1453, dispersing Greek scholars through the south 
of Europe with their Greek Testaments, hitherto shut up, prepared the 
way for the translation of the Holy Scriptures. And I pray you to 
notice that while we want to emphasize the human clement in mis- 
sions, God emphasizes the divine element. God's greatest missionary 
is not the men, but is the Book — the infallible Book; the Book that 
never grows old or weary, never needs a vacation, and never dies ; 
the book that goes everywhere, and if it only speaks to every man in 
his own tongue wherein he was born, it becomes the living and im- 
mortal missionary of God. And God, therefore, not only has to get 
ready a reformed Chnrch and to provide the means for the dispersion 
of her missionaries, but to provide the means for the translation and 



J 




PROOFS OF GODS FAVOR AND ULESSING 



Z^l 



I 



diffusion of His Word. So notice these events again, almost simul- 
taneous, we might say, the fall of Constantinople; the dispersion of 
Greek scholars; the mariners' compass coming into general use; the 
printing press, with moving type, first used in 1543; and steam as a 
motive power. Let us bear them in mind as God's preparations. 

Now come down to the eighteenth century which seemed more 
likely lo be the mother of monsters of irreligion and infidelity than to 
be the cradle of modern missions. In the first half of ihc century, with 
Deism in the pulpit and sensuality in the pew, God raised up three 
great agencies to prepare the immediate way for foreign missions. 
First: The Moravians, a little hand that came out at Huss's stake; 
a little church of a few hundred of people with their three magnifi- 
cent mottoes, that e\'ery l)eliev€r's work is witncs.sing for God, and 
every believer's home is where he can do the most good for humanity, 
and every believer's cross is self-denial for the Master's sake. The 
Moravians providentially molded John Wesley, and the Holy Club 
of Lincoln College, Oxford, touched by this influence, took on a dis- 
tinctly missionary character. Their motto had been " Holiness unto 
the Lord " ; but holiness became wedded lo service and the watchword 
of the Methodists came to be a double motto : Holiness to the Lord ; 
service to man. And then there was a third great instrumentality : A 
little band of intercessors, many of them unknown by name, in Scot- 
land and England and in Wales, and in the north of Ireland, and ir 
the south of Europe, and in America. Take one man as a specimen, 
Jonathan Edwards, in Northampton, than whom no hohcr man has 
ever trod this continent. In 1747, Jonathan Edwards, overwhelmed 
with the awful corruption of the Church in America and England, 
sent forth his trumpet blast calling all disciples in all lands to a visible 
union of prayer for the speedy effusion of the Spirit. And that 
clarion voice echoed across the sea, and was licard by William 
Carey, at the shoemaker's bench ; it was heard by OIney and Sutcliff, 
and their fellow-workers, reissuing the pamphlet in 1784, setting up 
the monthly concert of prayer for the conversion of the world. 

And so, my brethren, let us thank God for modem missions, be- 
gun in a symphony nf prayer. No wonder that God has been in mis- 
sions ! These were a part of His ways ; but the thunder of His power, 
who can understand? 

Then came the actual march of tlic King, and there were several 
things that attended that march. First, organization in the Church. 
I have been wishing to-night that there might be at least two men 
here that belonged to the century before our own. Mr. Chairman. 
I would like to have WiJliam Carey sit in one of those chairs, and I 
would like to have Sydney Smith sit in another; I would like to 
have William Carey sec how God haci shown that young man that 
he need not sit down and leave God to convert the world, and I 
would like to have God show Sydney Smith that the thoughts of 
Carey were something more than the dreams of a dreamer who 
dreamed that he had been dreaming, and that it is not so easy to wipe 
out the interest of consecrated cobblers when the spirit of God broods 
over the men. And now contrast that day with the present day. Con- 
trast the haystack at Williamstown and the parlor of Widow Wal- 





3^8 



THE IRRESISTIPLE PLEA FOR ADVANCE 



lace at Kettcrinfj, where twelve obscure Baptists met in October, 1792, 
with the great Kcumenical Conference in the city of New York in the 
vcar 1900. Mo3em missions I THe niarcH of God I Regiment after 
regiment, and denomination after denomination, have joined the ranks, 
until the whole Church is enhstcd in the army ! And then notice even 
more wonderful things : How God has called out His reserves. Look 
at the greatness of medical missions — the greatest regiment in the 
missionary army, judged by the measure of its utility and the 
grandeur of its success, Look at the Woman's Brigade. See them 
beginning in the Woman's Missionary Society under Mrs. Doremus, 
and then the various denominational societies of women, until there 
is not a single live church in this country, or in England, or on the 
continent, that has not its auxiliary board of women within its own 
organization to co-operate in the great work of foreign missions! 
And out of woman's consecration came the great young people's cru- 
sade. In 1844 George Williams founded the parent Young Men's 
Cliristian Association of London, and now those associations girdle 
the globe. Then there came the Young Women's Christian Associa- 
tion, by a very natural suggestion. And then there came on the 
Young People's Society of Christian Endeavor. Do you not see 
Gotl in missions? Do you not sec God taking the Church, reforming 
her, providing facilities both for the dispersion of missionaries and 
the diffusion of His word, and then organizing His Church and 
bringing out His reserves, the medical regiment, the woman's 
brigade, the young people's societies? 

And now look at what Gnd has done for the translation of the 
Scriptures. Up to the time of the reformation perhaps twenty-seven 
or twenty-nine versions of translations; between then and the 
eighteenth century twenty-seven or twenty-nine more, if you please. 
so that in round numbers about sixty at that time : and now the 
growth of the present century in this respect has exceeded the growtli 
of all of the other centuries fivefold. And will you notice also that 
although four hundred tongues seem a small proportion of perhaps 
two thousand languages and dialects that are spoken on the face of 
the earth, yet all the leading nations of the world arc represented in 
the vernacular Uibles. and all the languages of secondary importance 
arc represented, and it is only the languages that pertain to smaller 
tribes and more insignificant people in comparison that are not yet 
reduced to writing. And then I want you to notice how God is yok- 
ing steam and the printing press together, multiplying copies of the 
Bible by the hundreds. And so God is yoking steam to transportation, 
until where it formerly look four or five months to go to India, we 
can now go there in as many weeks. 

Now. let me hasten to a conclusion, as I call your attention to the 
workers God has called up. 

The ideal missionary must have four passions : A passion for the 
truth ; a passion for Christ ; a passion for the souls of men, and a 
passion for self-sacrificing. And I may say that the history of mis- 
sions in the last century has shown not one, nor fifty, nor one hun- 
dred, but thousands of men and women that have filled out the grand 
ideals of the mission service in the mission life. Have you ever 



I 





OPPORTUNITIES OF THE PRESENT SITUATION 



329 



Studied design in nature and seen how marvelously God fits ball and 
socket in the joints of bones ? Look at the adaptation of workmen to 
their field. Was there ever greater adaptation than in the case of John 
Williams to be the evangelist in the South Seas; William Carey to 
India: Hepburn to be the translator of the Bible into the Japanese 
tongue ; Catharine Booth to be the mother of the Salvation Army ; 
Dwight L. Moody to be the world's evangelist? 

Now may I say a word about the results? In four sentences I can 
compass them : As to the foreign field, where Christ has been faith- 
fully preached, three great features of the ideal church have appeared : 
A church self -supporting, self-goveniing, self -propagating, and in 
proportion as Christ has been preached and taught there have ap- 
peared all the righteous and richest fruits of the tree of life in full 
measure. And two sentences will describe the reflex action of mis- 
sions at home : One from Thomas Chalmers, who said that foreign 
missions act on home missions, not by exhaustion, but by fermenta- 
tion; and the oth'jr the sage saying of Alexander Dufif, that "the 
church that is no longer evangelistic will soon cease to be evangelical." 

Now, what is to be done? God prepared the way. God has been 
marching through the centuries. God has left the sea! of His approba- 
tion on the work abroad and the work at home of the churches that 
support the work abroad. What is to be done? Only one thing is 
needful : That you and 1 should recognize the invisible Captain of the 
Lord's hosts on the field of battle and be inteiit to hear the clarion 
bugle blasts with which He commands the " Forward. March! " and 
be confident that He is with us and that we are executing His mission, 
and rally all of our hosts in united and sympathetic bands, forgetting 
things in which we differ, and emphasizing only the things in which 
we agree, and so, in response to His call, piercing the center of the 
enemy, turning his staggering flanks and moving resolutely in united 
piercing front, we overcome the hosts of evil in one overwhelming 
charge. 

OpportoQJtks of the Present Situation 

Rev. W. T. A. Barber, MJi.. B.D., Principal of Leys School, 
Cambridge, England* 

We are assembled here to-night in our thousands. Christian men 
and women in a conference avowedly Christian, in the mighty heart 
of a great Christian nation. But it is not only these faces lighted with 
the Christian hope that I behold; for behind them stretches a mighty 
multitude of others, dusky, yellow, bronzed, or black, reaching away 
into the distant darkness of savagery — the great company of the 
heatlien nations in their need. Theirs is the most pathetic need of 
all ; the lack of the sense of need. But unconsciously their faces are to- 
ward this assembly of the praying messengers of the kingdom. And 
nearer than these, turned toward us with a longing of expectation, 
are the eyes of veterans whose faces have grown furrowed and their 
hair gray in the Jong years of service in preaching the Gospel, Oh I 
how these men who have borne the burden and heat of the day arc 
longing for issues from this council. The decaoes have passed them 

•Cwcclc Hi.Il. M«y i. 





330 THE iBRESISTIfiLfi PLEA TOR ADVANCE 

by, unknown and little honored, toiling on with scant visible result 
and sometimes tliey have almost felt that the Church at home has for- 
gotten ihem. But now, as with the closing century this great council 
has shown them that at last the Church is awaking to the elements 
of its duty to heathen lands, their eyes are ablaze with hope, their 
hands arc outstretched in prayer, their voices are rising in supplication, 
and they are enlarging their storehouses to receive the blessings that 
shall follow. And behind the whole, stands One whose brow was 
scarred with thorns, looking at us and pointing with His pierced hand 
to the myriads for whom He died. Verily, this closing hour of the 
Ecumenical Conference, as wc stand between the centuries, is a solemn 
season, when the claim concentrates on us soul by soul. Let us gather 
at the foot of the Cross and renew our sense of our Saviour's healing 
touch that we may renew owr sense of our Saviour's claim. 

The first all-compelling claim is our knowledge of the love of God 
that died for us and that saves us from our sins. And when He, the 
Holy One, who made His Church that the world might be saved, lias 
taught us to discern, we find that the solemn harmony of His voice as 
He makes His claim, is made up of many different notes wherein the 
nations make their claim on us. The welfare of our own Christian 
nations makes foreign missions imperative. All the wealth and refine- 
ment of modem civilization have their perils in sensuous delight and 
ficlf-indulgence. The only way of avoiding these perils which have 
ruined the prosperous nations of the past is ever to uphold the unsel- 
fishness which finds its supreme expression in no personal, no merely 
national, but in a world-wide salvation. Mighty religious systems 
have had sway for centuries in the distant East. What claim can 
have more weight upon us than their utter failure to redeem the races 
of their origin? Granted all their good, yet the final test must be 
what, as a whole, they have made of their peoples. Pure trans- 
cendental philosophy has ruled amidst the leaders of tlie Hindu races; 
keen brains of Hindu thinkers have sent soaring and daring thoughts 
into the realm of the Unknown, and in triumph have sounded dreamy 
notes of satisfaction, " God is all and in all." But there was there no 
personality, and there could be no Christ. Pantheism has done its 
utmost during millenniums, and what do we find? It has blurred the 
sense of personal responsibility, for God is all and even sin is from 
Him ; moral power has followed personal responsibility into its grave ; 
the common people bow befcire idols whose temples arc sculptured 
with obscenity ; the nautch-girl and the temple prostitute bring the 
sanctions of religion to their shame; woman is degraded; child-mar- 
riage legalizes brutal lust and dooms myriads of girl-widows to lives 
of ignominy : and caste relentlessly imposes slavery tipon vast multi- 
tudes of pariahs. That is what thousands of years of Brahmanism 
have done for India. What claim can be stronger? And then, oppor- 
tunity! The Government of India by a strong, just Britain has 
given ideals of jitstice, and trained acute intellects in a literature which 
is steeped in biblical thought. The old, absurd cosmogonies and 
theophanies have become impossible. The Christo-Somaj is a wit- 
ness to the rending of the old wine skins when the new wine is poured 
in. It is not long since Max Miilter wrote to educated India his mes- 




onamvsrriEs of the nxsExi srrvAnom 331 

sage urging it to coaU&s as an ob\-ious fact that it is already Chris- 
tian. Educated young India is intellectually convinced of the truth of 
QirisCianity and awaits overpowering moral con>'iction and compial- 
saon. The danger is chat if we seize not the opportunity to produce 
that spiritual compulsion, iliese educated men without the moral 
strength of sacrifice for conscience* sake tnay be a worse foe to Chris- 
tiantty than ever. 

Pariahdoni sees tliat Christianity gi\-cs uplift and freedom from the 
yoke of centuries ; low-caste and out-caste peoples are willing to scat 
thcmsehrs at the feet of the tcaclicr. The witness of all who have 
been working antong these during tlic last twenty years assures us 
that the only limit to ihc number of villages that arc willing to submit 
this ivry moment to Christian instruction h the lack of men to teadi. 
and of funds to support the teachers. And while famine and pesti- 
lence year after year are bringing despair to fatalistic hearts. Chris- 
tian philanthrophy sees splendid opportunities of showing the mind of 
its Master and its Lord. Verily, the field is white unto harvest, the 
danger is that the har\'cst should rot for want of han-estcrs. 

Think of the claims of China. A pure ethical creed, the noblest and 
most practical to which man has ever attained, has liad uncljccked op- 
portunity for more than two thousand years. No spot, no smirch is 
there upon its pages ; no blot of impurity in its most popular presenta- 
tion. Here is the highest practical system that man could soar to. 
But there has been one all-fatal flaw. There is no thought of a per- 
sonal God in its midst. Old whispers of the Supreme Being have 
died away into voiceless niouthings about " Heaven " and " Prin- 
ciple," and tlie noble, moral machine lias been left without motive 
power. And now we see the outcome of an agnostic national life. To 
call a man a liar is to compliment his cleverness ; the greatest Con- 
fucian scliolar is not athamed to leap about in passion like a naughty 
child ; the haughty graduate, who profess to believe only in wliat he 
can see is afraid to go out in the dark because of the evil spirits that 
haunt his imagination ; he who can write the choicest literary and 
religious essays boasts of a vocabulary and imagination of unutterable 
foulness; the whole civil service is dishonest, the fountains of justice 
are poisoned at their source. Moral strength is absent ; untold abomi- 
nations are found in the trains of high mandarins, opium smoking 
yearly claims more victims, and there is no power to redeem. Na- 
tional comiption has borne its fruit, and the Goliath of dishonesty fell 
thundering at the first onset of his pigmy assailant. The whole head 
is sick and the whole heart is faint. Without God the land is without 
hope. 

But the opportunity ! God made the wrath of man to praise Him. 
After ages of self-satisfied ignorance, the literati were shocked by the 
Japanese war into the sense of need. It is true the time of reaction is 
on us now and there is utmost peril lliat the reactionary Empress 
Dowager in her alarm may ruin her country : but the leaven is work- 
ing in the mass, and leaven is life. The classes and the masses alike 
are ready to listen to the missionary. There will still be riots and 
murders, but never again can the old days of indifferent contempt 
return. Tens of thousands in Manchuria are ready to receive Chris- 




i^a THE IRft£SISTlBL£ PLEA FOR ADVANCE 

tian teaching. Here, as in India, what a claim upon us is this oppor- 
tunity! Literature is sorely needed to supply the new form of mental 
craving of millions uf literati ; unnumbered multitudes claim the heal- 
ing of Western science; native preachers need careful training; the 
blind, the deaf, the mute cry from their forlorn abandonment. And 
there comes the highest claim of all. " Coals of fire on their heads." 
For they defiled the very Christ Himself with their bestial imaginings, 
and they poured forth our martyrs' blood. He who prayed " for- 
give " sends us forth determined. They shall look on Him whom they 
have pierced ; they shall understand the purity of Him they called 
the God of Lust. In myriad ways, with myriad tongues, the needs of 
China and of India are eloquent for the help of the choicest intellects, 
the fervent lives> the self-sacrificing prayers of Christendom. 

And when we turn to Africa what claims are vocal and insistent 
there? Centuries of slavery and wrong have left their mark. Inter- 
necine war, animal appetite, even cannibalism have made man a beast 
of prey, preying on his own kind. In the north and center, Moham- 
medanism is sending forth its missionaries with a success numerically 
greater than that of Christianity. Too often its surface-conversions 
have but stimulated fierceness and warfare. T.oo often, where civili- 
zation and barbarism have met, the worst of the two systems alone has 
survived. In ;ht* west, the drunken savage bows down and worships 
before the heap of empty bottles that have held the fiery spirit sent tc 
him by so-called Christian nations. In the south the Old Testament 
fatalism of the Boer has until recently denied the subject black the 
right of marriage, and even now denies him the possession of a bit 
of soil in this world or a soul in the next. On the Congo, severed 
hands and bodies mutilated for lack of precious rubber, are loo often 
the only proof the African has of the meaning of Christian rule. All 
the wrongs which Western greed has inflicted cry out to us with 
clamant voice from the continent that cradled our Lord in safety 
from the massacre of Bethlehem and sent its swarthy son to carry for 
Him His cross to Golgotha. But opportunity 1 Now at last the con- 
tinent lies open ; the unknown is open to our gaze. The very emula- 
tions of Western nations have led to new spheres of influence where 
roads are being made, where the steam whistle will soon be heard, that 
the way of the Lord may be made plain. Uganda compressing into 
her first quarter-century in the light of day the early history of the 
Church — martyrdom, schism, strife, triumph; the Western colonies 
with their himdreds of thousands of communicants and their self- 
supporting churches ; the Sudan from whose throat the fiercest fanati- 
cism has but just loosened its grip : Egj'pt with its vast Mohammedan 
university — oh, what opportunities are here! And, if it please God, 
after the agony of that strife now waging, there must be new oppor- 
tunity and most stringent claim that Bechuana and Swazi and KaAir 
shall have the Gospel as never before. 

And the time would fail to tell of the vast South American continent 
where but the dull light of an effete Romanism makes darkness visible, 
but where the priest lias overshot his mark and ahcnated the men; 
of the Mohammedan lands where the Caliph has nearly tired out the 
patience of tlic world ;of the islands of the Pacific, where past triumphs 




OPTORTUNmCS OF THE PRESENT SITUATION 333 

erihearten to new endeavor. And in the furthest East the new spirit 
of the island empire of Japan has made our own generation mem- 
orable. There Western civilization has been copied and adapted with 
many a Japanese patent improvement, but the religion which gives 
vitality to Western civilization is looked at askance, and the novelty is 
giving way to that tndifferentism which has driven ovtX the old spirit 
but left the house swept and garnished. What spirit shall inhabit the 
swept and garnished house? It is for our prayers and service to say 
which. Shall it be Christ? For remember that, in the days to come, 
the Chinese and Japanese must be mighly factors in the commercial, 
and therefore the social and religious, histor>' of the world. The na- 
tion that does nothing now to Christianize them may some day mourn 
the incoming tide of what should have been a Christian influence, 
but is anti-Christian throue;h that nation's sloth. 

Oaim ! opportunity ! Never was there greater claim, because never 
was it clearer how great a difference Christ makes to a nation. And 
all through the generation in whose fighting ranks we stand. God has 
been giving opportunities, opening doors, annihilating space, making 
the world ready for His Church's work. When, sixty years ago, Cal- 
vert and Hunt went to Fiji, it took sixteen months before the letters 

■ telling of their arrival could reach their friends. Now it is almost im- 

■ possible to find a comer of the sea distant from London by two months 
of steam travel. 

The ocean steamers are like great shuttles in God's weaving, mov- 
ing ever across the world bearing the threads of His great tapestry. 
Political changes, revolutions, wars, the daring of commerce and 
discovery all have been pressed into His service, and many an apparent 
triumph of Satan has been overruled by God and made subservient to 
His will. Many generations have been spent in preparing: our gen- 
eration has been spent in opening ; God asks of us what use we will 
make of His preparing and His opening. The paths of conquest into 
which events have forced the unwilling feet of Great Britain and 
America are full of sign-posts of direction for the Church. The in- 
evitable growth of political and commercial control, by which new 
races are brought under the influence of the Christian nations of the 
West, claims not only that we should send merchant princes, gov- 
ernors, and military commanders, but that the supreme unselfish- 
ness of Christian missions should add its saving salt. The Church, 
too. has wealth to win and campaigns to wage. For this were wc 
bom. for this <Ioes God overrule — that through us the nations may 
be His, that the government may he upon His shoulder. 

Oh! you, the rising race of America, of Britain, and of evangelical 
Europe, you in whom, for better or for worse, is vested the empire of 
the wet Id: make it the empire of your King Jesus T The science of 
the ages has come with its gifts and poured them at your feet. Lit- 
erature, art, medicine, the philosophy of mind and nature, have en- 
riched your souls and multiplied your powers and thoughts. The 
prizes of wealth and power are in your grasp. But what are these 
compared with wealth of souls and power over nations being born into 
new life? Use these treasures aright. Knowledge has often led men 
astray from God, let yours be brought a willing slave to the feet of 



I 



k 



334 



THE IRRESISTIBLE PLEA TOR AHVANCE 




Him in Whom is all knowledge ; wealth has often deadened the soul ; 
let vC'Urs be a joyous olTering at His feet, who, though rich, became 
jKwr. Let that mind be in you that was in Christ Jesus, who being 
in t]ic form of God thought it not a prize to be equal with God, but 
emptied HiniscU and look upon Him the form of a servant. 

The answer we are to give leads «s afresh to the Cross, and 
past the Cross, past the shattered Tomb, past the Ascension Glory to 
the Day of Pentecost. For ten days have we gathered here, and now 
wc arc to scatter once more. Shall He. the Holy One. come on us 
as a mighty rushing wind? He shall bring all things to our remem- 
brance : claim, op]M)rtunity, power. Oh. for that thrilling sense of His 
presence and power I I tliink that none can realize Him so well as the 
missionary nn the field who has seen the triumphs of His grace in the 
place of Satan's utmost strength. I have known days of doubt and 
fear, when it seemed almost impossible that there could be any suc- 
cess ; and then I have seen a writing, not upon the wall, but on a 
human face, lines of living light in the darkness. I have watched, and 
I knew a hand was there, as there slowly appeared on a heathen face 
the lineaments o£ love, joy, peace, longs ufTering ; and as I recog- 
nized that transformation, as I saw the likeness of the face of Christ, 
it came home to me with the thrill and power of blest reality, *' I be- 
lieve in the Holy Ghost." I believe in the Holy Ghost! Do we? 
There is the opportunity, there the claim, there the power. We be- 
lieve in the Holy Ghost! 



Outlook for the Coming Century 

Mr. Eugene Stock, Secretary, Church Missionary Society, 
London*- 

The subject on which I am to speak is the Outlook for the Com- 
ing Century. The thought occurs to me, will there be a coming cen- 
tury at all? I know not; you do not know. The early Christians 
expected the Lord to come very soon. It never entered their wildest 
imaginations that there wonlU be a Christian England and a Chris- 
tian America. They thought the Lord would come. He did not. It 
may be there is to be a Christian India and a Christian Africa in our 
sense of the term; we do not know. All we know is that tlie Gospel 
is to be preached as a witness to all nations, and then shall the end 
come. 

Our brother, Dr. Pentecost, referred in his prayer to the doors 
being open to the preaching of the gospel all over the world. Truly, 
it is wonderful. There never has been a day like it before. I could 
go around ihe world, anil I could show you country after country 
open. There are a few doors yet to be opened. Why are they not 
quite open yet? I think it is because we have not yet gone fully and 
rightly into the doors that are open. The greatest of all tliese un- 
entered countries, which is very rarely mentioned in missionary ac- 
counts, is Arabia. It is true yon have a noble missionary or two at 
Muscat, which is on one border, and the Scotch Free Church has 
another noble man or two at the little Briiish settlement of Aden ; but 
outside of that there is that great Arab race, the children of Abraham 

* Ccatnil Pretbjrtcrlui Ctrardi, Hir <. 





I 



I 



OUTUXJK FOR THE COUING CENTLRY 335 

as much as are the Jews, waiting: for the jjospel ; but we can not get in 
to preach it. The Lord will open that door when wc have entered the 
doors already open. 

Then, of course, there are unopened countries in Central Asia, 
'Afghanistan, and Tibet, and so on. Of these also wc arc just at the 
^ doors, waiting for them to open, and the new century will, nc doubt, 
not only open them, but it will make more accessible those countries 
into which the doors arc open. Of course wc may say in one sense 
that the whole heart of Africa is open. It is only the other day that 
the forest of the Pygmies was traversed by a missionary, and now 
within the last twelve months native teachers from Upanda have gone 
and buried themselves in that forest; and they are the first messen- 
gers of Christ to those little i*ygmles. Then only the other day. owing 
to the skill of Lord Kitchener. Khaitum was opened, and that great 
Eastern Sudan opened again just the other day ; and yet in a sense not 
open yet, because our Government, I am sorry lo say. declines to al- 
low any missionary to live there who is going to work among the 
Mohammedans. To-day our brethren, both the United Presbyterians 
and the Church Missionary Society, are both represented there, just 
on the spot as witnesses, ready wiiencvcr the Mohammedans like to 
come to them. Who is going to stop them? Ah, my friends, in the 
days when the far northwest of India was conquered by the British 
armies, the officers were men of tlit highest Christian faith, and the 
moment they conquered those great Mohammedan cities they sent for 
the missionaries. That has not been done in Khartum, Still, I don't 
want to be hard on the Government ; it is a diffictdt position, I know, 
but the Sudan will open, I do not doubt, in a few months. Are wc 
ready to go in ? 

It is a very easy thing to come to these splendid meetings and sing, 
" Jesus shall reign where'er the sun." Yes. 1 know that ; it is quite 
true; but after all the Lord works by means. If we don't work, ' 
Jesus will reign anyway, but it will be very uncomfortable for you 
and me. if when He docs reign all over the world we have to reflect, 
" And I did nothing for His kingdom." God forbid that that should 
be said of any of us. Oh, that we might be able to look back and 
say, " Praise the Lord. I bad my part in it." But you may depend 
upon it, if that is to be so, it will not merely be by means of outlooks 
for the century, and listening to speeches, and singing hymns; it 
means the going into our own little spheres — they may be very little, 
perhaps — and doing just the little thing which the Lord puts be- 
fore us. 

/ Personal influence is the main thing to be exercised in the sending \ 
/orth of men and women. There are fathers and mothers in this I 
church to-night. Arc you ready to dedicate your children to the Lord 
for this service? Do you object Co your sons and daughters going 
as missionaries? Can you look into the face of Jestis Christ and 
say. "No, I can not consent?" Will you? God forbid. You may 
depend upon it that there are Christian families, many of them in 
England known to myself, who look forward with the deepest, earnest 
longing that their children may go out as missionaries, and who teach 
them from the beginning to look forward to it, and rejoice when they 




53fi TH£ IRRESISTIBLE FLEIA FOR ADVANCE 

go forward. Yes, that is what we want to come to, and that is fer 
more important tlian the givinjf of money. I know this, that when 
God raises up young men and women He will touch the hearts of 
those that have the means, and enable them to go. I am not the least 
afraid; I never appeal for money under any consideration; 1 am al- 
ways appealing for men and women, and 1 find it true tliat when ihey 
come, God opens the pockets of people to give money to send them. 

Rev. George F. Pentecost, D.D., Yonkers, N. Y* 
In order to get an outlook for the coming centur)* it will be neces- 
sarj* to make some rrlrospcct and take into account the cumulative 
successes or achievements of Christianity during the closing century. 
Material advancement has gone by leaps and bounds; but so also has 
the .spiritual advancement of the world under the preaching and ad- 
ministrative agencies of the gospel. It is well to remembtT that the 
greatest results in the moral and spiritual world are ap()arently cflFected 
in periods of time that seem altogether inadequate. This is not really 
so ; but the truth is that God not only works in mysterious ways, but in 
ways that to the untrained and unpracticed eye are without observa- 
tion. Forty years ago had anyone predicted that the institution of 
American slavery would disappear from the States within less than 
liaJf a decade he would have been accounted a madman or fanatic. But 
God's cumulative forces had been working for years, and all unknown, 
even to ihe philanthropist and politician, the institution was honey- 
comlM-d to its very heart ; so that it fell into hopeless ruin by the recoil 
and concussion of the first gun fired in its defense. In the days of the 
Reformation, the superstitions and monstrosities of centuries of eccles- 
iastical corruption and misrule went down before the trumpet of that 
great movement. Political superstition and tyranny were shattered to 
pieces by the puissant hand of Cromwell. Our o»vn nation was, as it 
were, born in a day. Remembering these things, I look forward to the 
coming century with bounding hope. I think I can see the working 
of cumulative forces and instrumentalities which within the lifetime 
of the younger members of this audience will work wonders even more 
startling than those accomplished in the nineteenth century, and 
which, parallel with all the gigantic achievements of material and 
practical science, will keep the spiritual kingdom of God well to the 
front of all other enterprises. 

Statistics are not as a rule interesting: but I venture to offer a few 
which I am sure will at least prove instructive. Including Hindus. 
Ilitddhists, Sikhs, and Confucians, there are about 8oo.ooo.ooo pagan 
souls in the world to-day. This is little more than half the entire pres- 
ent population of the world. There are 200,000,000 Mohammedans, 
H,ooo,ooo Jews, and say 225,000,000 Roman Catholics. There are in 
the Creek and other Christian communities about 120,000,000, while 
I'roteslant Christianity numbers only about 150,000,000. It is an ex- 
Imordinary thing that less than 1,000,000 people in all Chri.ttian lands 
jmvr llir courage to write themselves down as atheists, or of no re- 
llntiiun Ivelicf. 

lit the face of these statistics the skeptic is continually telling us 

^■CliOTl IV?«bytCTl*B Church, M»y t. 



I 




OUTLOOK FOR THE COMING CENTURY 



337 



that Christianity so far has been a failure. Has it? It might just as 
truly be said that until the ushering in of the nineteenth century all 
intellectual and material philosophies and sciences of mankind had 
b«na failure. I think I might, with ail fairness, say that Christianity 
has been more uniformly and progressively successful than any 
science or any other force in the world. 

But let us look a few minutes at what has been accomplished in the 
present century. I make all my figures proximate and in round 
numbers. One hundred years ago in all the pagan world there 
were scarcely more than a score of missionary stations, with scarcely 
more than that number of commissioned missionaries^ and a com- 
munion roll of not far above i.ooo converts from modem paganism. 
There are now more than 5,000 missionary stations throughout the 
pagan world and in the islands of the sea. Growing out of these cen- 
tral stations like root branches from the banyan tree, there are more 
than 15,000 outstalions. The stations are manned by 13,000 Eu- 
ropean and American men and women missionaries. Adding to these 
about 62,000 native helpers and oilier workers, we find in all about 
75,000 Christian missionary workers in the field to-day. In connec- 
tion with many of these mission stations there are magnificent educa- 
tional institutions, and at all of them schools for primary education. 
Around these stations duster hospitals, dispensaries, and other insti- 
tutions for the relief of physical distress. Moreover, to-day the Word 
of God may be read by three-fourths of the entire population of the 
earth in their own mother tongues. The miracle of Pentecost has been 
made almost universal, and so far as it has extended it is permancnL 

There arc to-day about 1,500,000 Protestant coninmnicants on the 
foreign field (millions liavc gone before during the century) and 
there arc probably from 2,000,000 to 10,000,000 more who have been 
won from paganism and arc nominal adherents to Christianity, the 
most of whom will ultimately be baptized. More than a million stu- 
dents are found in the schools, colleges, and universities of the for- 
eign mission field. A million patients arc annually treated in mission 
hospitals and dispensaries. And to-day hundreds of thousands of 
starving Hindus and Muslims are being fed and nourished back to 
life in mission fields by Christian contributions and by Christian 
hands. The home churches in Europe and America are now annually / 
pouring out the vast sum of nearly $17,000,000 for the evangelization/ 
of our black, brown, and yellow brothers of the pagan world, whom 
we have never seen, and who can never repay directly a single penny 
of all this great expenditure. T.he motive of all this is love and not | 
gain. It is this heaven-born motive which differentiates the foreign 
missionary enterprise from all other himian undertakings. No won- 
der the world does not under.stand it. and the sordid spirits who con- 
stitute the critics of foreign missions arc constantly saying: " Why 
this waste "; and when they count up the number of converts, they 
have no hesitation in declaring that foreign missions are a failure be- 
cause they do not " pay." And yet. Sir Charles Elliot, late lieutenant-). 
governor of Bengal, once said in a public address, that the most' 
important interest and the greatest safeguard Great Britain had in In- / 
dia was to be found in the bungalows of the missionaries of all Chris- / 




338 THE IRRESISTIBLE PLEA FOR ADVANCE 

tian denominations. /Have you ever thought that during this closing- 
centurj' probably more progress has been marie, more converts won to 
Christ from the pagan nations than during the first four hundred, » 
years of the Christian era, with all the prestige and power of the / * 
apostolic ministry behind that early missionary work ; and won under 
conditions infinitely harder than those whidi confronted the early , 
Christians ? From my own observation I would vt-nturc to say that i | 
not in the apostolic age was there a more heroic missionary spirit or ' 
more heroic missionaries than there are to-day in the pagan world. 

But missionary statistics can not measure missionary progress. 
The Gospel has wrought other results than those seen in the mere con- 
version of some millions of heathen to Christ. It has already revolu- 
tionized to a vast extent the social conditions of all heathenism into 
which it has penetrated. It has created a mora! atmosphere which is 
as discernible by the intelligent observer as is the material atmosphere 
by the thermometer and barometer of science. I speak from personal 
knowledge and observation. I conmiend you to read Vr. Dennis's 
great work on this topic. In India the tremendous indirect effect of 
Christianity upon the intellectual, moral, and spiritual life of the edu- 1 
cated, as well as the low-casle people fs beyond iwwer of tabulation. | 
Already the old rock-ribbed system cf Hinduism is being fractured by 
the impact of tlie gospel in every part of India. In Bengal the Bramo- 
Somaj is the direct result of the touch of Christianity upon Hindu 
and Brahman thought and caste ; the same is true of the Arya-Somaj 
in Northern and Central India; and of the great Sadharan-Somaj of 
Bombay ; and a similar body in the Madras district. The Devas of 
the Punjab have for their confession of faith a document much of 
which is a bodily plagiarism from the New Testament. .An old 
Brahman ptmdit of Madras told me with his own lips: " Dr. Pente- 
cost, you missionaries will never convert the lirahmans to Christ nor 
Hindus generally to Christianity ; but this you have done, and to a 
greater and greater extent will continue to do; you are Christianizing 
Hinduism; and I am frank to confess to the advantage and better- 
ment of Hinduism." In my presence and hearing, and in one of the 
finest orations I ever heard delivered in the P'nglish language, the 
greatest lawyer in India, a Brahman of the Brahmans, said to his 
audience; " My brethren, it were madness to shut our eyes to the fact 
that Christianity, that religion which uiarched from Bethlehem in 
Judea to the steps of the imperial throne of Koine, and has since dom- 
inated all the Western world, has come to India. It is not a passing 
episode; it is a mighty conquering and frcrmancnt spiritual ]>ower, 
come to stay and repeat its victories. We must face this new religion 
and deal with it honestly and frankly as who would not wish to in the 
presence of its founder, the peerless Christ." 

I speak of these things in order to remove the doubt still in the 
minds of many uninformed Cliristians and stop the mouths of many 
misinformed enemies of foreign missions; Christianity is steadily^^^ 
gaining, every year, over all other forces now operative in the world^^H 
We are facing a century big with promise, in which there will be!^^ 
without doubt far more advance made than in the passing century. 
Be sure that Christianity will not be found lagging in the rear of the 



1 




THE CLAIMS OF THE HOUR 



339 



I 
I 



world's proiajess. It will lead in the new century, as it has led in all 
the past centuries, makinjc: a way for the best advancement of political, 
social, and material civilization. 

Why should we, with all our might and money, prosecute the 
foreign missionary cntcrpri5e? We should do it, (i) Because Ihe^ 
highest law of benevolence prompts this course. " Give and it shall) 
be given to you." I do nut speak now especially of money; give thef 
gospel ; give the grace of God, by passing on the good news. *' There 
is that scattereth and yet that increaseth ; there is that withholdelli 
more than is meet and that tendeth to poverty." Take these declara- 
tions of Holy Scripture and apply tbcm, and it will be easily seen that 
every interest which the Church of Gad lias at stake will be furthered 
by the vigorous prosecution of foreign missions. 

(2) Because the Providenti.nl order rc(]uircs it. It was necessary 
that Paul should first preach the gnspcl to the Jews, but when they i 
judged themselves unworiliy of everlasting life, then lo, he turned 
to the Gentiles. We have a million unbelieving pagans in New York. 

^ In vain we .seek their conversion. We build new and finer churches ;\ 
I call younger and more eloquent preachers; provide larger and more 
artistic choirs; but these people will not come. Our city missionaries 
and Rihle-readers are faithfully trying to teach them, hut they will* v_ 
not hear. The fashionable pagans, just as surely, refuse the gospel, w 
What shall we do? Follow the Providential order and " turn to the| j 
Gentiles." 

(3) Christian patriotism, if I may use that term, demands it. It 
was our recent war wiih Spain that aroused this country out of its 
commercial materialism and awakened again the nobler passion of 
patriotism into life and activity. A vigorous foreign policy and war 
upon the principalities and powers of darkness and spiritual expres- 
sion in pagan lands will develop in us a new inspiration, and a pa- 
triotic fervor for Christ and His Holy Church as nodiing cKse will. 

(4) The apologetic value of a vigorous and successful foreign^ 
policy and success is past calculation. Already this F.ctimcnical Con- 
ference has done more to shut the mouths of scoffers and awaken intoj 
new life the dormant faith of our people than any other event in thei 

1 last quarter of a century.' Let the news of great foreign victories for 
Christ be coming from across the .seas, from India and China, and 
Japan, and Korea, and Africa, ami the islands of the sea, and the 
enthusiasm of the Church at home will awake, and scoffers will l^c 
silenced and converted into friends as the unbelieving nations of the 
earth were .silenced by our victories abroad and convertc<l to believe in 
the substantial greatness and power of this nation. Re sure of it the 
outlook for the coming century demands a vigorous foreign policy, 
and by the grace of God that shall be the policy of at least the Ameri- 
can Church. 



The Oainu of Ibc Hour 

Rt. Rf.v. W^ C. Do.\NE. D.D.. LL.D., Bishol* of Albany* 

I would with all mv he.irt that some one else rnther than I stood 
here to-night to say the last word, some one whose lips have been 

• C&nwffl« Hkll. M*r 1. 



Jb 




THE IRRESISTIBLE PLEA FOR ADVANCE 



1 

■ 



touched with the live coal of the enthusiasm which has been kindled 
in this CoHfermce. I can not. because I have not heard them, gather 
up the threads of thought and speech into a cord, which can not be 
broken, to bind men's heans together, or twist the steel of the keen and 
kindled utterances into an electric cable quick with power to carry 
under seas and over continents the message of missions. It is true 
th*l has been done, and will be done: for the world-wide power 
of the press has been chained and harnessed here to tell the world 
how a great rushing, restless city has stopped for a week to think, not 
jusi of trade, and stocks, and politics, and crimes, but of Jesus Christ 
ami His work in the world. 

It was wt>en the Jews of the dispersion were gathered in Jerusalem 
thit tongues of fire (all of one gift of the Holy Ghost) tuned the 
tongues of men to tell His wonderful works in distributed dialects 
that Sfwke to every man with the tongue in which he was bom. And 
thb great gathering of Christians oi rhe dispersion has heard here, 
in the conquering speech of the world, how the story of God's won- 
drtful work of universal redemption. God's gracicus offer of universal 
tahracion h»s been made known to all nations, and kindreds, and peo- 
ples, and tongues. Who can douht that the Holy Spirit taught those 
men to speak, on their scattered missions? Who can doubt that the 
Holy Spirit has been poured out on this great company of Christian 
men* and women of one heart and of one soul, if not all of one mind 
and one njouih. whose longing is to make known everywhere the mes- 
sage of the Master; to extend and to esUblish the kingdom of our 
King! 

I nni»i content myself with speaking on my assigned subject — ^The 
Drmands and ihc Outlook of the Coming Ccnturj*. 

TJie demands are two : Mutual recognition of our common service, 
and the magnifying of agreements, and not of differences. And the 
reci>gtdlit>n must be fair and frank. Comity is rot a bad word, for it 
meait^ o iiM>a">'^"*''i'P- Co-operation is possible, because the work is 
one. ttuMigh the ways and workers be apart. Toleration is an intol- 
erabk- woril. iKcause it savors of conceit. I deplore the differences, 1 
tK'pmalr the divisions, but I accept them as the present condition of 
t.'hiiiitcnvlom. Cnid can use them, God can fuse them when He will. 
NoihiiiK i* Ritinwl by ignoriiig ihcm; no good comes out of feigned 
antt forert! alliances. What this Conference stands for is not deny- 
ing frtcljt, not Htultifying intelligence, not stilling convictions: not . 
(is»ti"R down hislorir institutions, not confusing terms, not laheling^H 
wiuM twi'IcN views as mint, anise, and cummin ; not calling materials ^H 
(hat we ilon't use. wood, Kiy. and stubble and making a bonfire of I 
ihrtu Ithr fii^ 'l^'i^ is ^^ *^v t^^se is not lighted yet, and is not to be 
jluhtrd by man), but mutually recognizing each other as servants of 
Jr«UN Chri»t. itanding or falling to our one Master and at work for j 

To my 1 «•" ^^ ^f^"'- ^^ T "f ApoTlos, and I of Cephas, or with 
Mf^^utvt' ej^ii^in, I am of Christ, is simple sectarianism, hut to say 
^\«i (i»nl». Apollo* waters, Crod gives the increase, is truth and fact. 

'iV one thing to realize is that all baptized believers, ex'cn- child 
^ 0^s\ f vervwhere, baptised with water " in the name of the Father, 




THE CLAIMS OF THE HOUR 



and of the Son, and of the Ho!y Ghost," is a member of the mystical 
body of Christ. 

I believe that earnest Christian men, not magnifying difficulties, 
must pray, at once in the spirit and in the words of the prayer of the 
Divine Master, that Hp will bring about such oneness as is between 
Himself and His father, entire, real, visible; and, meanwhile, that 
each must stand and ser\e. loyal to his convictions, in the place where 
God has set him to sen-c. So far as I represent the Episcopal Church, 
and I am not dis]>osed to misrepresent her, I stand here holding fast 
to her definite dogmatic position and to her distinctive polity. By 
birth, education, conviction, and loyahy I am committed with all 
my heart, and soul, and mind, to their maintenance. Others who are 
here arc as strongly committed as I am, and are as truly conscientious 
as to their ecclesiastical jwsitian. The sum of our differences is 
large, but the sum of our agreements is larger still. 

Loyahy in the letter and in the spirit to every obligation of our 
ordination vows is of the essence of respect for ourselves and for one 
another. Criticism and condemnation of one another's convictions 
is ill-mannered, and idle, and ill-advised. Where they are not 
principles, but only sentiments or opinions, we must relegate them to 
the subordinate sphere. But this age demands two things: First, 
that we shall be pro-tcstants. whether we are Protestants or Anglicans, 
or Greeks, or Romans, and we must not be — if I may coin a word- 
contra- te slants. We must witness for the truth in the affirmative way, 
and not witness against error in the controversial way. Controversy 
among Christians may be needful, but is most unprofitable. 
B The next thing that this age demands is that we shall look for, and 
I dwell on, and proclaim, and thank God for points of agreement^ 
Hlamong Christian believers, and not be nimmaging about, like rag-\ 
"pickers in a heap of street dirt, for differences and disagreements./ 
The power of the first Christian tcacht*rs was always along this line. 

t While differences exist, ami always must exist, so far as we can see, 
we may at least direct our warfare, not against one another, but 
against the common foe, and give and get a godspeed in all honest 

(etforls to advance the kingdom of our King. 
Among the outlooks of the new century that will make for peace 
and power, not *he least and not the last, is the progress toward sub- 
stituting the simplicity of creeds for the complexity of confessions. 
Slowly it is dawning upon the Christian mind that there is a differ- 
ence at the very root between articles of faith and articles of religion, 
I between the facts of belief and the theories of opinion, between the few 
unchanging verities and the many varying speculations, between 
truth and the theoriring about tnith, between the rock of what is re- 
vealed and the rubble of the detrition of it. between the symbol that 
can he oxygenated by the perpetual ventilation of use and the skele- 
ton that has grown dry in the lumber-room nf references. 
The next great outlook of the century is the constant combination 
of all Christian people in what may be called applied Christianity. 
Apart from our divided worship and our discordant confessions, we 
look each other in the eyes and take each other by the hand in 4 





34* TUi: IRRESISTIBLE PLEA FOR ADVANCE 

thousand human ways to-day. There is no passing by on the other^^B 

side of any representative of suflFering humanity. Is it a question of^^| 
organized charities, of social elevation, of political reform; is it a 
fjucstion of tenement-house improvement, of breathing places in the ^^ 
tiums, of the relief of the poor: Is it a matter of hospitals, or housesjftfl 
of mercy, or gifts to a famine-stricken country ; is it an appeal for the^^ 
care of orphans, or the ag'ed. or the helpless; is it anything in which 
the needs of liunianiiy appeal lo us as servants of Him who took 
mankind into His Godhead that He might he touched with the feel- 
ing of our infirmilies? — instantly the commonness of our Christianity^ i 
asserts itself. All names arc forgotten but the name of Jesus. / 

The white heat of Christian love and sympathy welds Christian hu- 
manity into oneness of ser\"ice, and when we go back Ic our separate 
worship it is to lake with us the sense of a communion which, please 
God, shall one day swallow up, as it already softens, the rough edges 
and estrangements of our other religious life. 

But the great outlook of the future is the outlook of opportunity. 
There arc no doors closed now, except by our own willful hands: no 
hmiting horizons of vision, except to eyes that arc shut or short- 
sighted. But if God writes " opportunity " on one side of these 
doors, He writes '" responsibility " on the other side. In what spirit 
shall we go up to enter in ? There can be no concordat made that 
shall parcel out this place to nie. and that to you and the other to 
another. Alas! Alasl we can not go all speaking just precisely the 
same tongue. We can only pray that some new petitecoslal outpour- 
ing shall one day blend confusion of tongues into the distributed dia- 
lect of the one message of the wonderful works of God. External and 
corporaie acts may not be blended, but oneness of heart and loving- 
ness of thought and word there may he. 

The very ac!jective which describes this Conference has the power 
in it of the trumpet call ; and with the ring of it in our ears and the 
spirit of it in our hearts, may God give us grace to widen horizons of 
duty, to tear down barriers of separation, to deepen love, to inflame 
zeal, and to make the service of the Master and the salvation of man 
the passion of our souls. 

Rev, Maltbie D. Babcock, D.D., Brick Presbyterian Church, '! 
New York* 

To a Christian an opportunity is a claim. If I saw a man hungry 
and could give him bread, if I saw a man wandering from the road 
and could show Jiim the way. that chance would be a claim ; that op- 
portunity, an obligation. Why do we read Christ " must be lifted 
up " ? Because man's need awakened Christ's love, a love tliat must 
save by a necessity of its own. The opportunity created the obliga- 
tion. Why did I'nul say: " I must see Rome"? Was he coerced?'] 
He had to impart something, because he had .something to impart. 
" Woe is me," said he. Jesus Christ could turn Saul into Paul, and 
Paul had nothing to say about it to men who need what Jesus Chnst 
did for Saul. " That I may impart." Men were weak morally. 

•Cameeie Hall, May t. 



I 




THE CLAIMS OF TBE HOt 



!13 



W. 



'3ul had power. Men were in darkness, and Paul knew the light. 
Men were in degradation and despair, and Fan! kntw Jesus Christ. 
What else could he do as a Christian? I must see Ronic and if 
there is no other way to get me there, fasten your chains on my 
wrists and take mc there as a prisoner, for I must sec Rome that I 
may impart I I am a debtor to the Greek, the harharian. the Jew. 
or to anybody who has not what I have. That is Christian chivalry. 
Show it the need and it leaps. 

Opportunity is obligation, oblig-ation is inspiralionr and inspira- 
tion is in-spiritaiion, which means that the spirit of Christ is in me, 
" Because I live ye shall live also," and because 1 love ye shall love 
also, and you shall love my way. That is why Paul says, Woe is 
me if I preach not the gospel to the man who does not know it. 
Where would Paul be tu-day if he were here with us? He would 
be in the thin red line in the foreign field, at the forefront of the bat- 
tle, where it meets the great black, broad line. I was ever a tighter ^ 
— Paul did not say it that way — but in effect he said : " It is ray am- | 
bition to fight where no one else has ever drawn a sword ; let me be , 
1. the first r unner to go ahead with the news of life. Let me build where \ 
\ no onc'else has built." ^_ 

''^ 'because Christian opportunity is a claim, it is inescapable. If 
Jesus is much to nie, 1 am logically bound to feel the compulsion of" 
that love, sweeping into line every man who needs what Jesus can 
do. Intensity and extensity are wrapped up together. Intcns*. devo- 
Bbn to Jesus Christ means extensive sympathies. If a light is bright 
it will shine a long way. Only a precious ointment can fill a whole 
house with its fragrance, but an exceedingly precious ointment will do 
so.. If Jesus Christ is everything to me, I know he can be everything 
to any man, and as much as in me lies I will take Christ to the last 
man. And because I know \t I have got the woe resting upon me if^ 

. ; t~v/\\l not do all that is in nie to let the last man vvbci does not knowj ■; 

' 'Jesus Oirisl divide with me. There is no escape from this logic. If 
i love Jesus Christ — which means if I am loyal to Him — never let 
clouds disturb the stars; never let feelings run away with convic- 
tion. If I love Jesus Christ — which means if I keep His command- 
ments — I am in touch with everybody to the end of the earth who 
needs Him, and I can not take a washbowl and wash my hands and 
say that you must excuse me from this matter. Jesus Christ said : 
" Ye are my witnesses," beginning at Jerusalem. That is New York 
City. I believe in city missions, of course. So does every foreign 
missionary'. Christ said : " Ye arc to be my witnesses in all Judca," 
and that is home missions, " and in Samaria." What is that? That is 
the particular tribe nr nation that you do not like. " In Jerusalem and 
all Jtidea and Samaria, and to the uttermost parts of the earth f" And 
that takes in the last man. See Jesns, before He goes to His Father's 
side, with His hand outstretched and pointing to the uttermost part 
of the earth. Let the Church never forget that gesture. To the ut- 
termost part of the earth! I tell yon. fellow-Christians, j^ur love 
has got a broken wing if it can not fly across the ocean. 

Xow the claims. There arc two that I would emphasize : Fidelity ' 
and fairness. Fidelity relates you to God, and fairness to your 



Jf' 



I 



k 




THB IRRESISTIBLE FLEA FOR AOVANCB 

brother. Think of fidelity. Can you think of a substitute for it? 
There is none. Sentiment, enthusiasm, eloquence must not evapor- 
ate in words, unless they cr>*statlizc in deeds. " Lord, I am ready lo 
die with thee," said Peter. " Peter, do not talk so fast, or you will 
get in trouble ! " It is not what a man says, but what he does that 
counts. No professions of love are worth anything without proof of 
loyalty. " Why call ye me Lord. Lord, but do not the things I say? " 
Fidelity is limitless obedience. Remember, fellow-Christians, how wide 
was the horizon of Jesus. Our horizon widens from cradle to home, 
school, city, country, and with some, perhaps, to the hst man. But to 
Jesus the outside rim of the earth was the first horizon that He saw, 
and the last. When he was bom good tidings came unto whom — the 
Jews ? *' Unto all people." " Among all nations " ; " through' 
out the whole world"; "to every creature"; "to the uttermost 
part of the earth," are Christ's words. " Go ye irto all the world," is 
His limitless command, His boundless expectation. Fidelity means 
that His horizon Is your horizon, His thought your thought. His ways 
your ways. Disobedience is infidelity. What do you make of your- 
self, my brother, when you do not believe in foreign missions, and yet 
say you believe in Jesus? Your garments smell of smoke. You are 
disloyal and disobedient. The early Church understood. It went 
everywhere preaching the gospel, and it was but a few years before 
Paul said the gospel had been trumpeted throughout the world — the 
inhabited world, the ecumenical world. Then what happened? The 
Church having won its fight, came under the curse of Sodom : " pride 
and fuHness of bread and abundance of idleneas." The mountain 
stream that came down from the tops of the hills became a stagnant 
pool on the plain. Living for itself in the world and of the world, in- 
stead of in the world and for the world, the Church went into degen- 
eration and deformation, and the Dark Ages came. O, if the early 
Church could only have remembered Jewish history. WTiat was the 
promise to Abraham? " 1 will bless you." but you must be a blessing 
to all nations. What is the sixty-seventh Psalm hut asking God to 
bless us " that thy way may be known on earth." How annoyed 
Jonah was, actually angry because God would have mercy on some- 
body who was not a Jew. Then when Paul was preaching in Je- 
rusalem, you remember, he said : " I am going to preach to the 
Gentiles," and the Jews caught up the dust and threw it in the air. 
crying: " Away with such a pestilential fellow." All this is losing 
life for not using it. God took the Jewish candle out of the candle- 
stick because it would not be the light of the world, and the nation 
went into darkness. It was for the same reason that the Church went 
into the Dark Ages. It turned its candle into a dark lantern, and said, 
" as long as I may see the light I do not care who is in the dark." Fel- 
low-Christians, can we doubt our Master's will? Ye are the light 
of your families? I hope so. " Ye are the light of the world ! " You 
are to shine so that the last man shall have some sight of your candle. 
Y'e are the salt of the Church ? No ; " ye are the salt of the earth.*' Go 
put your light in the darkness: go rub your salt into decay. Thai 
is what we arc for. Go where darkness and decay are worst. When 
Jesus said " love your neighbor," he meant the man who needs you. 






TEE CLAIMS OF THE UOUB 



345 



O, the wonderful story of tlie good Samaritan ! The man in need is 
your neighbor. And who is your nearest neighbor? Your neediest 
neighbor. It may be some child-widow in India is your nearest 
neighbor. It may be some famine-stricken laborer in India; some 
groping soul in Africa is your nearest neighbor, because just now in 
the interest of God's kingdom he needs you more, than your Sunday- 
school class needs you. It may be, I do not know. Everyone of us 
Christians will go some day — not before the great white throre, 
never dream it; you belong to Jesus Christ, and there is. therefore, 
now no judgment to the man whose hand is in Christ's — but before 
your Master, as a servant to give an account of your fidelity, of how 
you used your tools, your talents. And what is your chief trust, what 
your most invaluable talent ? It is your personal knowledge of 
Jesus Christ. I am to give an account before my Master for what I 
did in this world, with what I knew about Him. Do not doubt it. 
" Wliat shall I do with Jesus that is called the Christ ? " Ask, rather, 
" what am I doing noiv with Jesus that is called the Christ ? " 

So much for fidelity. The next claim and the other claim is fair-_ 
ness, and that makes my blood stir ; for the old Saxon, and Angle, and 
"Dane, and Teuton is in my blood — is he not in yours? I know he is. 
I had good old pagan ancestry, believe me. You can see some of 
their memorials, their altars, and tombs at old Stonehenge to-day. 
They believed in human sacrifices. They used to take fair young girls 
and put them in wi^rker crates and shoot arrows at them to see which 
way their blood would run, that they might know what the gods were 
thinking about and how battles would turn out. And those were my 
ancestors. O, you bluc-eyed and fair-haired men and women, proud 
of your Scotch, and Irish, and German blood, remember and honor 
the foreign missionaries Augustine, PauUnus, Patricius, Colomba, 
Callus! They were foreiRn missionaries who went out years ago to 
men and women who were wild barbarians, pagans of the north, my 
ancestors, and preached to them the gospel of Jesus Christ. A-^d I 
f am the heir of their sacrifice, my knowledge of Christ is their gift to 
me. What a 'beautiful incident that was of Paulinus. It was near 
old York, men of New York. A great company was gathered in a 
great hall. A stranger came and asked for a chance to speak to 
them. His name was Paulinus — little Paul — and men said, " Shall he 
speak?" and an old Thane said: " What is this life we are living? 
Where did we come from? Where axe we going? We do not know. 
It is as though a little sparrow flew into our banquet hall on a cold 
winter night out of the dark, circled around, and then flew out again. 
That is our life. We do not know where we came from. We stay 
here for a little while, and then out into the dark we go. If this 
stranger can tell us anything, let him be heard." And then Paulinus 
lold them what he knew, and how life lighted up into meaning;, and 
hope, and joy in the presence of Jesus, And that is where our Chris- 
tianity started. We are the children of the converts of foreign mission- 
aries, and I tell you that fairness means that I must do to others as 
i^Vmcn once did for me. There are millions to-day in Africa. India, and 
. Jthe islands of the sea that have just as good a right before God to 
<t know the best there is in life, as you and I have. Why do we not tell 



'i 



9 




34<S THE IRRESISTIBLE FLEA FOR ADVANCE 

them? Is it fair that there should be millions ot k.hiidren bom in the 
next generation to open their eyes in heathen darkness, when you and 
I opened our eyes in the light of a Christian day ? You are darkening 
the lives of millions of unborn children by not putting the light of the 
love of Jesus Christ before the faces of their fathers and mothers. 
You know that as well as I do. I will not talk of the horrors that be- 
long to pagan religion, nf the degradation of u^nianhood, of the 
I deformation of childhood, Yon and I know what Jesus has been tp/^v 
jus. Shall we not tell it to them that are in darkness? What if your 
boy recovered from diphtheria because your doctor knew of anti- 
toxine: if within twelve hours after the remedy was given him the 
labored breathing got more easy, the terrible film began to dry up 
and slough off. and the word came "* he is all right: the antitoxinc 
has done its work." how would you bless God ! But there in a village 
yonder is a man v.hose boy has diphtheria, and you know it. They 
arc holding the poor gasping child over fires of charcoal and lime, 
trying in the old way to help him to breathe, and you let liini suf- 
focate in the old way, and let his father and mother break their hearts 
in the old way. What saved your boy would save that boy. Fel- 
low-Christian, we must not walk in a vain show. We must not de- 
ceive ourselves. " God is not mocked." We thank God that wo 
are not as other men are, and that we are safe in bed with our chil- 
dren, but what are our thanks to God without the fidelity of obedience 
and the fairness of brotherly love? 

Let me ask, in closing, what is the opportunity? It is a home one 
as well as a foreign. What the unchristian world at home in America 
and England needs is a heroic advance of Christian missions. Why? 
Because there is no way in which the Church can so move thought- 
less mtn and women as to make an advance by new faith and new 
fidelity into the heathen world for Jesus's sake and for principle. 
James Russell Lowell said : " You can never know a man's moral 
genuineness until you know what he will do for a principle." When 
the world sees the spirit of Christ in Christians, it will take knowl- 
edge, it will acknowledge that they have been with Jesus. The Church 
needs the actual vitalization, the vital reaction of daring deeds for 
God. Look at the Moravian Church — the most missionary of 
churches, but with a perpetual revival at home. " Go ye Into all the 
world, and lo. I nm with you." Our Lord is not with us because we 
do not go! And the heathen world is our opportunity as never b^ i 
fore in the world's history. There are men here who remember fifty ^ 
years ago praying for open doors. To-day they are open. You have 
been praying for open Bibles, and they are open to-day in over 
400 languages. You have prayed for open hearts. See how this 
great " Voluntc-er Movement " has spnuig up in the colleges. " Here 
arc we. thousands of your sons aiid daughters ; send lis, we are ready 
to go." Korea has spurned Rnddhism. and is w^aiclng. The ancient 
faith is tottering in Tndta. The door of China is open to America as 
it is to no other nation. The hand of God must have held back the ' 
reform movement in China a few years ago, because the Christian 
Church had not enough workers to supply Its needs. The " yellow 
peril" is our golden opportunity. What is opportunity; ob-portus, 




THE CLAIMS OF THE HOUR 347 

at the gate. The apostle said to the lame man, " at the beautiful 
gate " : " Silver and gold have I none, but such as I have give I 
thee ; in the name of Jesus of Nazareth, rise up and walk." Let the 
Christian Church say to-day to poor, lame, foot-bound China: " I 
have no thought for your gold or silver, but I come in the name of 
Jesus Christ of Nazareth, and bid you rise up and walk." 

Fellow-Christians, we can never be the same after this Conference. 
We are either going back into willful disobedience, or we are going 
on into newer and truer service. Pray as never before. Give as never 
before. If you can not go, can you not send your substitute? If not 
a missionary, support a native teacher, a worker, a helper. Fifty 
cents a week will support a helper. If any two or three of you agree 
on any cme man, Jesus will be with you, and you can together send a 
substitute. We know the need as never before, and God's limitless 
power. We know how many volunteers are ready to go, and how 
the fields are calling for them. Face your opportunity ; feel its ob- 
ligation, feel its inspiration, and say : " Lord Jesus, I can not go my- 
self, but Ijere is my substitute ; use him, and let me serve Thee as the 
angels do night and day, he in the night in China, and I in the day 
in America." 




Address to the Church 

At a meeting of the representatives of the different missionary 
hoards who had attended the Conference, held on the morning follow- 
ing its adjournment, the following address to the Church was pre- 
sented and adopted : 

As we who compose this Ectimenica! Conference separate for our 
homes in all parts of the world, we desire to give expression to our 
gratitude to God for His goodness to us in bringing us together, in 
keeping us in the unity of His Spirit during our gathering, and in 
now sending us back to our work with new love for one another, new 
faith in Him. and new desire to serve the world which He sent His 
Son to save. 

We have stood together at the close of the greatest missionary cen- 
tury since the apostolic age. We have taken lo heart its solemn les- 
sons. We have marked llie certain blessing of God upon every effort 
to obey the Great Commission to preach the Gospel to every creature. 
We have witnessed the inevitable loss which follows disobedience 
or neglect. We have seen the power of Christ to overcome sin, to 
purify men. and to transform all life. And we have renewed our un- 
alterable conviction that Jesus Christ is the way, the truth, and the 
life, and that the supreme dutv of all who believe in Him is to do His 
will and to make Htm known unto the uttermost parts of the earth. 

We look back to the feeble beginnings of the missionary move- 
ment in the eighteenth century, to the unknown and unopened world 
which then confronted the Clnirch. to the liosttlity of governments, 
to the moderatism and indifference of the Church itself. We look out 
now upon the missionary forces extended over the whole earth, con- 
fronting with the perfect gospel every imperfect and impotent faith, 
upon a world open and explored, upon difficulties clearly defined and 
well understood, upon an earnest and awakened Church. 

A new century is opening before us in which the scattered nations 
of men will be drawn closer lo one another than in any past age. in 
which the forces alike of evil and of good will work with vaster 
power, employing agencies undreamed of in other times, and In which 
the Church of the living God will be called as never before to be " the 
pillar and ground of the truth." 

Hearkening before we part lo these voices of the past and the 
future, we would speak as a Conference to the CImrches of Evangeli- 
cal Christianity which we represent. With a fuller knowledge of this 
world and of all that h best in it. and of the trial of Christianity 
among the nations of which wc have been eyewitnesses, we reaffirm 
our solemn conviction that the non-Christian religions, apart even 
from the error they contain, are helpless before the problems of 
man's present life, and hopele.« before the prnblcms of the life to 
come, and that Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is the only Saviour of 



ADDRESS TO THE CHURCH 



349 



mankind. We believe that even as we need Him, Ihe world needs 
Him, and that His own love Tor us and for the world, the woe and 
weariness of life untouched by Him, the blessings which enrich our 
life here and touch with glory our life hereafter, involve the deepest 
obligations to our feilow-creaturcs and must constrain us to make the 
passion of our lives that which was the passion of His who came " to 
seek and to save that which was lost." 

Wc rejoice to testify to the Church that in all essential matters 
w^c arc of one mind. Wc believe that the supreme aim of missions is 
lo make Jesus Christ known to the whole world with a view to the 
salvation of men for time and for eternity, and to the estahHshmcnt in 
every nation of a true and living Church. We believe that Jesus Christ 
as Lord is Himself the authority and power of missions, and the sure 
promise of absolute success. We believe that He lives and rules, and 
that we are but working under His present kingship and control. 
We believe in the spirit of love and of brotherhood in our service, 
" doing nothing through faction cr vainglory, but in lowliness of 
mind, each counting other better than himself, not looking each of us 
to his own things, but each of us also to the things of others." We be- 
lieve in recognizing the due bounds of one another's activity, in avoid- 
ing both the reality and the appearance of rivalry, and in so dispos- 
ing our forces that we may Ihe more speedily reach the whole world 
with the gospel. We thank God that we have found this unity of 
heart and purpose compatible with great diversity of temperament 
and wide difference of practice in many matters; that in ihc midst of 
diversities of gifts we have had and shall have ever the same Spirit : 
of diversities of ministration the same Lord ; of diversities of work- 
ing the same God who worketh all things in all. 

As we have experienced here the blessing of unity of heart in a 
great cause and have realized afresh that for this cause the Church 
exists, wc have felt called to lay its burden anew upon the Churches 
from which wc come. We would remind ihem of the duty and priv- 
ilege of prayer for the world. Otir Lord has enjoined, " Pray yc the 
Lord of the harvest lo send forth laliarers into His harvest." and has 
promised '' whatsoever ye ask in faith believing, ye shall receive." And 
prayer must be accompanied by sacrifice. We remind ourselves and 
the Churches of the lowly Hfc of our Saviour, who though " the foxes 
had holes and the birds of the air had nests, had not where to lay His 
head," and of His lowlier death when He endured the cross, despising 
Its shame. Lender these never-fading visions of Him, suflfering for us 
and for all mankind, we would ourselves live, and would appeal to all 
Christians to re-examine Tn His presence their habits of life, their 
modes of expenditure, their judgments of what is worthy and endur- 
ing, and what is transitory and valueless, their interest in His service 
and the salvation of men. and to live as ihcy will wish they had lived 
in the day when Jesus Clirist shall try each man's work and life of 
what sort it has been. 

We can not forbear adding an appeal to all individuals and nations 
which may have no direct interest in those supreme concerns that have 
the 6rst place with us, but which yet feel pity for the sorrows of 
humanity, to resist in every proper way the tide of evil flowing over 




35d &ODRESS TO THE CHURCH 

the world from Christian lands and cursing the nations which we are 
striving to help. 

Over all the evil of the world, over all the disobedience of the 
people, over all the mistakes of Christians, over all the tumult of the 
nations, over all the forces of life and all the movements of history, 
we believe God is ruling, calm, and steadfast, and faithful. We call 
ourselves and the Church to a quiet and abiding trust in Him and to 
a fresh surrender to His will, who would not " that any should perish, 
but that all should come unto repentance." Intrusting to Him the 
certain guidance of the great tides of influence and life which are 
beyond our control, it is for us to keep the commandments of His 
Son, and carry to those for whom He lived, and died, and rose again, 
the message of the goodness and love of their Father and ours. We 
who live now and have this message must carry it to those who live 
now and are without it. It is the duty of each generation of Christians 
to make Jesus Christ known to their fellow-creatures. It is the duty. 
through our own preachers and those forces and institutions which 
grow up where the gospel prevails, to attempt now the speedy evan- 
gelization of the whole world. We believe this to be God's present 
call, " Whom shall I send and who will go for us ? " We appeal to all 
Christian ministers set by divine appointment as leaders of the people, 
to hear this call and speak it to the Church, and we appeal to all 
God's people to answer as with one voice, " Lord, here am I, send me." 



THE EHDl 



APPENDIX 



PROGRAMME 

OP THE 

Ecumenical G)nfereiice on Foreign Missions 
NEW YORK, APIUL 2I.MAY t, 1900 



Sahttdayf April 21 

AFTERNOON 
CARNEGIE HALL 

opening Mectiag 

Chairman — Hon. Benjamin Harrison, LL.D., ex-President United States 

of America. 

Prayer Rev. Henry C. Mabic, D.D., Boston 

Addresses of Welcome Hon. Benjamin Harrison, LL.D., 

Honorary President 
Rev. Judson Smith, D.D., Chairman 
General Committee 
Responses: 

For the British Delegation Rev. R. W. Thompson, London 

For the German Delegation Rev. Dr. A. Schreiber, Berlin 

For the Australian Delegation Rev. Joseph King, Melbourne 

For the Missionaries Rev. Jacob Chamberlain, M.D., 

D.D., India 

Report of General Committee Rev. S. L. Baldwin, D.D., General 

Secretary, New York, N. Y. 

Benediciir,n Rev. F. F. Ellinwood, D.D., New 

Yorlc N. Y. 

EVENING 

CARNEGIE HALL 

Natknal Wefcom* 

Chairman Mr. Morris K. Jesup, President New York Chamber of Com- 
merce. 

Praypr Rt. Rev. H. C. Potter. D.D.. LL.D., 

D.C.L., Bishop of New York. 

Addrt-i of Welcome Hon. William McKinley, President 

of the United States of America 

Address of Welcome Hon. Theodore Roosevelt, Governor 

of the State of New York 

Response Hon. Benjamin Harrison, LL.D., 

Honorary President of the Con- 
ference 

Benediction Rev. Judson Smith, D.D., Chairman 

General Committee 



354 PROGRAMME 

Monday^ April 23 
MORNING 

CARNEGIE HALL 

Authority and PtopOK oi Fordgn VUmiosm 
Chairman — Rev. Judson SmTB, D.D., Boston 

Devotional Service Walter B. Sloan, London 

Authority and Purpose of Foreign 

Missions Rev. A. H. Strong, D.D., LL.D., 

Rochester, N. Y. 

The Source of Power Rev. J. Hudson Taylor, China 

The Supreme and Determining Aim... Robert E. Speer, M.A., New York 
Benediction Rev. William Ashmore, D.D., China 

CENTRAL PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 
Authority auul Purpoie ol Foreign Mioiont 

Chairman — Rev. Jaues A. Cunningham, M.A., London 

Devotional Service Rev. James A. Cunningham, M.A. 

The Cause Crowned by the Qosing 

Century Rev. James I. Vance, D.D., Nash- 
ville, Tenn. 

The Sourc« of Power Rev. Henry T. Chapman, Leeds, 

Eng. 

The Supreme and Determining Aim... Rev. Paul de Schweinttz, Bethlehem, 

Pa. 
Rev, Henry C. Mabie. D.D., Boston 

Benediction Rev. James A. Cunningham, M.A., 

London, England 

AFTERNOON 

CALVARY BAPTIST CHURCH 

Japan — Kofca 

Chairman — Rev. T. M. McNair, Japan 

Prayer Rev. Thomas Marshall, D.D. Chi- 
cago 
Korea: 

General Survey of Korea C. C. Vinton, M.D., Seoul 

Evangelistic Work in Korea Rev. C. F. Reid, D.D., Seoul 

Medical Work in Its Past, Pres- 
ent, and Future Aspects O. R. Avison, M.D., Seoul 

Education in Mission Work Rev. W. M. Baird, Pyeng Yang 

Spirit of Korean Christians Rev. F. S. Miller, Seoul 

Work in Southern Korea Rev. J. W. Harrison, Chunju 

Japan: 

Recent Progress in Japan Rev. J. L. Dearing, D.D., Yokohama 

Present Religious and Educa- 
tional Problems Rev. Albertus Pieters, Nagasaki 

Recent Impressions of the Mis- 
sion Work Rev. Julius Soger, D.D., Tokyo 

Changes of Half a Century *Rev. J. C. Hepburn, M.D.. East 

Orange, N. J. 

Hope for Formosa Rev. Thomas Barclay, Formosa 

Educate the Women Miss M. B. Griffiths, Tokyo 

Preachers in Japan Rev. E. R. Woodman, Tokyo 

Evangelistic Work among Stu- 
dents Rev. H. H. Coates, M.A.. Tokyo 

* Retired. 



PROGRAM UE 355 

Japia— Korea,— Centiuutd 

Financial Help a Need Minasuke YamAfnichi, Kobe 

WiHingncss to Spend and Be Spent. Rev. Tokiuki Osada, Tokyo 

The General Situaiioti in Japan. .. "Rev. G. W. Knox, D.D.. New York 

Orphans in Japan ...Mrs. J. H. Pcttcc, Okayania 

The Church in Japan Rev. W. C. Buchanan, Takamatsu 

Benediction "Rev. J. T. Cole, Ogontz, Pa. 

FIFTH AVENUE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 

China. 

CAairmciJi— Rev. William Asbuor£, D.D., China 

Prayer Rev. George T. Purvcs, D.D., New 

York 

Religious Aspect of China Rev. E. Z. Simmons, Canion 

Present Conditions Rev. George Owen. Peking 

The Open Door for Preaching Rev. T. W. Pcarcc. Hongkong 

The Populace and the Missionary Rev. J. W. Davis, D.D., Central 

China 

Education in China (Paper) ...*Mrs. S. L. Baldwin. New York 

Medical Missions in China J. II. McCartney, M.D., Chungking 

Medical Missions for Women 'Mrs. Wellington White, Mt. Vernon, 

N. Y. 

Converts not "Rice Christians" Rev. H. H. Lowry, D.D„ Peking 

Woman's Hospital at Shanghai (A Delegate) 

Stability of the Chinese Rev. C. F. Kupfer, Ph.D.. Chinki- 

ang 

Opium Quesdon Rev. J. N. Hayes, Central China 

Outlook Mrs. F. Howard Taylor, Ho-nan 

, Discussion Delegates and Missionaries 

C"" ■■"■*" 



CHURCH OF THE STRANGERS 

Btimia, Axtam^ Stain 
CAAirmaM — •Rkv. F. P. Hagcasd, Assam 



Prayer Mrs. W. P. Armstrong, Burma 

Religious Evolution of the Burmans Rev. F. N. Evclcth, D.D., Inaein, 

Burma 

The Karens Mrs. J. N. Gushing, Rangoon, Burma 

The Shans and Other Mountain Tribes. Rev. W. W. Cochrane. Hsipaw. 

Burma 

Methods among Mountain Tribes Rev. W. M. Young, Hsipaw. Burma 

Work among Karens A^rs. L. W. Cronkhite, Basscin, 

Burma 
Work among Tclegus Mrs. W. P. Annstrong, Rangoon, 

Burma 
General Survey of Siam Hon. J. Barrett, formerly U. S. Min- 
ister to Siam 
Missions to the Laos •Prof. Chalmers Martin, Princeton, 

N.J. 

Self-support in Siam Rev. F. L. Snyder. Bangkok. Siam 

Woman's Work in Siam •Mrs. J. N. Culbertson. Washington, 

D. C. 

Medical Work among the Laos J. S. Thomas. M.D., Muang Praa 

Importance of Work in Assam 'Rev. W. E, Witter, M.D.. Boston 

Character of People in Assam Rev. S. A. Pcrrine, Impur. Assam 

Women in Assam Mrs. S. A. Pcrrine, Impur, Assam 

Benediction Rev. W. M. Yotmg, Hsipaw, B< 

•Reilfed. 




35^ PROGRAM MC 

CENTRAL PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 

Indk 

C&aiftMiM— Rev. Charles Cuthiert Hall, D.D.. LL.D.. New York 

Prayer -Rev. J. W. Waugh. D.D.. Dela- 
ware, Ohio 

India's Place in Christian Missions Rev. T. S. Wynkocjp. D.D., India 

Educated Natives and Christianity Rev. L. B. Wolf, Guniur 

Rev. J. Wilkie, M.A., Indore 
Work (or the Masses L. R. Scudder. M.D.. Ranipcttai 

•E. W. Parker. D.D,. Shahjihanpur 
Bonds that Unite India with Christen- 
dom Rev. J. E. Abbott, D.D.. Bombay 

Rev. W. H Findlcy. M.A., Kanir 
Nttive Christian Character "Rev. E. C. B. Hallam.Kcuka. N. Y. 

Rev. David Downie. D.D.. Nellore 
Christians and non-Christians Rev. T. S. Smith, Ceylon 

Rev. J. Aberly, Jr., M.A., Guntur 
Woman's Work in India 'Mrs. B. H. Badlcy. New York 

Mrs, J, C. Archibald. India 
Benediction Rev. H. J. Bruce, Satara 

BROADWAY TABERNACLE 
Ooemla^ Malaytla, Auctralaiiaf Hawaii. PhlUppliui 

Chairman- *Rkv. T. L. Gulick. D.D., Devon, Pa. 

Prayer Arthur J. Wytnan. New York 

Survey of the Island World Rev. R. Wardlaw Thompson, Lon- 
don 
The New Hebrides Rev. J. G. Paton. D.D., New Heb- 
rides 
Dutch Missions in the Island World... Rev. Y. R. Callenbach, D.D., Doom, 

Holland 

Our Opportunity in the Philippines Bishop J. F. Hurst, 1>.D.. LL.D., 

WashinfTton. D. C. 

The Evolution o{ Hawaii Rev. O. H. Gulick. Honolulu 

Changes in Micronesia Rev. F. M. Price. Caroline Islands 

M.id3gascar Rev. W. E. Cousins. Madagascar 

Our Oceanic Converts Rev. Joseph King, Australia 

Bible Circulation in Oceania Rev. Canon W. J. Edmonds, B.D., 

London 
Benediction Rev. J. G. Paton, D.D.. New Heb- 
rides 

MADISON AVENUE REFORMED CHURCH 

Mohammedan Lands : Turkey, Pcnia^ Syria, Arabia, Egypt, North Africa. 

Chairman — Rev. A. F. Scuaufflek, D.D., New York 

Prayer A. E. Kittrcdgc. D.D.. New York 

Missions in Turkey "Rev. J. I,. Barton, D.D., Boston 

Missions in Syria Rev. William Jcssiip, Beirut 

Missions in Arabia Rev. M. H. Hutton, D.D.. New 

Brunswick, N. J. 

Missions in North Africa J. Hargraves Bridgford, England 

Missions in Egypt Rev. John Giffen, Asyut. Egypt 

Missions in Persia Robert E. Spccr. M.A.. New York 

Surroundings of Missions in Turkey. .. *Rev. Cyrus Hamlin. D.D.. LL.D., 

Constantinople 
Women in Moliammcdan Lands 'Miss M. C. Holmes. Syrii 

• Rrtlrrf. 




PROGRAMME 



3S7 



Th« Relation of the Missionary to the 

Goverament Rtv. George Washburn, D,D., LL.D., 

Constantinople 
The Greeks oE Turkey.... Re%-. Kdward Riggs, D.D.. Marso- 

van, Turkey 

Mohammedans in Palestine Rev. C. T. Wilson, Palestine 

Requirements of Success in Turkey •Miss Grace N, Kimball, M,D., Van 

Benediction A. E. Kittredge, D.D., New York 



UNION METHODIST CHURCH 

Afrk& 

Chairman — Rev. Wilson Pkraner, D.D., E. Orange, N. J. 

Prayer Bishop Alex. Walters. Jersey City 

The Debt of Christendom to Alrica Rev. A. O. Whitman, Atlanta. Ga. 

C. F. Harforcl-Battcraby. M.D., 
Stratford, England 

Africa a Hopeful Mission Fieid Rev. H, B. Parks, D.D., New York 

Rev. Charles Phillips, Johannesburg, 
Africa 
Christian Missions from the Native 
_ Standpoint .Rev. E. B. P. Kotc, Africa 

■ Character of the Native Races 'Rev. D, K. Flickinger, Africa 

I Work among Africans... Rev. Mr. Lackshire, Indiana 

■ Congo Free State W. J. Roth, Congo 

I Wortc on the Congo Rev. Henry Ricliards, Congo 

■ Work in Angola Rev. W. P. Dodson, Angola 

H German Missions in Africa Rev. Dr. A. Schreiber. Germany 

H Medical Missions in Africa F. P. Lynch, M.D., Africa 

I Industrial Missions in Africa Rev, C. S. Morris, Africa 

I Scotch Missions in Central Africa Rober: Laws, M-D.. D.D., Africa 

I Training Natives Rev. Dr. Pullman, Africa 

r ""■•""■■" 



MADISON AVENUE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 

North Axociica* South America^ Mexicot Vest IniUci 
GiKiinHan— Rev. L. T. ChahberL-MN. D D.. New York 



Prayer H. A. Johnston, D.D.. New York 

Indians of South America.... Rev. W. B. Gruhb. Terra del Fuego 

Bible Work in Latin America Sr. F. de P. Castelts, Costa Rica 

Education in Brazil G. W. Chambcriain, D.D.. Brazil 

Religious Problem of Latin America. . Rev. H. W. Bronn, Mexico 

Literature Rev. J. W. Butter. D.D., Mexico 

Needs of Peru and Bolivia H. Grattan Guinness. M.D., London 

Success of Work in South .\merica C. W. Drccs, D.D., Bncnos .Ayres 

Why Missions in South America Rev. I. H. La Fctra, Chile 

Scotch Missions in Brazil E. Sargood Fry, M.D-, Edinburgh, 

Scotland 
South .'\merican Missionary Society. .. Rev. .\. Ewbank. London. England 

Practical Consideration of Work Rev. \. T. Graybtll. Mexico 

Our Nearest Mission Field Rev. D. W, Carter, Cuba 

Moravian Missions in Guiana Rev. Paul de Schwcinitz, Bcthlebem, 

Pa. 
The Aborigines of North America Rev. J. Taylor Hamilton, Bethteluni, 

Pa. 
Benediction Rev. L, T. Chamberlain. D.D. 

•Retired. 




I 



358 PROGRAMME 

CHAPTER ROOM, CARNEGIE HALL 

Kdvcws in An Lands 
Chairman—Rzv. A. T. Fibrson, D.D.» New York 
Prayer Rev. G. D. Baker, D.D., Philadel- 
phia, Pa. 

The Jewish Question A. T. Pierson. D.D., New York 

The Jews of Europe Rev. J. Fairley Daly, M.A., B.D., 

Glasgow 

The Jews of Palestine Rev. D. W. Torrance, M.D., Syria 

Duty of Missions to the Jews Mark Levy, New York 

Benediction A. T. Pierson, D.D., New York 

EVENING 

CARNEGIE HALL 

A Century oi Iffinlong 

Chairman— Rev. A. V. V. Raymond, D.D., LL.D., Schenectady. N. Y. 

Prayer Rev. R. J. Willingham, D.D., Rich- 
mond, Va. 

Review of the Century Eugene Stock, London 

German Missions for a Century Rev. Dr. A. Schreiber, Barmen, Ger- 
many 

Centennial Statistics Rev. J. S. Dennis, D.D., New York 

Superintending Providence of God in 

Foreign Missions Rev. A. T. Pierson, D.D., New York 

Benediction Rev. W. R. Huntington, D.D., N. Y. 

CENTRAL PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 

A Century of Minions 

Chairman — Rev. A. W. Halsey, D.D., New York 

Prayer Rev. H. R. Elliot, New York 

Superintending Providence of God in 

Foreign Missions Rev. A. T. Pierson, D.D., New York 

Review of the Century Rev. R. Wardlaw Thompson, Lon- 
don 

China Inland Mission Rev. J. Hudson Taylor, China 

Mission Work in South Seas Rev. J. G. Paton, D.D., New Heb- 
rides 

Benediction Rev. J. G. Paton, D.D. 

Tuesday^ April 24 

MORNING 

CARNEGIE HALL 

Evangelistic Work 

Chairman — Bishop E. G. Andrews, D.D., New York 

Devotional Service Rt. Rev. William Ridley, Bishop ol 

Caledonia 

Character, Importance, and Condi* 

tions of Success Bishop J. M. Thoburn, D.D., India 

Manner and Form of Presenting Gos- 
pel to non-Christian Peoples so 
as to Persuade and Win W. F. Oldham, D.D., Malaysia 

Personal Dealing with Unconverted 

and Inquirers Rev. M. L. Gordon, M.D., D.D., 

Japan 

• RcUred. 



PROGRAHME 359 

Evangelistic WoA. — Continutd 

General Perva&ivc Influence of Chris- 
tian Missions Rev. Henry Richards. Africa 

Rev. J. Taylor Hamilton, Bethlehem, 

Pa. 
Discussion Rev. Gcorgp Owen; Rev. T. T. 

Eaton ; H. G. Guinness, M.D. ; 

Rev. Paul de Schweinitz ; Rev. 

Richard Winsor; Rev. G- F. 

Penlecost. D.D. ; Rev. W B. 

Grubb;Rcv. A. T. Picriin.D.D. 
Benediction Bishop E. G. Andrews. D.D N. Y. 

CENTRAL PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 

^Ponoan'i Educational Work 

Chairman — Miss CAROLINE Hazasd, Wellesley, Mass. 

Prayer Mrs. A. F. SchauRler, New York 

The Kinderganen in Missions Mrs. E. W. Blatchlord, Chicago, 111. 

Primary and Village Schuuls Mrs. E.J. Btllcrby. lodia 

Industrial and Manual Training Miss Irene H. Barnes, London 

Mrs. H. J. Bnice, Tuskegec, Ala, 

Higher Education of Women Miss Isabella Thoburn. India 

(Paper) 'Mrs. S L. Baldwin. China 

Discussion Miss Mary Mills Patrick. Ph.D.; 

Mrs. Alice Gordon Gulick; Miss 
Lilivati Singh; Misa Caroline- 
Hazard 

The Training of Bible Women Mrs. T. M. McNair, Japan 

Training School for Bible Women 'Mrs. J. M. Francis, Japan 



CALVARY BAPTIST CHURCH 

Woman's Evangelistic Work 

Chmnnan — Mas. E. S. Strachan, Hamilton, Ont 

Prayer Mrs. E. S. Strachan 

Methods of Presenting Christian 

Truth lo Women and Children Miss Jessie Duncan, India 

Discussion Miss E. A. Preston, Japan 

The Work of Native Christians Miss A. E. Bclton. Japan 

Discussion Mrs. W. T. Currie, Africa 

General Public Work on Behalf of 

Women Miss A. E. B.^fike^vi]le. India 

Discussion Mrs. I. N. McQucston, Hamlltou, 

Ont. 

MADISON AVENUE REFORMED CHURCH 

Wooua'i Work— Ghrlog 

Chairman — Mrs. Moses Smith, Chicago, 111. 

Prayer Miss L. A. Wells, Japan 

Giving, a Foundation Stone of Mis- 
sionary Work Mrs, H. H. Forsyth. Chicago, Itl. 

Bible Doctrine of Giving Mr?. J, H, Knowles, New York 

The Need of Giving Mrs, J. P. Jones, India 

Relation of Money to Salvation Mrs. .^. L. Frisbie. Des Moines, la. 

Facts and Figures Mrs. B. McP. Campbell. Chicago 

Hearts and Influence (Paper) Mrs. Anna Shacflfcr, Findlay, Ohio 

■ • RcUrad. 







360 PROCRAUUK 

Woman's 'Work— Givin£.— Cwi/iwKrt/ 

Time and Taltnis Mrs. E. M. Spren^, Cleveland, Ohio 

Missions and Money from • Woman's 

Sundpoint (Paper) Mrs. Emily Huntington Miller, 

Evacston. 111. 

Business Methods Miss M. D. Wingatc. Chicago, III. 

Systematic and Proportionate Giving. .. Mrs. E. C. Armstrong, Indiana 

Prayer and Gift* Mrs. J. H. Randall, SL Paul, Minn. 

Prayer Mrs. Z. F. Gri^n, India 

AFTERNOON 

CH.AMBER MUSIC HALL 

Th« Mlsdon : Its Admlobitralive Prableou 

Chairman — Rev. T. S. Barbous, D.D.^ Boston, Mass. 

Prayer Rev. J. C. Brewitt, England 

Organization, Government, Confer- 
ences, Location and Strength of 

Stations Rev. W. H. Findlay, M.A., India 

Rev. R. H. Pitt. Richmond. Va. 

German Methods of Missions Rev. Dr. A. Meren^ky, Berlin, Ger- 

many 

Discussion W. Henry Grant; Rev. G. H. Brock; 

Rev. A. C. Fuller; Rev. George 
Scholl; Rev. C. S. Morris; Rev. 
J. L. Dearing, D.D.; a Delegate 
Benediction Rev. T. S. Barbour. D.D. 

CHURCH OF THE STRANGERS 
The Missionary Staff 

Chairman — Mb. Rouekt EQlgouRj Toronto. 

Selection, Preparation. Support, Lim- 
ited or Life Service, Unmarried 

in Inili.aJ Years of Service Rev, R. P. Mackay, Toronto 

Life on the Field, Effect of Surround- 
ings., Personal Influence, Home Rev. I. H. Corrcll, D.D., Japan 

Relation of the Missionary to His 
Own Government, and to the Gov- 
ernment of People Among Whom 

He Labors— Indemnities David G. Barldey, Esq., LL.D., Bel- 
fast, Ireland 
Some Causes of Breakdowns of Mis- Henry Foster, M.D., Clifton Springs, 

sionarics N. V. 

Discussion Rev. John Morton, D.D.; C. F. 

Harford -Battersby, M.D.: Rev. 
John McLaurin, D.D. ; Rev. 
L. B. Wolf: Rev. R, M. Mateer: 
Rev. J. Hud."ion Taylor; Mrs. 
L. D. Osbom: Dr. Stevens; 
C R. Woods, M.D. 

FIFTH AVENUE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 

Native Acency in Evaneeliitk Work 

Chairvtan—REv. A. H. Boadford, D.D.. Montclair. N. J. 

Prayer Rev. A. H. Bradford. D.D. 

Relation to Missionary *Rev. H. M, M. Hackett, M.A. 

D.C.L., Montreal 

• Reilnd. 




PKOGRAMME 361 

Native AcctKy In ETUftfirtk WaAt—ConHnmeJ 

Training of Evangelists and Preachers.. Rev. E. W. Parker, D.D., India 
Development of Native Leaders Rev. S. H. Chester, D.D., Nashville* 

Tenn. 
Discussion Rev. J. W. Davis, D.D.; Rev. 

Thomas Barclay; Rev. E. B. 

Haskell; Rev. C. Aoki; Mrs. 

F. H. Taylor ; Rev. Joseph 

King; Rev. H. V, S. Peeke; 

W. H. Wheeler; Rev. A. H. 

Ewjng; Rev. E. Z. Simmons 
Benediction Rev. J. L. Barton, D.D., Boston 



CENTRAL PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 

Woman'i Vovk— Litcratwc 

Ckainnan — Miss S. C. Dukfek, Providence, R. I. 

Prayer Mrs. George Kerry, London, Eng. 

Christian Literature for Women in 

Mission Lands *Mrs. S. B. Capron, India 

Discussion Mrs. J. H. Pettee; Mrs. W. M. 

Baird; Mrs. William Ashmore; 
Miss S. E. Easton; Mrs. F. N. 
Eveleth; Miss I. Thoburn; Mrs. 
D. C. Scudder 
The Systematic Study of Missions: A 
Uniform Scheme for All Wom- 
an's Organizations Miss A. B. Child, Boston, Mass. 

Mrs. W. A. Montgomery, Rochester, 

N. Y. 
Miss C. Butler, Newton Centre, 
Mass. 
Discussion *Miss E. C Parsons; Miss Lucy Jar- 
vis; Mrs. J. E. Scott; Mrs. N. M. 
Waterbury; Miss Watson; Mrs. 
J. Conklin; *Mrs. J. T. Gracey; 
Miss I. H. Barnes; Mrs. E. K. 
Bishop 
Distribution of Missionary Literature. . Mrs. Joseph Cook, Boston, Mass. 

Mrs. A. H. Studebaker. Brooklyn 
Mrs. L. A. DeMerritt, Maine 

Discussion Mrs. Archibald Wheaton; Mrs. M. 

D. Kneeland; Mrs. T. Moodie; 
Miss Simons; Mrs. W. F. Brun- 
ner 
Publication of Books — A Uniform 
Scheme for All Woman's Organ- 

tzatioiis Miss E. H. Stanwood, Boston, Mass. 

Mrs, N. M. Waterbury, Boston 
Miss Mary Mills Patrick, Ph.D., 

Constantinople 
Mrs. A. F. Schauffler. New York 
Miss P. J. Walden, Boston, Mais. 

Discnsmm Mrs. H. N. Jones; Mrs. C. H. CaMi 

Mrs. J. E. Scott; Mrs. Knapp; 
Rev. E. W. Parker, D.D,; Mn. 
J. L. Hill 
Prayer Mr-. W. P. Armstrong, fiuriM 



3<a ^^^H^ PROGRAUME 

MADISON AVENUE REFORMED CHURCH 

Vonun'i Mcdlcil Work 

Chairman — Mfts. J. F. Kef.n. Philadelphia 

Prayer Mrs. C. P. Turner 

Home Churches and Medical Work... .Mary E. Bryan, M.D.. India 
Discussion Mrs. S. E. Johnson, M.D.; Miss 

Mary Stone, M.D. 
The Legitimate Field of Medical *Miss Grace N. Kimball. M.D, Van, 

Missionary Turkey 

Medical Missions in Facts and Figures. Mrs. H. N. Jones, Philadelphia 
Tlie Woman Physician as Missionary 

Agent in China (Paper) Mis-t R.ichcl Bern, M.D.. Ticn-T-iin 

The Power of Medical Missions Mrs. G. E. Shoemaker. Philadelphia 

Miss Jessie C. Wilson. M.D,. Persia 

Selt- support in Medical Missions Mrs. C N. Thorpe, Philadelphia 

Discussion Miss Mary Pierson Eddy, M.D. 

Mrs. Ida Fay Levering. M.D. 

Miss May E. Carleton, M.D. 

•Mrs. A. W. Fcam. M.D. 
Benediction Rev. A. E. Kitlredge, D.D. 

CALVARY BAPTIST CHIIKCH 

Wotk for Young ^Tomen and Children 

Chairman — Mrs. S. C. Trueheabt, Nashville, Tenn. 

Prayer Mrs. M. D. Wightman, Charleston, 

S. C. 
Foreign Missions in Training Young 

People Mrs. W. E. Norvell. Nashville, Tern. 

Relation of Young People to Foreign 

Missionary \Vork of Church Mrs. A. J. Wheeler, Nashville. Tcnn. 

Young People and Foreign Mis.sions. . . Mrs. J.W.Childres3, Nashville, Tenn. 
Most Effective Methods of Training 

Young People Mrs. J. M. Gaut, Nashville, Tenn. 

Junior Organizations Distinct from. 

Senior Mrs. T. B. Hargrove, Kansas Ctty, 

Mo. 

Public Meetings for Young People Miss Emma Gary, China 

Disctission , Mrs. S. C. Truehcart: Rev. S. S. 

Hough: Miss Alice Carter; Mrs. 
C. D. Wright; Rev. W. W. Cas- 
sel berry 
Benediction Rev. W. W. Casselbcrry 

EVENING 

CARNEGIE HALL 

The Bible and MlBsioiury AddretsM 

ChatrmaH — Biskop E. R. Hendrix, D.D.. Kansas Gty, Mo. 

Prayer Rev. ^iohn G. Paton, D.D.. New Heb- 
rides 
The Bible: Its Translation and Di.i- Rev. Canon W. J. Edmonds, B.D., 

tribution Exeter, England 

Progress in India Rev. Jacob ChamJicrlain, M.D., D.D., 

India 
China: Past, Present, and Future. .Rev. William Ashmore. D.D.. China 

Benediction Rt. Rev. William Ridley, Bishop of 

Caledonia 

• Retired. 



PROGRAMME 365 

CENTRAL PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 

The Bible aiui Blliriooaiy Addrenes 

Chairman — Rev. C. H. Daniels, D.D., Botton, Mass. 

Prayer Rev. D. J. Burrell, D.D., New York 

The Bible as a Factor in Missions Rev. John Fox, D.D., New York 

The Missionaries' Dependence on the 

Bible Society *Rev. E. W. Parker, D.D., India 

Survey of Work in Australia Rev. Joseph King, Melbourne 

Bible Distribution in South America. ..H. Grattan Guinness, M.D., London 

The Bible in Korea Rev. O. R. Avison, M.D., Korea 

Benediction Rev. C. H. Daniels, D.D., Boston 

Wednesday, April 25 
MORNING 

CARNEGIE HALL 

EdnatioaMi Vork 

CAa»rmon— Rev. George Washburn, D.D., LL.D., Constantinople 

Devotional Service Rl Rev. T. W. Dudley, D.D., Bishop 

of Kentucky 

Place of Education in Christian Mis- 
sions Rev. W. T. A. Barber, M.A., B.D., 

Cambridge, England 
Hon. W. T. Harris, LL.D., Wash- 
ington, D. C. 

Necessity for Training in Teaching. .. .Rev. J. W. Conklin, Springfield, 

Mass. 

Discussion Rev. J. H. Barrows, D.D. ; *Rev. H. 

M. M. Hackett. M.A., D.C.L.; 
Rev. A. B. Leonard, D.D. ; Rev. 
G. W. Chamberlain, D.D.; Rev. 
L. B. Wolf: Rev. D. Z. Shef- 
field, D.D. ; Rev. Edward Riggs ; 
Rev. W. H. Findlay. M.A. ; Rev. 
T. W. Pearce; Rev. R. W. 
Thompson 

Benediction 

AFTERNOON 

UNION METHODIST CHURCH 

Wklcr Rflatfam of VHmkxn 

Chairman — Rev. John Henry Barrows, D.D., Oberlin, Ohio 

Prayer Rev. Lloyd W. Thompkins 

Discovery, Geography, Commerce, 

Colonization. Diplomacy G. A. King, Esq., M.A., London 

Philology, Science, Philosophy Rev. Dr. A. Schreiber. Germany 

Rev. J. H. Barrows, D.D., Oberlin. 
Ohio 

Discussion Rev. Dr. Y. R. Callenbach ; Rev. 

D. L. Leonard, D.D.; Eugene 
Stock: C. S. Morris; Rev. Jo- 
seph King: W. B. Grubb; F. P. 
Powers 

Benediction Rev. J. H. BArrows, D.D,, Oberlin 

• Rcdrad. 





Con- 



F 



PROGRAMME 

MADISON AVENUE REFORMED CHURCH 

VcrnacuUr Litentun 

Chainnan — Rev. Ggorce Robson, D.D., Perth, Scotland 

Prayer Rev. T. W. Pcarcc, China 

Preparation of Vernacular Literature 

(Paper) Rev. John Murdoch. LL.D.. India 

Rev. George Kerry. London 
Educational Literature as a Means of 

Moral Culture Rev. H. O. Dwight, LL.D., 

staniinople 
Responsibility of Missions for Pro- 

viflitig Pure Reading M^itter Rev. J. E. Abboit, D.D., India 

Publication of Notes and Maps (Paper). Rev. W. J. Slowan, Scotland 

Discussion Rev. W. M. Baird; Rev. T. M. Mc- 

Nair; Rev. T. R. Sampson, 
D.D.: Rev. Richard Lovett, MA. 

FIFTH AVENUE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 

The Natire Cbiuck and Moral Queatioiu 

Chairman — Rev. Charles Wiluahs. Accrington, Eng. 

Prayer Rev. Charles Williams, Accrington 

Standard of Admission, Discipline Walter B. Sloan, London 

Rev. John McLaurin, D.D., India 
Organization and Administration of 

Mission Churches Joseph Taytor, London 

Rev. Frederick Galptn. China 

Discussion ....Rev. G. F. Smith; Rev. J. Morton. 

D.D.; Rev. T. Wakefield; Rev. 
Alan Ewbank: Rev. J. F. Por- 
ter; R. E. Speer; Rev. W. E 
Soothilt; Rev. J. H, Laughtin; 
Rev. J. A. Ingic: Mrs. E. H. 
Haviland; L. M- Beebe 

CENTRAL PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 

Normal Traming 

Ckairman—F KAXK Morton McMuRBY.Ph.D,. New York 

Prayer Rev. N. E. Pressly, Mexico 

Ideas of Special Value lo Teachers David Murray. LL.D., New Bnind- 

wick, N. J. 
Relation of Expression to Impressions, Rev. Myron T. Scudder. New Paltz. 

New York 

Discussion Dr. Frank Morton McMurry ; Rev. 

J. W. Conklin: Rev. S. G. Han; 
Miss N. Wilbur; Dr. Worden: 
Rev. Hnw.irri HliSiS; Rev. W. S. 
Sutherland, D.D. 

CHAMBER MUSIC HALL 

Medical Training of Natives 

Chairman — C. F. Hartord-Baitersbv, M.D., Stratford, England 

Prayer Rev. W. E. Robinson, Cincinnati, O. 

Whether Advisable. How and Where 

Should They Be Trained Edwin Sargood Fry. M.D.. Scotland 

Albert P. Peck. M.D.. China 
*John C. Berry. M.D., Worcester, 
Mass. 

*ItMlnd. 



4 




PROGRAM HE 




I 



365 



Medical Trafaiinf <rf Nattv<».— Cm/iinw^ 

Discussion 'M. C White. M.D.; L. R. Scudder. 

M.D.: A. P. reck, M.D.; Mrs. 

S. E. Johnson, M.D. ; George D. 

Dowkontt. M.D.; O. R. Avison. 

M.D; 'Mrs. A. W. Fcam, M.D.; 

W. F. Seymour, M.D. 
Benediction Rev. R. C Becbe, M.D. 

EVENING 

CARNEGIE HALL 

MiaaJooi and Govemmaib 

Chairman — Rev. U. C Mabie, D.D., Boston, Mass. 

Prayer Rev. L. C. Barnes, Pituburg, Pa. 

Present Problems in Relation of Mis- 
sions to Governments James B. Angell, LL.D., Ann Arbor, 

Mich. 

Miuionary Addresses: 

India , . Rev. Maurice FhilUps, India 

Africa H. Graltan Guinness, M.D., London 

Caledonia Rt. Rev. William Ridley, Bishop of 

Caledonia 
Manchuria Duncan McLaren, Scotland 

Benediction Rev. A. C. Thompson, D.D., Boston 

CENTRAL PRESBYTERLAN CHURCH 

Education and Literature 

CAoirmon — Riv. Canon W. J. Edmonds, B.D., Exeter, England 

Prayer D. S. Dodge, D.D., New York 

The Christian College Rev. Georjic Wa.shbum, D.D.. 

LL.D., Constantinople 

Higher Education Rev. Robert Laws, M.D.. Africa 

Literature Rev. Richard Lovett^ M.A., London 

Benediction Rev. Canon W. J. Edmonds, B.D.. 

Exeter. England 

Thursday, April 26 

MORNING 

CARNEGIE HALL 

Comity and DNUon of Fields 

Chairman — Rev, R. Wardlaw Thompson, London 

Devotional Service Rev. J. Fairley Daly, M.A., B.D., 

Glasgow 

Spirit and Limitations of Missionary 

Comity H. M. King, D.D., Providence, R. 1. 

A General Summary Rev. .Alexander Sutherland, D.D., 

Toronto. Can. 

Discussion ..Bishop C. C. Fenick; Rev. G. W. 

Knox, D.D.; Rev. R. Johnston, 
D.D.: Rev. George SchoH. D.D.: 
Rev. Dr. A. Schreiber; Rev. Paul 
de Schweinitz; Rev. J. Soper; 
Rev. W. K. McKibbcn; Rev. 
J. A. Mcintosh; A. C Buno, 
M.D. 

Benediction J. H. Taylor, China 

•Retired. 



366 PROGRAMME 

CENTRAL PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 

VoQun's IToffc in Fordga MUont 

Chairman — Mrs. Judson Smith, Boston 

Prayer Mrs. C. H. Case, Chicago 

Reports from Sectional Meetings: 
Work Among Young Women and 

Children Mrs. S. C. Trucheart, Nashville, 

Tenn. 

Giving Mrs. Moses Smith, Chicago, III. 

Literature Miss Abbie B.' Child, Boston. Mass. 

Discussion Miss Lucy Jarvis; Miss Ellen C. 

Parsons; Mrs. J. M. Potter 
Medical Work Mrs. H. C. Campbell, Allegheny City, 

Pa. 

Discussion Mrs, Johnston, M.O., India 

Educational Work Miss Frances B. Hawlcy, New York 

Discussion Miss Parsons ; Mrs. J. Fairley Daly 

Evangelistic Work Mrs. I. N. McQueston, Hamilton, 

Ont. 
Miss Corinna Shattuck; Mrs. J. 

Howard Taylor 

General Discussion 

Introduction of Christian Girls from 

India Mrs. E. S. Roberts, North Chili, 

N. Y. 
Prayer ♦Mrs. J. T. Graccy, Rochester, N. Y. 

AFTERNOON 

CARNEGIE HALL 

Man Meeting for ITomen 

Chairman — Mrs. J. P. E. Kumler, Pittsburg, Pa. 

Prayer Mrs. Henry Foster, Clifton Springs, 

N. Y. 

Address of Welcome Mrs. Harriot T. Todd, Boston 

Responses : 

For Great Britain Mrs. George Kerry, London 

For Australasia Mrs. Joseph King. Melbourne 

For Missionaries Mrs. Alice Gordon Gulick, ^ain 

Women's Societies as Evangelizing 

Forces Mrs. Moses Smith, Chicago, III. 

Woman's Work in Home Churches Mrs. N. M. Waterbury, Boston 

Methods and Opportunities Mrs. W. M. Baird. Korea 

A Physician's Opportunity Dr. Ida Faye Levering, India 

The Importance and Use of Mission- 
ary Literature Miss Irene H. Barnes, London 

Introduction of Missionaries Mrs. A. J. Gordon, Boston. Mass. 

Benediction Rev. Joseph King, Australia 

FIFTH AVENUE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 
Co-opcratton and Division of Fieldi in Occupied and Unoccupied Territories 

Chairman — Rev. Alexander Sutherland, D.D., Toronto, Canada 

Addresses H. Grattan Guinness, M.D., Londor 

Rev. John W. Bntlcr. D.D., Mexico 
*Rev. F. P. Haggard, Assam 

• Retired. 



PROGRAMME 367 

Co-opention and DtvWon of Fldcb, enc—ConHnued 

Discussion Rev. J. H. Taylor; Rev. A. Suther- 
land, D.D. ; Rev. George Owen; 
*Rev. E. W. Parker, D.D. ; Rev. 
E. B. Ryckman, D.D.; Rev. T. 
M. McNair ; Rev. Alan Ewbank ; 
Rev. C S. Bullock; Rev. W. C. 
Buchanan. 

Benediction Rev. Alexander Sutherland, D.O., 

Toronto, Can. 

CENTRAL PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 

Hl^icr KtfaraHoo 

Chaimuxn — Rev. J. F. Couches, D.D., Baltimore, Md. 

Prayer Rev. E. M. Bliss. D.D., New York 

Higher Education in Mission Fields. ..Rev. D. S. Dodge, D.D., New York 

Rev. D. Z. Sheffield, D.D., China 
Rev. George B. Smyth, D.D., China 
Miss Mary Mills Patrick, Ph.D., 

Constantinople 
Rev. Albertus Pieters, Japan 

Discussion Dr. Wolcott; Rev. J. W. Conklin 

Comity in Educational Work Rev. F. F. Ellinwood, D.D., N. Y. 

Discussion Rev. D. Z. Sheffield, D.D.; W. H. 

Grant ; Rev. C. Aoki ; Rev. 
Geo. Washburn, D.D., LL.D.; 
Rev. G. B. Smyth, D.D. ; Rev. 
J. F. Goucher. D.D. 
Benediction Rev. F. F. Ellinwood, D.D., N. Y. 

CHAMBER MUSIC HALL CARNEGIE HALL 

Mlirioii Pfcnct 

ChaiTimin — Rev. M. H. HorroN, D.D., New Brunswick, N. J. 

Prayer Rev. H. O. Dwight, LL.D., Con- 
stantinople 

Their Conduct and Management Rev. Hubert W. Brown, Mexico 

Rev. A. W. Rudisill, D.D.. India 

Co-operation in Mission Presses 

(Paper) Mr, Gilbert Mcintosh, China 

Discussion Rev. G. B. Winton; L H. Correll, 

D.D.; G. A. King. Esq., M.A.; 
Rev. Edward Riggs, T. Craven, 
D.D. ; Rev. E. Z. Simmons; Rev. 
W. S. Watson 

Benediction Rev. M. H. Hutton, D.D., New 

Brunswick, N. J. 

EVENING 

CARNEGIE HALL 

ITooun't Vork 

CAoifmon— Mrs. J. T. Gracey, Rochester, N. Y. 

Prayer Mrs. J. H. Knowles, New York 

A Great Need (Paper) Mrs. Isabella Bird Bishop, London 

The Responsibility of Women in For- 
eign Missions Mrs. Duncan McLaren, Edinburgh 

The Power of Educated Womanhood. .Miss Isabella Thobum, India 

• Retlrfd. 



368 ntOGRAMME 

"Vonaafi "VoA.—Cniimmed 

The Results of Higher Education Miss Lilivati Singh, B.A., India 

The Outlook in Woman's Foreign 

Missionary Work Mrs. W. A. Montgomery, Rochester, 

N. Y. 
Introdaction of Christian Women 

from Mission Fields Mrs. S. L. Keen, Philadelphia, Pa. 

Benediction Andrew Longacre, D.D., New York 



CENTRAL PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 

Comity aad DhrUon of ndds 

Chotrman — Rev. Waluvce Radcuffe, D.D., Washington, D. C 

Prayer Rev. Wallace Raddiflfe, D.D., Wash- 
ington, D. C. 

Addresses Mrs. W. A. Montgomery, Rochester, 

N. Y. 
Rev. Thomas W. Pearce, China 
Mrs. Alice Gordon GuHck, Spain 
Rev. Thomas Barclay, Formosa 
Benediction Rev. Wallace RadcliflEe, D.D., Wash- 
ington, D. C 



FritUy* April 27 

MORNING 

CARNEGIE HALL 

StS-mspport by mff***" Churches 

Chairman — Rev. C. R. Hemphill, D.D., Louisville, Ky. 

Devotional Service Hon. W. J. Northen, Atlanta, Ga. 

Principles and Methods of Self-support. Rev. G. B. Winton, Mexico 
Present Sutus of Mission Churches... Rev. W. R. Lambuth, D.D., Nash- 
ville, Tenn. 
Object Lesson in New Field (Paper) ... Rev. H. G. Underwood, D.D., Korea 

Discussion Rev. Charles S. Morris; Rev. R. M. 

Mateer;Rev. J. W. Davis, D.D.; 
Rev. Thomas Barclay; Rev. C. 
C. Vinton, M.D.; Rev. A. H. 
Ewing; Rev. Wheeler Boggess; 
Rev. A. T. Pierson. D.D. 
Benediction J. F. Goucher, D.D., Baltimore, Md. 



AFTERNOON 

CHURCH OF THE STRANGERS 

MbriofUfy Boards and Stcktia 

ChairmoH — Rev. Rivington D. Lord, D.D., Brooklyn, N. Y. 

Prayer John D. Wells, D.D., Brooklyn, N. Y. 

Need and Value of Such Organizations. George SchoU, D.D., Baltimore, Md. 

Relation to Denominational Bodies J. M. Buckley, D.D., New York 

Relation to Missions and Missionaries, 

Interdenominational Conferences, 

Deputational Visits Rev. R. Wardlaw Thompson, Lon^ 

don 



PROGRAMME 369 

t/Dtdoauy Boanli and Sftcktift. — ConttHutd 

Discussion Rev. John D. Wells, D.D.; Rev. 

M. H. Hutton, D.D.; Rev. J. L. 

Barton, D.D. ; Eugene Stock; 

Rev. W. R. Richards; Rev. A. B. 

Sanford, D.D. ; Rev. Wheeler 

Boggess; Rev. J. A. Macdonald; 

Walter B. Sfoan 
Benediction Rev. R. D. Lord, D.D., Brooklyn 

FIFTH AVENUE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 

Scltiupport 

InEvanceUitieawICbaKhVorfci In Educatioiul Tork 1 InMcdfollToffc 

CAaiVman— Rev. S. H. Chester, D.D., Nashville, Tenn. 

Prayer Rev. S. H. Chester, D.D., Nashville, 

Tenn. 

Papers Rev. W. H. Wheeler; Rev. E. O. 

Stephens, Burma 

Discussion C F. Reid. D.D.; F. F. Ellinwood, 

D.D.; Duncan McLaren; W. W. 
Barr, D.D. ; Rev. T. W. Pearce; 
J. P. Headland, D.D. ; W. Henry 
Grant ; Rev. L. J. Davies ; I. L, 
Van Schoick, M.D. ; G. A. King, 
M.A. ; Rev. A. H. Ewing; S. R. 
Vinton ; Julius Soper, D.D. ; Rev. 
Alan Ewbank; D. Z. Sheffield, 
D.D.; 'Miss E. C. Wheeler; H. 
C. Woodruff. D.D. ; Wilson 
Phraner, D.D.; Rev. W. K. 
McKibben 

Benediction Rev. D. Z. Sheffield, D.D. 

UNION METHODIST CHURCH 

Indostrial Tnlning 

CAaJrman— Rev. B. C. Warren, D.D., New York 

Prayer Rev. B. C. Warren, D.D., New York 

Industrial Education in India Rev. James Smith, India 

Industrial Training of Natives Rev. J. O. Spencer, Ph.D., Japan 

Industrial Mission Work Mr. Watson Grace, London 

Discussion Rev. T. S. Smith; Rev. Joseph Tay- 
lor; Rev. W. B. Grubb; J. E. 
Abbott, D.D. ; A. H. Lewis. 
D.D.; Rev. J. F. Porter; Rev. 
C. S. Morris; Rev. W. R. Hotch- 
kiss 

CENTRAL PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 

Elementary Schoob 

Chairman — Frank Morton McMurry, Ph.D., New York 

Prayer Rev. James A. Cunningham, M.A., 

London 
What Missions Are Doing for Normal 

Training Rev. J. Fairley Daly, M.A., B.D., 

Glasgow 

•Retired. 



37^ PROGRAM UE 

Ekmentary Schools.— CVnARvft^ 

Controlling Ideas in Curricula F. M. McMurry, Ph.D., New York 

Discussion Mrs. M. S. Woolman; Rev. L. Mosv 

D.D.; F. M. McMurry. Ph.D.; 

Prof. J. W. Conklin; a Delegate; 

John Pearsall; W. H. Grant; 

Miss M. C. Davis; Rev. Howard 

S. Bliss; Mr. Clark; Mr. Lyon; 

Mr. Robbins ; W. P. Freeman 

CENTRAL PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 

(Spedal Sevion) 

Tnbdng of Mistiooarks 

Chairman — Miss Parsons, Rye, N. Y. 

Prayer Mrs. A. Pettit, Elizabeth, N. J. 

Paper Mrs. J. Fairley Daly, Glasgow 

Discussion Mrs. W. B. Osborne; Miss M. Coles; 

Miss S. T. Knapp; Miss Gibson; 

Mr. Hass; Mrs. L. O. George; 

Bishop Bonthaler, Miss M. 0. 

Allen 
Benediction Rt. Rev. Bishop Bonthaler 

EVENING 

CARNEGIE HALL 

Meeting for Business Men 

Chairman — Hon. James B. Angell, LL.D., Ann Arbor. Mich. 

Introduction Hon. Seth Low. LL.D.. New York 

Prayer Rev. Canon W. J. Edmonds, B.D.. 

Exeter, England 

Trials of the Missionary Hon. James B. Angell, LL.D,, Ann 

Arbor, Mich. 

Our Success, Our Opportunity, and 

Our Duty Hon. S. B. Capen. LL.D.. Boston 

Influence of Missions in India Judge D. G. Barkley, LL.D., Ireland 

Relations of Laymen to Missions Hon. W. J. Northen, Atlanta, Ga. 

Commerce and Missions Hon. C. A. Schieren, Brooklyn, 

N. Y. 

Business in Missions Secretary George Scholl, D.D., Bal- 
timore. Md. 

The Open Door John H. Converse, Philadelphia. Pa. 

Benediction Rev. Jacob Chamberlain, M.D., D.D.. 

India 

CENTRAL PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 

Self-support by MWoa Chiifchct 

Chairman — Rev. Wilton Merle Smith, D.D., New York 

Prayer Rev. W. M. Smith, D.D., New York 

Addresses Rev. O. R. Avison, M.D.. Korea 

Rev. Dr. Borchgrevink. Madagascar 
Rev. H. W. Brown. Mexico 
Rev. William -■Xshmore. D.D., China 
Rev. George Chalfant, D.D., Pitts- 
burg. Pa. 
Rev. John Morton. D.D.. West In- 
dies 
Benediction Rev. W. M. Smith. D.D., New Yoifc 



PROGRAMME 37 1 

Sattuday, April 28 

MORNING 

CARNEGIE HALL 

Studcnb and Other Youne People 

Chairman — John R. Mott, New York 

Devotional Service Bishop E. R. Hendrix, Kansas City, 

Mo. 
The Achievements, Present Position, 
and Significance of Missionary 
Movementc among Students 

throughout the World Prof. J. R. Stevenson. Chicago, III. 

H. C. Duncan, M.A., London 

Discussion F. M. Gilbert; Rev. C. T. Riggs: 

Eugene Stock ; E. S. Fry, M.D. ; 
Miss E. K. Price 
The Young Men of the Future Min- 
istry — How Fire Them with the 
Missionary Passion and Make 
Them Leaders of Missionary 

Churches C C. Hall. D.D., LL.D.. New York 

Prayer Robert E. Speer, M.A., New York 

CENTRAL PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 

Non-Christian Religions 

Chairman — Rev. F. F. Ellinwood, D.D., New York 

Devotional Service Rev. F. F. EHinwood, D.D., N. Y. 

The Right Attitude of Christianity 

toward Non-Christian Faiths J. H. Barrows, D.D., Obcrlin 

The Religious Condition of India 

from the Missionary Standpoint. , .W. S. Sutherland, M.A., Scotland 
The Ethical and Philosophical Sys- 
tems of China and Japan *Rev. G. W. Knox, D.D., New York 

Mohammedanism and Christian Mis- 
sions Rev. C. T. Wilson, Palestine 

Discussion Rev. A. H. Ewing; *Rev. M. Jame- 
son: Rev. Dr. A. Schreiber; Rev. 
D. 2. Sheffield, D.D.; Rev. T. M. 
McNair; Rev. T. S. Wynkoop, 
D.D.; Rev. Y. R. Callenbach, 
D.D. ; Rev. S. G. Hart 
Benediction Rev. F. F. Ellinwood, D.D. 

AFTERNOON 

CARNEGIE HALL 

Students and Other Young People 
Chairman — John R. Mott, New York 
Organized Movements among the 
Young People of the Church — 
Their Extent and Missionary Pos- 
sibilities Rev. B. L. Whitman, D.D., Wash- 
ington, D. C. 
How to Foster and Utilize among the 
Vast Army of Young Men and 
Women in the Various Young 
People's Movements a Mission- 

•Retind. 



372 PROGRAMME 

Studcnti *ad Other You^ ^ta^—OmtiHtud 

ary Spirit Adequate to the Op- 
portunities of Their Generation. . . . S. Earl Taylor, New York 

D. Brewer Eddy, A.B., Aubani,N.Y. 

John Willis Baer, Boston, Mass. 

CENTRAL PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 
Apologetic FtoUcms in Kfialoiu 
Chairman — Rev. Paul Mastin, Princeton, N. J. 
The Relation of the Missionary to 

Non-Christian Religions George Robson, D.D., Scotland 

Apologetic Problems in Missions Rev. George T. Purves, D.D., N« 

York 

Discussion Rev. I. A. Mcintosh ; Everett P. 

Wheeler; Dr. Alexander; Rct. 
A. C. Dixon, D.D.; Rev. AT. 
Graybill 
Benediction Rev. H. T. McEwen, D.D., New Am- 
sterdam, N. Y. 

EVENING 

CARNEGIE HALL 

Stodentt and Other Young Peoftle 

C/kiiVman—JoHN R. Mott, New York 

Prayer Rev. Silas B. McVey 

The Solemn Responsibility of the 
Church in the Light of the Work- 
ing of God's Spirit among the 
Students and Other Young Peo- 
ple Rev. W. F. McDowell, D.D., New 

York 
The Peculiar Obligation and Oppor- 
tunity for this Generation to Obey 
the Command to Preach the Gos- 
pel to Every Creature Eugene Stock, London, England 

John R. Mott, New York 
Prayer H. C. Duncan, M. A., London, Eng. 

Sunday, April 29 
Special Services 
AFTERNOON 

CARNEGIE HALL 

Man Meetfaig for Men 

(Under the auspices of the West Side Y. M. C. A.) 

CAotrman— Robert E. Speer, M.A., New York 

Prayer John Willis Baer. Boston, Mass. 

What Christ is Doing for the Nations. . Rev. John G. Paton, D.D., New 

Hebrides 
C. F. Harford-Battersby, M.D., The 

S"(1an 
H. Grattan Guinness, M.D., The 

Congo 
John R. Mott. New York 
Miss Ijlivati Singh, India 



FROGRAUME 373 

EVENING 
CARNEGIE HALL 
Maa Meeting In Interest ot Famine SuSeicn la bxfia 

Chairman — Hon. Seth Low, LL.D., New York 

Prayer Rev. R. S. MacArthur. D.D., N. Y. 

Introductory Address J. H. Barrows, D.D., Oberlin 

Causes which Lead to Famine in India. Rev. L. B. Wolf, India 

Rev. David Downie, D.D., India 
How the Indian Government Handles 

a Famine Rev. W. H. Findlay, M.A. 

Facts and Statistics Rev. James Smith, Ahmednager 

What an Indian Famine is Like Rev. Dr. Johnson 

♦Rev. E. W. Parker, D.D. 
Manorama Mary Medhui 
(Collection for Famine Relief.) 
Why Foreign Nations Should Help 

in Famine Relief Rev. Charles Cuthbert Hall, D.D., 

LL.D., New York 
What Can the United States and 

Other Christian Nations Do? Rt. Rev. H. C. Potter, D.D., LL.D., 

Bishop of New York 
Benediction Bishop H. C. Potter, D.D., N. Y. 



Mboday, April 30 

MORNING 

CARNEGIE HALL 

Medical Voffc 

Chairman — Rzv. Jacob Chamberlain, M.D., D.D., China 

Devotional Service Rev. C. F. Reid, D.D., Korea 

Relation to Missionary Work as a 
Whole— Practical Proofs of Its 
Value — Importance, Limitations, 

Results (Paper) Rev. George E. Post, M.D., D.D.S., 

Beirut, Syria 
C. F. Harford-Battersby, M.D., Eng- 
land 

Qualifications for Medical Work F. Howard Taylor, M.D., China 

Comity in Medical Work O. R. Avison, M.D., Seoul, Korea 

Discussion F. P. Lynch. M.D. ; Frank Van 

Allen, M.D.; May E. Carleton. 
M.D.: ♦;. C. Hepburn. M.D. 

Prayer Y. L. Graham, M.D., Philadelphia, 

Pa. 



CENTRAL PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 

Christian LHcraturc 

Chairman— Rev. C. F. Reid, D.D., Korea 

Devotional Service Rev. C. F. Reid. D.D., Korea 

Christian Literature in China Rev. Timothy Richard, Shanghai 

The Recent Reform Movement in ChinaRev. George Owen, Peking 
How We Won Our Way on the Congo. Rev. Henry Richards, Africa 
Christian Union and Missions J. H. Garrison, D.D., SL Louis, Mo. 

'lUtlnd. 



374 PROGRAMME 

Chriitian lMtt».ttttt.^CottfittueJ 

Development of a Christian Literature 

for China Rev. D. Z. Sheffield, D.D.. Tungcho 

•Rev. W. T. A. Barber, M.A.. B.D., 
Cambridge, England 

The Emperor of China Rev. H. W. White, China 

Discussion Rev. James Thomas; Rev. Matu-ice 

Phillips; Rev. T. W. Pearc<; 
F. E. Meigs 
Benediction Rev. Timothy Richard, China 

AFTERNOON 

MADISON AVENUE REFORMED CHURCH 

Lttenry Work 

Chairman — Prof. Henry M. Baird, New York 

Prayer Prof. Henry M. Baird. New York 

Literary Workers (Paper) K. S. McDonald, D.D., India 

Contributions of Book and Tract So- _ 

cieties Rev. Richard Lovett, M. A., Lonc^K-O" 

Discussion Rev. D. J. Burrell, D.D.; R •«*■ 

George Patterson; Rev. D. ^• 

Sheffield, D.D.; Rev. E. »■ 

Bliss, D.D.; Rev. G. L. Sheai — ^ - 
D.D.; Rev. J. L. Dearing, D.^*^-: 
Rev. H. W. Hulbert 
Benediction Rev. A. E. Kittredge, D.D., N. Y-^ • 

CENTRAL PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 
Hospitals and Diqtensaries 

Chairman— D. B. St. John Roosa, M.D., LL.D., New York 

Prayer Rev. Jacob Chamberlain, M.D., D.^C^ ^■' 

India 

Qualifications for Medical Work W. H. Thomson, M.D., New York^*^ 

When Should Hospitals Be Estab- 
lished? Their Conduct. Manage- 
ment under Various Conditions, 
Relation of Clerical Men to Med- 
ical Work Robert C. Beebe. M.D., China 

John Cross, M.D., China .^, 

Discussion Rev. L. R. Scudder, M.D.; D V^^ "' 

Torrance. M.D. ; G. W. Holmes ^'^ 
M.D.; Rev. H. Coley; Ma: J^I] 
Pierson Eddy, M.D.; Frank V»-^^ 
Allen, M.D., India. 

CHURCH OF THE STRANGERS 
Educational Philanthropic "Work 

Chairman — James Wood, Mt. Kisco, N. Y. 

Prayer James Wood, Mt. Kisco, N. Y. . 

Widows in India Miss Anstice Abbott, Bombay, Indt 4—^ 

Work for Orphans Miss Corinna Shaltuck. Turkey 

Work for the Blind Rev. A. M. Cunningham, M.A 

China 

Discussion *Miss Emily C. Wheeler; *Mr= 

Wellington White: Dr. Y. ^ 
Callenbach; J. P. Moore, D.D, 

• Retired. 



fROGRAMUE ^Jig 

FIFTH AVENUE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 
REidomry Literature for Home Cburcfacs 

Chairmati—REv. C. H. Daniels, D.D., Boston, Mass. 

Prayer Rev. C. H. Daniels, D.D., Boston 

Periodicals and Reports of Societies, 
General Missionary Literature, 

Religioui and Secular Press Rev. E. E. Strong. D.D., Boston 

•Mrs. J. T. Gracey, Rochesier, N. Y. 
Rev. A. W. Halsey, D.D., New York 

Discussion Rev. E. M. Bliss. D.D.; Rev. A. T. 

Pierson, D.D.; Rev. D. C. Ran- 
kin, D.D. ; Robert E. Speer, 
M.A.: Rev. C. H. Daniels, D.D.; 
Dr. A. Schrciber; Rev. J. L. 
Thurston 
Benediction Rev. J. P. Leyenberger, Toronto, Can. 

EVENING 

CARNEGIE HALL 

Social Progress and Peace 

Chairman — Rev. W. R. Huntington, D.D., New York. 

Prayer Rev. M. H. Hutton, 'C-.u., New 

Brunswick, N. J. 
Relation of Foreign Missions to So- 
cial Progress and Peace Rev. C. D. Hartranft, D.D., LL.D., 

Hartiord, Conn. 
Rev. Charles Williams, England 
Evil of Importation of Intoxicating 

Drinks into Foreign Mission Fields.Rev. T. L. Cuyler, D.D., Brooklyn 

C. F. Harford-Battersby,M.D., btrat- 
ford, England 

Discussion T. M. Harvey; John G. Paton, D.D. ; 

George Scholl. D.D. 
Benediction George Scholl, D.D., Baltimore, Md. 

CENTRAL PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 

McdicAl ITorfc 

Chairman — Rev. D. J. Bubjiell, D.D., New York 

Prayer Rev. D. J. Burrell, D.D. 

Medical Missions C. F. Harford - Battersby, M.D., 

Stratford, England 
Rev. W. E. Cousins, Madagascar 
Rev. William Perkins. London, Eng. 

Benediction Rev. D. J. Burrell, D.D. 

Tuesday^ May t 

MORNING 

CARNEGIE HALL 

Home Work for Fordjfa KUstions 

Chairman — Rev. Edward Judson, D.D., New York 

Devotional Service Hon. S. B. Capen, LL.D., Boston 

EflFect on Churches of Supporting 

Foreign Missions Rev. A. J. F. Bchrends, D.D., Brook- 

lyn. N. Y. 

• Retired. 



37(S PROGRAMU£ 

Home Wotk lor Fordgn SfiMioiit. — Ctmtinutd 

Reflex Influence of Foreign Missions 

on Other Benevolent Enterprises.. Rev. David H. Greer, D.D., N, Y. 

Enthronement of Missionary Idea Rev. George Wilson, Edinburgh 

Possible Power of Pastor Rev. George F. Pentecost, D.D., 

Yonkers. N. Y. 
Mr. £. E. Lewis, Iowa 
Benediction Rev. J. G. Paton, D.D. 



AFTERNOON 
FIFTH AVENUE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 

Support of JKaiota hf Honu QiuKfies 
Chairman — Rev. H. C. Mabie, D.D., Boston, Mass. 

Prayer Rev. C. H. Daniels, D.D., Boston 

Stewardship, Systematic Prayer, and 

Beneficence Rev. William Perkins, London, Eng. 

Rev. J. Fairley Daly, M.A., B.D., 
Glasgow 

Ways and Means, Special Appeals Rev. D. S. Mackay, D.D., New York 

Hon. S. B. Capen, LL.D., Boston 

Discussion W. C. King; John H. Converse; Rev. 

J. Y. Dobbins, D.D.; L. C. War- 
ner. M.D.; Rev. W. M. Smith, 
D.D.; Rev. T. S. Barbour, D.D. 
Benediction Rev. William Perkins, London 

MADISON AVENUE REFORMED CHURCH 

The BlUeSodetUs 

Chairman — Rev. A. E. Kittredce, D.D., New York 

Prayer Rev. A. E. Kittredge. D.D.. N. Y. 

The Bible Society— Its Work (Paper) . Rev. E. W. Gilman, D.D., N. Y. 

Difliculties and Achievements Rev. James Thomas, London 

Scotland and Bible Diffusion, 1860- 

190G (Paper) W. J. Slowan, Glasgow 

True Beginning of Modern Bible 

Work in India Rev. Canon W. J. Edmonds, B.D., 

Exeter, England 
Discussion Rev. C. T. Wilson; George A. King, 

Esq.. M.A.: *Rev. F. D. Greene; 

Rev. J. S. Porter; Rev. G. H. 

Gerberding, D.D.; Rev. T. S 

Wynkoop. D.D.; Rev. J. W. 

Davis, D.D.: Rev. W. N. Cro- 

zier; Sr. F. deP. Castells; Rev. 

M. Douglas 
Benediction Rev. A. E. Kittredge, D.D. 

CHURCH OF THE STRANGERS 

EvangfThtif PUIantbropk Vorfc 

CAoirman— Ret. J. K. Wight, D.D., China 

Prayer Rev. J. K. Wight. D.D.. China 

American Seaman's Friend Society Rev. W. C. Stitt, D.D., New York 

Work for Famine Victims Rev. L. B. Wolf. India 

Rev. J. H. Laughlin, China 
Rev. J. E. Abbott, D.D., India 

•■Hill. 



PROGRAMME 377 

Bnncdbtk PUUntbrapIc "WoA^—CctUiMMtd 

Work Among Lepers (Paper) Wcllesley C Bailey, London 

Mrs. James Watt, Guelph, Ont. 

Discussion Miss Budden; Dr. Ditmars; *Mr3. 

L. M. Campbell 
Benediction Rev, J. K. Wight, D.D., China 

EVENING 

CARNEGIE HALL 

Outlook tad Denuuids 

Chairman — Hon. Benjamin Harrison, LL.D. 

Prayer Rev. E. B. Coe, D.D., New York 

The Present Situation: Its Claims 

and Opportunities Maltbie D. Babcock, D.D., N. Y. 

Rev. W. T. A. Barber, M.A., B.D., 
Cambridge, England 
Outlook and Demands for the Com- 
ing Century Rt. Rev. W. C. Doane, D.D., LL.D., 

Bishop of Albany 
Farewell; 

For the Foreign Delegates Rev. Canon W. J. Edmonds, B.D., 

Exeter, England 

For the Missionaries Rev. George Owen, China 

The Closing Words Hon. Benjamin Harrison, LL.D. 

Benediction Rev. F. F. Ellinwood, D.D. 

CENTRAL PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH 

OutlocA and Demandi 

Chairman — Rev. R. S. MacArthur, D.D., New York 

Prayer G. F. Pentecost, D.D., Yonkers, N.Y. 

Outlook and Demands for the Com- 
ing Century Eugene Stock, London, England 

G. F. Pentecost, D.D., Yonkers, N. Y. 

The Present Situation: Its Claims 

and Opportunities Maltbie D. Babcock, D.D.. N. Y. 

Benediction Rev. R. S. McArthur, D.D. 

CALVARY BAPTIST CHURCH 

Outlook and Demandi 

CAoirmoB— *Rev. J. T. Ghacey, D.D., Rochester, N. Y. 

Prayer Rev. J. Hudson Taylor, China 

OuUook and Demands for the Com- 
ing Century George F. Pentecost, D.D., Yonkers, 

N. Y. 
Eugene Stock, London, England 

The Missionary Outlook Rev. J. Hudson Taylor, China 

Benediction Rev. A. W. Halsey, D.D., New York 



•Retired. 



Tiro Andoi 

A. A. Ayer, E»q., 

KaIi CtiAran Ilanurji, 

Hon. David Ci. llxrklrv. LL-D.. 

Hon. S. H. Blakf. Q.C., 

sci». LL.D., 



Hon. S. 11. Cttpt 
Hon. Senalcr U. A 



i:o». 




Organization 
Ecumenical Conference on Foreign Missions 

New York, AprU 21— May J, J900 

llonprary Presidrnl 
BENJAMIN HARRISON. LL.D. 



Hon. J. L. M. Cuirr. LL.D.. WMtiifiKion. 
William E. Dodge. New fork, 

Hun. J, W. FosicT. WflHliinBttin. 

Anrirrw F. Cai)1t, F.tq., Manir«'al. 

Thoroa* Morgan Hirv^, Eiq., London. 
}lDn. W. J. Norllicn, AtUnia. 

E» -Governor Palliion, Pmn*ylv»nia. 

N. P. Pond. Kcichrflcr. 

D. Willis Jaroo. N«w York. 



Honorary VUt- Presidents 

Japan. Morris K. Jemp, 

G. A King. M. A., Em).. 

Hon. Stih ].nw, H..l>.. 

C. VV. Macalifinc. E*<.. J. P.. 

Duncan M;icl^fcn, b«i-, 

Chcfttci' U, MaMcy, 

kcif. l>r. A. .Mcrensky, 



Montreal 

India. 

Ireland. 

ToroDlo. 

Dokton. 

Taranio. 



J. Picfbont Mofgan, 

Sir O. Mowai. Q.C, G.C.M.G.. 

Bugenr Stock, 

Hoa Alden Speare, 

Cicai SludrbakFT, 

Hon. C. A. Schirrer, 

Kr%-. Dr A. SchrfibCT, 

Prof. Gu»tav Wameck, Ph.D.. 

James Wuod, 



New Yoit 

LoadotL 

New Vwt 

Enclaal 

ScotlaAi 

Toronto. 

CrrtnanT. 

New Voi 

ToronM 

LoiKko- 

Bo*tM 

Indiana 

Brooklyn 

Carman;. 

Ccrmaar. 



GENERAL COMMnTTEE 



Her. Judson Stnilh, 
Ser. 5. L. Baldwin. D.D., Qtn't Stc'y. 




Hpv. Hrnry AtiKicc, D.D., 

Hev. W. W. Ban. D.D.. 

Rev. S. S. [tairs 

Rev. W. M. Bell. O.D.. 

Rev. M. M. Binford, 

Hev. J. G. Bi»tiop, D.D.. 

Bithou S. C. Breyfoael. 

Kcv. A. J. Orown, n.!),. 

Rev. J. C. Brown. 

Re^. l5. J. Burrell. D.D.. 

Rev. S. S. Callender, D.D., 

{amm Carey, Jr.. 
iamilton Ca*icl>, E«a. 
Rev. S. H. Ch«lrr. D.D., 
Hon. VV. U Clarke. 
Rev. II. N. Cobb, IJ.D.. 
Kev. C H. Daniel*, D.D., 
Col. E. L. nobbini. 
Rev. F. F. Elltnwood. D.D.. 
Rev. Alex. Falconer, 
Rev. John Fox. D.D., 
Hon. H. O. Fuller, 
Prof. M. Galley. 
Rev. C. O. Galea. D.D.. 
kev. Edwaitl W. Gilman. D.D., 
Re». AnhHT Given. li.D., 
Rev. J. I. Good. O.D.. 
T. E. Crencn. 
Rev. A. W. Hall. 
Rev. 1. T. HamilloTi. 
Rev. William I. Haven. D.U.. 
Rev. E- Hub«r, 
Rev. M. H. HuttoD. D.O., 
Hon, P. K. Jamee. 
Rev. W. H. K^iiTifdy. 
Bi»hop E. B. Kertiart. D.n.. 
Rev. Luther Kuhlman. D.D.. 
Rev. M- G, Kyle. D D.. 
Rev. W. n Lamhuth, n.I>., 
* For abbreviations «e p*gei 38s-344. 



PE 

UP 



U 

AFB Firf 

MBCC 

E A 

P 

BOO 

ATS 

Reus 

AFBFM 

PC 

PS 

SDB 

RCA 

A B C F M 

M E 

P 

PC 

ADS 

AB M U 

KC N A 

BMP 

A0S 

FB 

RCU S 

R P 

WMC A 

Mor 

A n S 

GES 

RCA 

P 

W M C A 

IT B 

ELGS 

UP 

M ES 



D.D., Chairmittt. 
\\\ Hmry Grant, At^l Cn'l 
Rev. J. W. Lkufihiin, 
Kev. A. B. Leonard. D.D.. 
Rev. R. D. Lord. D.n,. 
Be*. H. C. Mabie. D.D.. 
Rev. R. P. Mackay. 
Rev. f. W. Minninfi. M.A. 
Kev. T. C. Mtcket 
Rev. P. A. Men*el, D.D., 
Rev. W. Moore. D.D,. 
Rev. P. M. Morriaon. 
Rev. S. S- Metieaty. 
Rev. A. McEj-nn. 
Rev. W. N. McVlcVar, D.D.. 
Rev. W. R. Nicholson. D.D., 
Rev. T. J. OKbiirn. 
Rev. A J. Palmer. I?.D.. 
Rev. H. ». Patkv D.D., 
Rev. T. H. Prrrin. 
Rev. R. H. Pitt, D.D.. 
Rev. W. P. Powcfi. D.D.. 
Ker. P. T. Pre.slv. O.D.. 
Rrv. W. I.. IVrs*ly. WD.. 
Rev. William T, SaMne. D.D., 
Rev. GcoTge Scboll, D.D.. 
Rev, Paul tie Schweiniti, 
Rev. r., \.. Sbrnrrr. D.D., 
Rev. E. E. Sibole. D D., 
Rev. R. M. Sommerville. D.D.. 
Rev. David Steele. D.D.. 
Rev. J. J. .Stimrr.rrbell. D.D., 
Rev. AleK. StJihcrland, D.D., 
Gen. Wager Swayne, 
Biihop H. M. Turner. D.D« 
Rev. r I. Vsnrr. D.D., 
Rev. F. W. \Vei»l(otlen. 
Rev. W. L. Wells. D.D.. 
R*v. O. U. Whitfcrd. 
Rev. R. J, Willinaham. D.D.. 
Rev. .•>. T. Wittif. 
Rev. B. U'tnget, 



Sit'f. 



FB 

ABMU 

PC 

BMP 

EA 

GES 

PC 

PC 

FM 

FCMS 

PE 

RE 

MP 

ME 

AME 

CF 

SBC 

PE 

ARS 

AKS 

RE 

ELGS 

klor 

ATS 

KLGC 

RP 

RCNA 

M BCC 

ricc 

PE 
AUE 

PS 

ELGC 

H P 

SDB 

sue 

FCMS 

FH 





ORGAN I Z AT JON 



379 



BRITISH COMMITTEE 

Rrr. K> WardUw Tiiampson, ChairptoK, London. 
T- llerbtrt Darlow. Hot. S*i')h 

LflnJon. Kcv. Tas. S. NisbcL Edinburch. 

Rev. VV. Park. Belfast. 

Kcv. W. VtiyiBi. London. 

V\'allcT B. Slnan, Loadoik 

W. }. Sloihnn, Esq., ClttMOW, 

Enfifnc Slock. London. 

Tisiinston Tarlow. Esq., Lonilon. 
HcT. rnsinh Thnmaf, \1.A., Liverpool. 

Rev. r,ea. Tongic, London. 

I. I*. Werner, CK-. London. 

Rev. Prettcndary Whit«, London. 



A. H. BajT"^ 1^. 

Kev. J«me« Uuchanan. 

Rev. E. P. Cachrmailtc, 

Re*. Alex. Cunncll. 

Rev. W. T. Cidnry. 

Wat*on OraM .^.,^-..,^ 

C. F. IIarfor<l-Daitcr5by, H.D.. Siratford. 

Rev. Jamo Jahniton. St. Leoiucd'^-trn-Sra. 

O, A. Kinic. Ksij., M,A., I.nnilnn. 

Rev. I'Tol. Lind*av, n.D.. Gla^Kow. 

Rev. John M'Uuruit, MA.. EdinburEch. 



Edinbunth. 
London. 
Lontl'in. 
London, 
London. 



EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 



Rev. Henry N. Cobb, 
Rev. S. L. Baldwin, D.D,, Sie'y. 

Georstc ToMcr Peabody, 
Rc». T. S. Barbour. U D., 
Rev. Ilar!^ ?. BcmVi. 
Rev. Eci'-in M. DHm, D.D., 
Rev. Anhur I. Brown, D.D., 
Ui» Abbie B. Child, 
Rev. Jatnei S. Dcnni*, D.D., 
Rev. A. C. nison, D.D.. 
Rev. F. y. Eliinwnod. D.O.. 
Rev. J. F, Goucher, D.D., 
Rev. J. T. Gracey. D.D., 
Hon. Darwia R. Jantn, 



■ HOSPTTALTTY COMMITTEE 

lte». Arthur J, Brown. D.D.. Cliainn.jn 



JTanea Wood. 



D.D„ CkairmeH. 

W. Henry Grant, Air'l Srt'j. 

Trtasurtf. 

Rev. K. H. Knubd. 
Rev. A. D. Lewiuid. D.D.. 
Rev. A. S. Lloyil, D.D., 
Hcv. H. C Mabic. D.D., 
William D. Murray, 
John K. Mott. 
Fri-dcrick B. Schenck, 
Robert E. Speer, 
Rev. Jud»on Smith. D D., 
Lucien C. Warner, M.D., 
John W. Wood, 



Mornajr Williami, E«q.» yUt-Ckov* 

AdviiofT Council 
Rev. Arthur J, Brown, CD., OioirmoK. 
Be*. Henry Evrrtmon Cobb, William B. Millar, 

Atesanrier M. (la'tirlrr, Georgtr P. Mollet, 



Rev. A. W. Ha]*ey. D.D.. 
Rav. W. R. Ilunlinslun, D.D.. 



William E. StiBei, Esq., 
Momay Williamd, Ettq. 



Committees oa Free Eatcrtaiament 
BAPTIST. Miu Emma L. Briilgeig 



Rev. John B. Calvert. D.D.. Ckairman. 

Rev. John Humpstonc, D.O.. 

Rev. R. S. MacArthur, D.D.. 

Rev. Oiarlea L. Khoadei. U.D,. 

Col. Alexander S. Bacon, 

O. R. Judd, 

Mornay William*. E»Q., 

Mri. Taffies B, Colnatc. 

Mr«. Winmni A. (jiuldarell, 

Mr<. B. F, Clark, 

Mr*. Barak Cole*. 

Mrs. Georee H. Fox, 

Mr«. I. .M. Haldcmao, 

Mrs. Koberr Hfirrii. 

Mil* A. Hope, 

Mrs. William M. luocs, 

Mrs. H. V. Lewis. 

Mrs. R. B, MncAiihur, 

Mr.. J. W. Perry. 

Miss 1. Pettua. 

Mr*. Stephen Smith. 

COXCltErATIOTAU 

Rev. Cha*. C. Crcccnn, D.D., Chairmen, 

Rev. Elliin W. Ilro»ji. 

Kev. H. A. Stimsor. D.D.. 

Rev. TosinS StronR. P.!).. 

Rev. William H. Ward, D.D., 

R. A. Dorman, Esq . 

Uy^r n Hnlmc», Esq.. 

Mr*. Ellimi W, Brn»o. 

MiM >I. C. E. Harden. 



Misi Cecilia Jennings, 
Mrs, C. E. Mitchell, 
Mrs. H. A. Rrimsort. 
Mis* Susan Haye* Ward. 

iriscorAL. 

Alexander M. Hadden. Chcirmam, 
Rev, Pwcy S. Gtapi. D.D.. 
Rrv. David H. (Ircer, n.n., 
Rev. W. M. Grosvenor. D.D., 
Rev. William R. IIuDtiogton, D.D. 
Hi H. Cammann, 
J. P. Faure. 
Francis C. Moore. 

rUKKDS. 

Robert I. Murray, Chairman, 
Rev. M. M. Bmrord, 
Mrt. Jo«hua L. Banon. 
iAn, Robert W. Lawrence. 

LUTIIIRAX. 

Cforffe P. Moller, Chairman, 

Rev. K. Andcrioii. 

Rev, H, W. Hoffman, 

Her. j. W. Loch. D.D.. 

Rev. J. n. Renien>Dy<ler, D.D., 

Rev. Maunlt Slolpe, 

Rev. S. G. WeiskoltcB, 

Hon. Cbnrtci A. SchJeren, 

E. F. Eitert, 

Janes Fdlows, 



J 



3«o 



ORGANIZATION 



Commfttco on Few BaUHahauuHLr—Cmtititud 



Hiu EmniB Allen, 
Hiss A. E. Downing, 
Hra. £. F. Eilert, 
Hn. Tamea Fellows, 
Hill Louise Henfcen, 
Miss Lillie F. Middendorf, 
Mrs. C Amund Miller, 
Miss Cecilia MoUer, 
Miss Lillian M oiler, 
Mrs. J. B. Remensnydcr, 
Mrs. Albert H. Stude^er, 
Mrs. Edw. Voege. 

MKXnODIST. 

Rev. Andrew Longscre, D.D., CfcoJrsMM, 

Rev. S. Parkea Cadman, D.D., ■ 

Rer. E. S. Tipple, D.D., 

D. E. Yamclt. M.D., 

William B. Millar, 

Mrs. J. M. Cornell, 

Mrs. Anderson Fowler. 

Mrs. J. Ednr Leajrcrart, 

Mrs. Ed. M. F. Miller. 

rXtSSYTtUAM. 

Rev. A. Woodnifl Halsey, D.D., Chaimm, 

Rev. A. J. Brown, D.D., 

Rev. Wiltoa Merle Smith, D.D., 

Rev. J. H. Tate, 



Allerton W. Kilbome, 
CoL John J. McCo^ 
William E. Stiger. Esq., 
Mrs. W. Barbour. 
Mrs. Fred A. Booth, 
Mrs. R. R. Booth. 
Mrs. Arthur J. Brown, 
Mrs. L. Duncan BulkJer> 
Miss A. L. Dennj, 
Miss A. M. Davison, 
Mrs. S. Derickson, 
Mrs. H. R. Elliot. 
Mrs. J. S. Kennedy, 
Mrs. Titus B. Mein, 
Mrs. Payson Merrill, 
Mrs. Theodore \^'eston. 

KZFOKMKD. 

Rev. Henry Evertson Cobb, Ckainm, 

Rev. J. Doliglass Adam, 

Rev. Joachim Elmendorf, D.D., 

Rev. John G. Fagg, 

Rev. H. A. Kinports, 

Rev. Donald Sage Mackay. D.D., 

Rev. Roderick Terry, D.D., 

Gerard Beekman, 

Mrs. William L. Brower* 

James G. Cannon, 

A. A. Raven. 



CunimiUo Ofk Serving 7cft 

Mrs. Lncien C. Warner, Ckainmam, Mrs. William G. King, 

Mrs. Arthur J. Brown. Mrs. John DeWiK Kno^ 

Miss Louise Henken, Mrs. J. Edgar Leaycnft, 

Mrs. William M. Isaacs, Mrs. Seabory C Maatick, 

Mrs. George Zabriskie. 

VUtatka of t&e Sick 
Mrs. C. Irving Fisher, ChmrmoM, Mrs. Howard Agnew Johnston, 

Hn. Robert Harris, Mrs. Theodore Weston, 

Alexander M. Hadden. 



WillUm B. Millar. 



Bofcaa of Infonnatioa 

D. E. Yamell. M.D., 
Hans P. Andersen. 



FINANCE OCXtSMITTEE 

Frederick B. Schenck, Esq., Ckairmait. 

William D. Murray, Stc'y. Arthur W. Miltrary, Au'l St^y. 

George Foster Peabody, Trtanrtr, 



R. Fulton Cutting, 
D. Stuart Dodge, 



VICk-CB AIRMEN. 



Charles A. Hull. 
John G. Jenkins, 
Charles A. Schieren. 



Frank Harvey Field, 
Charles M. Jesup, 
William H. Rowe, 
William Baldwin, 
Gerard Beekman, 
Archer Brown, 
John H. Converse, 
A. H. DeHaven, 
W. H. Doane, 
Ernest F. Eilert, 
Henry H. Hall, 
Darwin R. James, 
Robert Lawrence. 
William C. Low, 



BXXCUTTVa COUNCIL. 

John Seely Ward. Jr.. 
Lucien C. Warner, 
William Dulles, Jr. 
William McCarroll. 
William H. Nichols, 
W. H. Parsons. 
W. J. Schicffelin, 
Alden Speare. 
W. P. Stevenson. 
Gen. Wager Swayne, 
Henry N. Tifft, 
Spencer Trask, 
P. A. Welch. 
Momay Williama. 



FnncU Lonis SUde, 



HALL COMMITTEE 

John Seely Ward, Jr., Chmrmam, 



H. A. Kinports, 




W. Hcory Gnnt, 



ORGANIZATION 



TICKET COMMITTEE 

Willtain L>. Murraj-, Ckmrman. 

Henry N. Cobb. 
Marnay WUIlim*. 

EXHffilT COMMITTEE 



Rev. HktImi P. Bncb. Chatrmam, 

Mr>. HkrlMi P. Brach. 

Mis. W. M. Cwleton. 

Rev. F D. Gficn*. 

Rrr. W. I. Unvcn. IJ,D., 

Rer. lltttry I.iihtck. LL.D., 

R«v. W. D. Power*. D.D., 



Rev. W. M. Langdon, Sttrttary. 

Kcv. H. A. TupjitT, Jr., D.U., 

Fenntll P. Turner. 

Mr*. A. T. Twing. 

Mn. W. W. WhTlc. 

Luih«r I). Wtshotd. 

Mrs. Lutlier D. WUtaifd. 



Advraory Committee 

Rev- L. N. Cilty. Irving C. L«r. E»Q.. 

Prol. II. C. Cue, M.D.. WillUm D. Matnr. Eig., 

Rev. Grorgc K. l>aT, U.D.. I3can J. K. Kuwll, Ph.D., 

Hcv. J. S. Detini*. D.n., Mi*t F. E, Smith, 

Pro(. R. E. Dodge. Prof, GusUv Wartieck, Th-D., 

CcuTKc S. KeUogg, Emi.. Willtau K. Wilder, Etq., 

C. R. LangcnbachcT. Em. 



Keiids of Courti 

Mrs. A. T. Twlng. Ckoinmen. 
UJM C A. Ncwbold. AUsko. Indian*. Mm. W. M. Carlcton. 
Re». W. D- Powcts, D.D.. I^tin America, j. S. Stone, M.D., 
MiH Helia Haye» Ward. Oceania. Rtr. V. D. Greene, 

Mr*. A. F. Scbaufflcr, Japan— Form oaa. 
C C. Vinton. M.D., Korea. 

Un. W, J, Boon*. Chiaa. 



Burma— Asaam. 
India — Ceylon. 

Turkey— l*cr»»a. 
Mi»a M. C. Holme*. Syria— Egypt— Arabia. 
Mri. F. A. Ik>oth, Africa— Madagascar. 
Mr. Elliot Field, Ubrvy, 



PUBLICATION AND PRESS COMMITTEE 

Rev. E. M. Bliii. D.D.. CAdin-Li™. 

Rev, Henry Anil>c«. D.D,, Rev. I. T. Gracry. D.I>.. 

Rev. S. L. BaMviin, D.D., W. Htnry tiriinl. 

Thomas U. Cnnani. Kcv, S. M. Jsdtton, 

Rev. Henry N, Col>b, D.D.. Silas UcBee. 

Rev. John B. Devinii. Rev. F. M. North, D.D., 

RcT. J. B. Drury, D.Q., Talcott Wllliaias, 
HcwT R- Elliot, 



EDITORIAL COMMITTEE 

Rev. E. M. Bill*, D.D,. Chairmaa. 
Rev. T. T. Cracejr, D.I>., Samuel Macauley Jackson, 

\V. Henry Grunl. Silas McBce. 

EdHoriil Secretiria 

Rev. J. II. Lausblin. 
Rev. Albrrtus Pieters, 
Rev. T. S. Wynkoop, D.D. 



. T. L. Dearing. D.D.. 
. H. O. Dwighc, LL.D., 



Rev. 

Rev. ii. ^. .VT..«..L, a-»_^ 

Uiis E. Theodora Crosby, 



COMMITTEE ON STATISTICS 

Rev. Jame* S. iJcnnJs D.D., Cknirmai. 
H. K. Carroll, LL.D., Rev. E. M. BIim, D.D- 

W. Henry Grant, Rev. E. E. Strong, D.D, 



COMMITTEE ON POPULAR MEETINGS 



talin W, W-ood, Chairman. 
lev. T. T. Gracey. D.D. 
Rev, Jolm I- Dewing, D.D., 



Rev. A. W, Hftlsey, D.D,. 

W. Heorv Gmot. 

Mis* £. Tbeodora Croalqrt 



MUSICAL DIRECTORS 

George C Stcbbiiu, Ira D. Sinkcy. 



F. H. Jacobs 



VOLUNTEER ORGANISTS 



G, Warring Stcbblni, 
J. Sutpbin Bcoacb, 



Albert R. Nocton. 



Frederick W, Schlleder, 
Waller Feck Sianley* 



J 



3Ss OBGANIZATION 

PROGRAfiniE COMBHTTEE 

Rev. Tudsoa Smith, D.D., CkairmoK. 
Rer. S. L. Bkldwin. D.D.. Rev. J. F. Gaudier, D.D., 

Rev. Henry N. Cobb, D.D, W. Henry Gr*nt. 

Rev. T. S. Dennis, D.D., Rev. W. R. L«mbuth. D.D., 

Rer. F. F. Ellinwood, D.D., Rev. A. B. Leonard, D.D., 

Rev. J. T. Gracej, D.D., Rev. H. C Mabie. D.D. 

OCHyiMITTEES ON SPECIAL TOPICS 
Comltr and IKvtrioo ol Fkldi 

Rev. Alex. Sutherland, J>.Ti..CkairmaM, Robert E. Speer, 

Rev. WiUiam T. Smith, D.D., Rev. R. D. Lord. D.D. 

Frftictitional Vork 
Rev. J. F. Goneher, D.D., Chatrman, Fcnnell P. Turner, 

Kev. D. Stuart DodEc, D.D., Kcv. J. L~ Amemuin. 

Rev. D. Z. Sheffield, D.D., Fnok Uortoa McMurrr. Pb.D., 

Rev. Albertus Pielera. 

Mcdkal Vork 

Rev. R. C. Beebe, M.D., CkairmiM, E. W. Feet, M.D., 

W. W. Keen. M.D., T. H. McCartnev. M.D.. 

Stephen Smith, M.D., J. B. Busteed, H.D. 

EvangtUstic Vork 

Rev. A. B. Leonard, D.D., CJi<itn>i(i«, Rev. J. L. Barton. D.D., 

Rev. J. L. Dearing, D.D., Rev. J. H. Laughlin. 

Utenry Work 
Rev. J. S. Dennis, D.D., Chairmen, Rev. H. O. Dwight, LL.D. 

Self-Mpport 

Rev. W. R. Lambuth. D.D., Chairman, Rev. S. H. Chester, D.D.. 

Rev. S. I- Baldwin, D.D.. Rev. Henry N. Cobb, D.D., 

Rev. J. L. Barton, D.D., W. Henry Grant. 

Rev. T. S. Barbour. D.D., Ckairman, Rev. T. L. Dearing, D.D., 

Hon. S. B. Capen, LL.D., Rev. J. L. Barton, D.D. 

Noa-Cbrirtian Rdigiona 

Rev. F. F. Ellinwood, D.D., Rev. George W. Knox, D.D., 

Rev. H. O. Dwight. LL.D. 

Hioaic DtpartBunt 

Rev. H. C. Mabie, D.D., Chairman, Rev. C. U. Daniels, D.D., 

Rev. A. W. Halsey, D.D. 

SURVEY OF FIELDS 

Rev. J. T. Gracey, D.D., Ckairman. 
Rev. S. L. Baldwin, D.D., Rev. T. H. Laughlin, 

W. Henry Grant, Rev. Henry N. Cobb, D.D. 



C. C. Vinton, M.D.. 
Rev. T. M. McNair, 



Japaiif Korea 

Rev. T. L. Dearing, D.D., 

Rev. J. L. Amerman, D.D., 

Rev. Albertus Pietera, Rev. J. O. Spencer. 

R. C. Beebe, M.D., Rev. J. H. Laughlin, 

Rev. S. L. Baldwin, D.D., T. H. McCartney, M.D., 

Rev. C. F. Kupfer, Ph.D., Rev. A. S. Van Dyck, D.D. 

Aaanif Burma* Siasa 
Rev. F. P. Haggard, Mrs. Will M. Carleton, 

Mrs. Stanley K. Phraner. 

Bdta, Ceylon 

Rev. J. T. Gracey, D.D., Rev. J. E. Abbott, D.D., 

Mrs. B. H. Badley. Miss H. C. Davis, 

Rev. E. C. B. Haflam, Rev. T. S. Wynkoop, D.D., 

Mrs. John Gillespie, Miss C. L. Clarke, 

Mrs. G. H. Ferris, Rev. L. B. WoU. 

Oceaniat Hawaii, Philippinca 
R«T. T. L. Goliefc, D.D., Miss E. Theodora Crotby. 



ORGANIZATION" 383 

W€tUta AtU and Levant 

Rev. H. O. Dwight, LL.D., Rev. William Jcssup, 

Mifs M. C. Holmes. 



U: 



Africa 

Sanders, M.D., Rev. R. H. Nassau. D.D., 

A. B. Leonard. D.D., Rev. Orville Reid. 



North America* South America, Central 'America, Vest ^iei, Mexico 

Rev. G. W. Chamberlain. D.D., Miia C. M. Wood, 

Rev. J. Tajrlor Hamilton, Elliot Field. 

Hebrewt ia All Landi 

Rev. A. T. Pierson. D.D., Rev. J. T. Gracer, D.D. 

COMMITTEE ON DEVOTIONAL SERVICES 

Robert £. Speer, Chairman. 
Rev. M. M. Binford, Kev. A. S. Lloyd, D.D., 

Rev. D. T. Burrell, D.D., Miss E. D. McLaurin. 

Rev. F. M. Foster, Ph.D.. Rev. F. M. North. D.D., 

Mrs. C. L. Goodell, Rev. Stanley White. 

COMMITTEE ON STUDENTS AND YOUNG PEOPLE 

John R. Mptt, Chairman. 
Rev. E. E. Chivers, D.D., R. R. Doherty, 

Robert E. Speer, Rev. F. E. Clark, D.D., 

Rev. A. D. Mason, John W. Wood. 

VOMAN^ COMMITTEES 

General Committee 

Miss A. B. Child, Ckairman. 

Mrs. D.J. Burrell, Mrs. J. T. Gracey, 

Miss S. C. Durfce, Miss Mary Parsons. 

Btisinets Commit^c 

Mrs. A. F. Schauffler, Chairman, 
Mrs. R. A. Dorman, Mrs. George M. Hoplcini. 

Mrs. W. I. Haven, Mrs. A. T. Twing. 

SPXCIAL PROCBAUUB COUMITTXBS 

Educational Vorfc 

Miss Mary Parsons, Chairman. 
Mrs. S. L. Baldwin, Miss Frances Hawley, 

Mrs. D. J. Burrell, Miss E. C. Parsons, 

Mrs. G. B. Germond, Mrs. A. T. Twing, 

Miss Susan Hayes Ward. 

Literary WoA 

Miss S. C. Durfee, Chairman. 
Mrs. Joseph Cook, Mrs. H. G. Safford, 

Mrs. Alvah Hovey, Mrs. Judson Smith, 

Miss L. M. Hodgkins, Miss P. J. Walden. 

Medical Vo^ 

Mrs. J. F. Keen, Chairman. 
Mrs. W. W. BaiT, Mrs. C. A. Longstreth, 

Mrs. W. S. How, Mrs. G. E. Shoemaker, 

Mrs. Mat^ Jackson, Mrs. J. L. Sibole, 

Mrs. H. N. Tones, Miss S. E. Stoevcr, 

Mrs. J. M. Krieder, Mrs. A. L. Wainwright, 

Mrs. C. N, Thorpe. 

Young 'Women and Children 

Mrs. S. C. Trueheart, Chairman. 
Hrt. J. W. Childress, Mrs. T. B. Hargrove, 

Mn. J. M. Gaut. Mrs. W. E. Norvell, 

MiSB Emma Gary, Mrs. A. J. Wheeler. 



384 ORGANIZATION 

Blethodi of GMng 

Un. UoKs Smith, Chainmm. 

Mrs. A. L. Aaliler, Mrs. E. S. Hurlbert. 

Hr*. Lyman Baird, Hr>. W. S. JeSries, 

Mn. William BUir, Hfb. £. M. Jones, 

Mrs. N. W. Campbell. Mrs. S. A. Kelsejr, 

iin. F. Cbstwortby, Mrs. G. H. Laflin, 

Urs. Jesse Cox, Mr*. M. S. Lamcraux, 

Mrs. F. P. Cranston, Mm. E. K. Macer, 

Mrs. E. W. Darst. Mrs. W. E. Quine. 

Mrs. S. J. Gamertsfelder, Mrs. G. W. Singlinger. 

Mrs. G. A. Harcourt, Mrs. J. H. O. Smith, 

Mrs. O, H. Hortoo, Mrs. G. B. WiUcox. 

EvufcHitic Vork 

Mrs. E. S. Stracban, Chairman. 

Miss Jane Buchan, Mrs. Nasmith, 

Miss Dickson, Miss Palmer, 

Mrs. Duncan, Mrs. W. £. Rosa. 

Mrs. Manning. Mrs. S. E. Smith, 

Mrs. McEwen, Miss Watson, 

Mr*. McQneston, Mrs. G. WrigbL 




A A 

A B C F M 



ABMU 



ABS 

A F B F M 

AI 

AIM 

AME 

AM£Z 



ARS 
ATS 



144 Hancock St., Boston, Ma<i<i. 
American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, 
14 Beacon St., Boston, Mass. 
Woman's Uoard of Fortign Missions, 

14 Bciicon St., Boston. Mass. 
Woman's Board of Missions of the Interior, 

59 Dearborn Sl. Chicago, III. 
Womar's Board of Missions for the Pacific, 
Y. M. C. A. Building, San Francisco, Cal. 
American Baptist Missionary Union, 

Trcmont Temple, Boiilon. Mass. 
Woman'-s Baptist Foreign Missionary Society, 

Tremant Temple, Boston, Ma«. 
Woman's Baptist Missionary Society of the West, 

'535 Masonic Temple, Chicago. HI. 
Woman s Baptist Foreign Missionary Society of California, 

31 Glen Park Ave., San Francisco. Cal. 
Woman's Baptist Foreign Missionary Society of Oregon, 

Oregon City, Ore. 
Woman's Baptist Foreign Missionary Society of Manitoba 
and Northwest Territories, 

17Q Pacific Ave., Winnipeg, Man. 
American Bible Socictj. 

Bible Houst. New York, N. Y. 
American Friends' Board of Foreign Missions, 
a6l Greene Ave.. Brooklyn. N. Y. 
Woman's Foreign Missionary Union of Friends in America, 
Center Valley, Ind. 
Africa Industrial Mission, 

17 Walmcr Road, Toronto, Can. 
Africa Inl.ind Mission, 

ifiCi Broad St.. Philadelphia, Pa. 
African Methodist P-piscopal Cnurch. 

6r Bible House. New York. N. Y. 
African Methodist Episcopal Mite Society, 
aooa Diamond St!, Philadelphia, Pa. 
African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, Home and Foreign 
Missionary Society, 

Birmingham, Ala. 
Woman's Home and Foreign Society, African Methodist 
Episcopal Zion Church, 
New Berne, N. C. 
Associate Reformed Synod of the South, Board of Foreign 
Missions, 

Due West, S. C. 
American Tract Society, 

150 Nassau St., New York, N. Y. 



I 



386 BOARDS AND SOCIETIES 

United Statei and CaaadA.—C<mtiHiuJ 

BMP Baptist Convention of Maritime ProTinces, Foreign Mission 

Board, 

178 Wentworth St., St. John, N. B. 
Woman's Baptist Missionary Union, Maritime Provinces. 
178 Wentworth St., St. John, N. B. 
B O Q Baptist Convention ol Ontario and Quebec, Foreign Mission 

Board, 

523 Euclid Ave., Toronto, Can. 
Woman's Baptist Foreign Missionary Society, Ontaric^ 

165 Bloor St., East, Toronto, Can. 
Woman's Baptist Foreign Missionary Society, of Eastern 
Ontario and Quebec, 
350 Oliver Sl, Westmount, Quebec. 
C C M A Canadian Church Missionary Association, in connection with 
the Church Missionary Society. 

67 Confederation Life Building, Toronto, Can. 
C C F M S Canada Congregational Foreign Missionary Society, 
2367 St. Catherine St.. Montreal. Can. 
Canada Cringregalional Woman's Board of Missions, 
207 Bloor St., East. Toronto, Can. 
C I M China Inland Mission (Council for North America), 

507 Church St., Toronto, Can. 
CA Christian and Missionary Alliance, 

690 Eighth Ave., New York, N. Y. 
C P Cumberland Presbyterian Board of Missions and Church Erec- 

tion, 

Holland Building, St. Louis, Mo. 
Woman's Board of Missions, Cumberland Presbyterian 
Church, 
Y. M. C. A. Building, Evansville, Ind. 
E A Evangelical Association, Missionary Society, 

237 West Eleventh St.. Erie. Pa. 
Woman's Missionary Society, Evangelical Association. 
326 East Fifth St., Waterloo. Iowa. 
E LG S Evangelical Lutheran Church (General Synod), Board of For- 

eign Missions, 

loot; Lanvale St.. Baltimore. Md. 
Woman's Home and Foreign Missionary Society of the 
Evangelical Lutheran Church, 
406 North Greene St., Baltimore, Md. 
ELUS Evangelical Lutheran Church. South (United Synod), Board 

of Foreign Missions and Church Extension. 
376 Spring St., Atlanta, Ga. 
E L G C Evangelical Lutheran Church of North America (General 

Council), Board of Foreign Missions, 

137 West School Lane, Philadelphia, Pa. 
FCMS Foreign Christian Missionary Society (Disciples of Christ), 

P. O. Box 884, Cincinnati. Ohio. 
Christian Woman's Board of Missions (C. W. B. M.), 
Indianapolis, Ind. 
F S S A Foreign S'lnday-School Association, 

525 Clinton Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y. 
F M Free Methodist Church of North America, General Missionary 

Board, 

14 and 16 North May St., Chicago, 111. 
Woman's Foreign Missionary Society of the Free Meth- 
odist Church, 
18 Lathrop St., New Castle, Pa. 
F B CJeneral Conference of Free Baptists, 

Auburn, R. I. 
Free Baptist Woman's Missionary Society, 
Alton. N. H. 



BOARDS AND SOCIETIES 



387 



UuiUd States and Cuudz.—C<>tttimii^ 
GES 



\ 



HNLS 
LFC 

Men 

MCC 
ME 

M ES 

MP 

MBCC 

Mor 

NBC 

PAL 
P 



PS 
PC 



German ICvangcIica! Synod of North America, 
igjo G St . N. W . Washington. D. C. 
HaughcR Norwc^nn Lutheran Synod's China Mission, 

ayS William St., St. Paul. Minn. 
Lutheran Board of Missions (Free Church), 

Augsburg Seminary. MtnnpapoUs. Minn. 
Mt-nnoniic Mission Board (General Conference of North 
Anicrira), 

Qiiakcrlown. Pa. 
Methodist Church, Canada. Depanment of Missions, 
X^ Richmond St., West, Toronto, Can. 
Wonwm's Missionary Society, Methodist Church, Canada, 
163. HiiKhson St., North. Hamilton. Ontario, 
Methodist Episcopal Church Missionary Society, 
150 I'iith Ave.. New York, N. Y. 
Woman's Foreign Missionary Society, Methodist Epis- 
copal Chnrch, 
ISO Fifth Ave.. New Vnrk. N, Y. 
Methodist Episcopal Church, Mi«ion.ir>- Socicty. 
346 Public Square. Nashville. Tcnn. 
Woman's Foreign Missionary Society, Methodist Epis- 
copal Church, South, 

Box 405. Nashville, Tcnn. 
Methodist Protestant Church Hoard of Foreign Missions, 
Summcrticld, N. C. 
Woman's Foreign Missionary Society, Methodist Prot- 
estant Church. 
802 North Seventh Si., Kansas City, Mo. 
Mission Board of the Christian Church, 

Dayton, Ohio. 
Moravian Church Mission Board, 

Bethlehem. Pa. 
National Baptist Convention. Foreipn Mission Board, 

547 Third St.. Louisvillt-. Ky. 
Phi]-.\frican Liberators' League. 

United Charities BuiUhng. New York, N. Y. 
Presbyterian Church in the United States of America, Board 
of Foreign Missions, 

156 Fifth Ave.. New York, N. Y. 
Woman's Board of Foreign Missions, Presbyterian Church 
in the United States of America, 
156 Fifth Ave.. New York, N. Y. 
Woman's Foreign Missionary Society, Presbyterian 
Church in the llnitcd States of .'\merica. 
501 Witherspoon Builrling, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Woman's Presbyterian Board of Missions of the North- 
west, 
4S McCormick Block, Chicago, III. 
Woman's Presbyterian Board of Missions of the Southwest, 

1516 Locust St.. St. Louis. Mo. 
Woman's Occidental Board oi Foreign Missions, 

gjo Sacramento St.. San Francisco, Cal. 
Woman's North Pacific Board of Missions, 

337 Wheeler St.. Portland, Ore. 
Woman's Presbyterian Missionary Society of Northern 
New York. 
78 First St.. Troy. N. Y. 
Presbyterian Chtirch in the United States (South), 
Executive Committee for Foreign Missions, 
Nashville. Tcnn. 
Presbyterian Church in Canada, Foreign Missionary Committee 
(Eastern Division). 
Halifax. N. S. 




388 



BOARDS AND SOCIKTIES 



United SUUs uul Can ada .—Continued 

Woman's Foreign Missionary Society, Presbyterian Church 
in Canada CEastern Division), 
3 FawBon St., Halifax, N. S. 
P C Presbyterian Church in Canada, Foreign Missionary Cotnniittee 

(Western Division), 

8g Coiifedcratian Life Building. Toronto, Can. 
Woman's Foreign Mis.'iionary Society, Presbyterian Church 
in Canada (Western Division), 

220 Richmond St., West. Toronto. Can. 
P M Primitive Methodist Church in the United States of Americir 

47 Oakland St.. Brooklj-n, N. Y. 
PE Protestant Episcopal Church in the United States of America, 

{Domestic and Foreign Missionary Society, 
American Church Missionary Society, 
Church Missions House, New York, N. Y. 
Womain's Auxiliary. 

Church Missions Hou.w, New York. N. Y. 
RCA Reformed Church in America, Board of Foreign Missions, 

25 East Twenty-second St.. New York, N. Y. 
Woman's Board of Foreign Missions, Reformed Church 
in America, 
25 East Twenty-second St., New York. N. Y. 
R C U S Reformed Church in the United States, Board oi Commissioo- 

crs for Foreign Missions. 
Mechanicsbiirg, Pa. 
Woman's Missionary Society. Reformed Charch, U. S. 
Tiffin, Ohio. 
RE Reformed Episcopal Church. Board of Foreign Missions, 

1617 D.aiiph!n St., Philadelphia, Pa. 
Woman's Foreign Mis.sianary Society, Reformed Episco- 
pal Church, 
2ic6 Chestnut St., Philadelphia. Pa. 
R P Reformed Presbyterian Church (Covenanter), Board of Foreign 

Missions, 

325 West Fifty-sixth St., New York. N. Y. 
R P S Reformed Presbyterian Church in North America. 

(General Synod), Board of Foreign Mission.s, 
2102 Spring Garden St., Philadelphia. Pa. 
SDA Seventh Day Advcnlists. l-'oreign Mission Board. 

Rooms 1905-7, 150 Nassau St.. New York. N. Y. 
S D B Seventh Day Baptist General Conference, Missionary Society, 

Westerly, R. I. 
Wom-tn's Exccu:ive Board, Seventh Day Baptist General 
Confrrcncc. 
Milton. Rock Co., Wis. 
SBC Southern Baptist Convention. Foreign Mission Board, 

1103 Main St., Richmond. Va. 
Woman's Missionary Union, Southern Baptist Convention, 
304 North Howard St., Baltimore, Mu. 
SEM Southern Evangelical Mission, 

8 Simpson Ave., Toronto, Can. 
S V M Student Volunteer Movement for Foreign Missions, 

3 West Twenty-ninth St., New York, N. Y. 
SEMC Swedish Evangelical Mission Covenant of America. 

Station Winneniore. Chicago. If). 
U B United Brethren in Christ, Home, Frontier, and Foreign Mis- 

sionary Society, 

D,tyton. Ohio. 
Woman's Missionary Association, United Brethren in 
Christ. 
Dayton. Ohio. 
U D E L United Danish EvangcTical Lutheran Church in America, 
Beresford, S. Dak. 




BOARDS AND SOCIETIES 389 

UttltEd StatM *ad CuaO^— Continued 

U £ United Evangelical Church Board of Missions, 

York, Pa. 
Woman's Board of Missions, United Evangelical Church, 
York, Pa. 
U N United Norwegian Church of North America, 

Austin, Minn. 
U P United Presbyterian Church of North America, Board of For- 

eign Missions, 

1425 Christian St., Philadelphia, Pa. 
Woman's General Missionary Society, United Presbyterian 
Church of North America, 
Boston, Pa. 
W M C A Wesleyan Methodist Connection of America, Missionary So- 
ciety, 

314 East Onondaga St., Syracuse, N. Y. 
W U Woman's Union Missionary Society of America for Heathen 

Lands, 

67 Bible House, New York. N. Y. 
Y M C A Young Men's Christian Associations, International Committee 
(Foreign Department), 

3 West Twenty-ninth St.. New York, N. Y. 
YWCA Young Woman's Christian Associations (World's Committee), 
Champlain Building, Chicago, III. 

GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND 

B M S Baptist Missionary Society, 

19 Furnival St., Holborn, London, E. C. 
B Z M Baptist Zenana Mission, 

5 Ellcrdale Road, Hampstead, London, N. W. 
B Brethren, 

Bath, England. 
B F B S British and Foreign Bible Society, 

146 Queen Victoria St., London, E. C. 
B S J British Society for the Propagation of the Gospel among the 

Jews, 

96 Great Russell St., Bloomsbury, London, W. C. 
C I M China Inland Mission, 

Newington Green. London, N. 
C L S I Christian Literature Society for India, 

7 Adams St., Strand, London. 
C E Z M S Church o! England Zenana Missionary Society, 

Lonsdale Chambers, 27 Chancery Lane, London, E. C. 
CMS Church Missionary Society, 

Salisbury Sq., London. E. C. 
C S F M Church of Scotland Foreign Mission Committee, 

22 Queen St., Edinburgh. 
Woman's Association for Foreign Missions, Church of 
Scotland, 

22 Queen St., Edinburgh. 
C S Colonial Missionary Society, 

22 Memorial Hall, Farringdon St., London, E. C. 
EMMS Edinburgh Medical Missionary Society, 

56 George Sq., Edinburgh. 
PCS Free Church of Scotland Foreign Mission Committee, 

15 North Bank St., Edinburgh. 
Woman's Foreign Missionary Society, Free Church of 
Scotland, 

15 North Bank St., Edinburgh. 
F F M A Friends' Foreign Mission Association, 

IS Devonshire St., Bishopsgate, London, E. C. 
H B Help for Brazil, 

Camp Verde, Tipperbin Road, Edinburgh. 



390 BOARDS AND SOCIETIES 

Gteat BriU&i and Itdas^—CcntimtieJ 

I C P M Indian and Colonial Protestant Mission, 

* 39 Warwick Lane, Paternoster Row, London, E. C 

KIM Kurku and Central Indian Hill Mission, 

lo Drayton Park, Highbury. London, N. 
L K S Ladies' Kaffrarian Society (U. P. Church), 

I South Park Terrace, Glasgow. 
L M C Livingstone Medical College. 

33 Hamfrith Road. Stratford, E. 
L M S London Missionary Society. 

14 Blomfield St, London, E. C. 
M L I Mission to Lepers in India and the East, 

17 Greenhill PI., Edinburgh. 
N B S National Bible Society of Scotland, 

224 West George St., Glasgow. 
N A M North Africa Mission, 

21 Linton Road. Barking. London. 

P C E Presbyterian Church of England, Foreign Missions Committee, 

New Bamet, London. 
PCI Presbyterian Church of Ireland. Foreign Mission, 

119 University St., Belfast. 
P M M S Primitive Methodist Missionary Society, 

71 Freegrove Road. Halloway, London, N. 
R B M U " Regions Beyond " Missionary Union, 

Harley House. Bow, London, E. 
R T S Religious Tract Society, 

56 Paternoster Row, London, E. C. 
SAMS South American Missionary Society, 

1 Cliffords Inn, Fleet St.. London, E. C. 
S V M U Student Volunteer Missionary Union, 

22 Warwick Lane, London, E. C. 

U M F C United Methodist Free Churches Home and Foreign Missions, 

Glenholme. Harehills Lane. Leeds. 
U P C S United Presbyterian Church of Scotland Foreign Missions, 

College Buildings. Castle Terrace, Edinburgh. 
U P Z United Presbyterian Zenana Mission, 

College Buildings, Castle Terrace, Edinburgh. 
WMS Wesleyan Missionary Society. 

17 Bishopsgate St., Within, London. 
Woman's Wesieyan Missionary Society, 

17 Bishopsgate St., Within. London. 
ZBM Zenana Bible and Medical Mission, 

2 Adclphi Terrace, Strand, London, W. C. 

GERMANY 

A E P M AUgemeiner Evangelisch-Protestantischer Missionsverein, 
(General Evangelical -Protestant Missionary Society,) 
Friedrichsgracht 53. Berlin. 
BMG Berliner Evangeiische Missions-Gcsellschaft, 

(Berlin Evangelical Missionary Society.) 

Berlin No. 43, Georgenkirchstr. 70. 
B F Berliner Frauenverein fiir China, 

(Berlin Women's Society for China,) 
Berlin. 
EHUD Evangclische Briider-Unitat in Dentschland, 

(Evangelical United-Brethren in Germany,) 
Berthclsdorf bei Herrnhut. 
ELM Evangelische Lutherische Mission, 

(Evangelical Lutheran Mission,) 
Carolinenstr. 19, Leipzig. 
E M D O Evangelische Missions-Gesellschaft fur Deutsch-Ostafrika, 
(Evangelical Missionary Society for German East Africa,) 
Schaperstr. 3, Berlin. 



BOARDS AND SOCIETIES 391 

Gcrmuiy. — Omtintud 

F V B Frauen-Verein fur christliche Bildung des weiblichen Gesch- 

lechtes im Morgcrlande, 
(Women's Society for the Christian Education of Women in 
the East,) 

Berlin. 
G B M Gesellschaft zur Befrirderung der Evangelischen Missionen 

unter den Heiden, 
(Society for the Furtherance of Evangehcal Missions among 
the Heathen,) 

Georgenkirchstr. 70, Berlin. 
G M G Gossnersche Missions- Gesellschaft, 

(Gossner Missionary Society,) 
Berlin. 
H M G Hermannsburger Missions- Gesellschaft, 

(Hermannsburg Missionary Society.) 
Hermannsburg. 
K M G Komit^ der Evangelischen Missions-Gesellschaft, 

(Committee of the Evangelical Missionary Society.) 
Basel (Switzerland). 
L M G Leipziger Missions-Gcpellschaft, 

(Leipsic Missionary Society,) 
Leipsic, 
M G B Mission.^-Gesellschaft der Deutschen Baptisten, 

(Missionary Society of the German Baptists,) 
Emdener Strasse 15, Berlin. 
N M I Neukirchener Missions-Gesellschaft, 

(New Church Missionary Society,) 
Moers, Rhenish Prussia. 
N M G Norddeutsche Missions-Gesellschaft, 

(North German Missionary Society,) 
Bremen. 
R M Rheinische Missions-Gesellschaft, 

(Rhenish Missionary Society,) 
Barmen. 

FRANCE 

S M E Society des Missions Evangeliques chez les peuples non- 

Chretiens, etablie i Paris (commonly called Societe des Mis- 
sions fivangeliqnes de Paris), 
(Evangelical Missionary Society of Paris.) 
102 Boulevard Arago, Paris, France. 

STPITZERLAND 

M R Mission des Eglises Librcs de la Suisse Romande, 

(Mission Board of Free Churches of the French Switzerland.) 
Lausanne, Switzerland. 
PAC Pilgermissions, de St. Chrischona, 

(Pilgrim Missionary Society of St. Chrischona,) 
St. Chrischona, bei Basel. 

NETHERLANDS 

C S D Centraal-Comite voor het Seminarie te Depok. 

(Central Committee for the Seminary at Depok,) 
Haarlem. 
D Z V Doopsgezinde Zendingsvereeniging, 

(Baptist Missionary Society,) 
Amsterdam. 
E Z Ermeloosche Zendingsgemeente. 

(Ermelo Missionary Congregation,) 
Ermelos, 



39' BOARDS AND SOCIETIES 

Netherlandi* — Continutd 

N H R Z Nederlandsche Hulpvereeniging voor de Rijnsche Zending, 
(Dutch Auxiliary Society oT the Rhenish Mission, Barmen,) 
Amsterdam. 
H S Z Hulpvereeniging voor de Salatiga-Zending, 

(Auxiliary Society to the Salatiga Mission,) 
Utrecht. 
H Z B Hulpgenootschap voor de Zending der Broedergemeente, 

(Auxiliary Society for the Moravian Mission,) 
Zeist. 
J C Java-Comit6, 

Amsterdam. 
N B Nedcrlandsch Bijbelgenootschap, 

(Dutch Bible Society,) 
Amsterdam. 
L G Luthcrsch Genootschap voor In en Uitwendige Zending, 

(Lutheran Society for Home and Foreign Missions,) 
Amsterdam. 
N Z Nederlandsche Zendingsvereeniging, 

(Dutch Missionary Union.) 
Rotterdam. 
N Z G Nederlandsch Zendelinggcnootschap, 

(Dutch Missionary Society,) 
Rotterdam. 
S V E Studenten-Zendingsvereeniging " Eltheto," 

(Student Missionary Society " Eltheto,") 
Utrecht 
U Z V Utrechtsche Zendingsvereeniging, 

(Utrecht Missionary Society,) 
Utrecht 

NORWAY 

D N M Det Norske Missionsselskab, 

(Norwegian Missionary Society,) 
Stavanger. 
F Finnemissionen, 

(Norwegian Mission among the Finns,) 
Tromso. 
N L K Det Norsk Lutherske Kinamissionsforbund, 

(Norwegian Lutheran China Mission Association,) 
Framnes, Norheimsund. 
I M Israels Missionen, 

(Mission for Israel,) 
Kristiania. 



SWEDEN 

EPS Evangeliska Fosterlands Stiftelsen, 

(Evangelical National Society,) 
Johanneiund. Stockholm. 
K S Kristliga Studentvarldsforbundet, 

(World's Student Christian Federation,) 

Stockholm. 

S M Svenska Missionssalsskapet, 

(Swedish Mission Society,) 

Stockholm. 

S M E Svenska Missionsforbundets Expedition, 

(Swedish Mission Union,) 

Hollandaregatan 27, Stockholm. 
S M K Svenska Missionen i Kina, 

(Swedish Mission in China,) 

Lastmakaregatan 30, Stockholm. 



BOA&DS AND SOCX£TI£S 393 

FINLAND 

S K Suomen IShetys Kunassa, 

(Finland China Mission,) 
HeUingfors. 
S Suomen IShctysseura, 

(Finland Missionary Society,) 

14 Hafsgatan, Helsingfors. 
S M £ Suomen Metodisti-episkopaalinen IShctys, 

(Methodist Episcopal Finland Mission,) 
Helsingrfors. 
S M Suomen MerimieslShetys, 

(Finnish Mission to Seamen,) 
Helsingfors. 

DENMARK 

B D Bibelselskabet for Danmark. 

(Danish Bible Society.) 
D M Det danske, Missionsselskab, 

(Danish Missionary Society,) 
Fredericia. 
L M Loeventhals Mission, 

Nakskoo. 
DIM Dansk Israels Mission, 

(Danish Mission for Israel,) 
Roeskilde. 
D S M Dansk Santa! Mission, 

(Danish Santa! Mission,) 

70 Bredgade, Copenhagen. 

INDIA 

SIM South Indian Missionary Association, 

Karur, Coimbatore District, S. I. 

CHINA 

S D C K Society for the Diffusion of Christian and General Knowledge 

among the Chinese, 
Shanghai. 

AUSTRALIA 

C M A Church Missionarv Association, 

The Block, Melbourne. 
L M S London Missionary Society, 

25 a Beckett St., Kew, Victoria. 
P C Q Presbyterian Church of Queensland, 

" The Manse," South Brisbane, Q. 
Presbyterian Woman's Missionary Union of Queensland, 
^^ George St., Brisbane, Q. 
P C S A PVesbyterian Church of South Australia, Foreign Mission Com- 

mittee, 

Adelaide. 
P C V Presbyterian Church of Victoria, 

West Melbourne, V. 
Presbyterian Woman's Missionary Union of Victoria, 
Fitzroy St., St. Kilda. V. 
P N S W Presbyterian Church of New South Wales, 
Woolahra, Sydney. 
Woman's Missionary Association, Presbyterian Church, 
New South Wales. 
Ardler, Ashficld. 



394 bOARDS AND SOCIETIES 

NEV ZEALAND 

B N 2 New Zealand Baptist Missionary Society, 

Dunedin. 
P C N Z Presbyterian Church of New Zealand, 

Leeston. 
P C O S Presbyterian Church of Otago and Southland, 

Roslyn, Dunedin. 

HAWAn 

H E A Hawaiian Evangelical Association, 

Honolulu. H. r. 
Woman's Board of Missions for the Pacific Islands, 
Honolulu, H. I. 

VESTINDIES 

J B S Jamaica Baptist Missionary Society, 

Jamaica, West Indies. 



Members of the Conference 

(lOT*: Tbe fcltowing abbmlations are uaed in Itiio liM.— C ComiDtitfes. HD Ilononnr 
Dckgati^. H M Hononry Hcnbcci- 1 Indcpcodcct. S SpejJccr*. * Retired. For 

DELEGATES AND MISSIONARIES 




Abbott. MiM A.. IndiA A ft C F M 

Abbott. Bev- J. E-. Ifidl« A B C F M 

Abbott, Rev. C. Brooklyn. N. Y.. A IJ C F M 
Aberly. Rev. J.. Ind>ii E L C S 

Adam, Kcv. J. 1)., tltimktyr. N. Y. L 

Adam», Kev. B. M.. llciltct. Cona , U £ 
Adams, fCcv. U. C, S«n Francitco, Cal. 

A B C F M 
Agar. Rev. C. H-iUnnsville. W. Va. H D 
Aiken, Rev. £. £.. Clima A B C F M 

■AinslM. Mrs. J. A.. PcrtU P 

Ainslie, Kev. P.. liatiiniurc, Md. FCMS 
Airuwonh, Rev. W. N., Dublin, (;«. M ES 
Ainsworlh. Mr». W. X., Dublin. G». M E S 
Alby, MiM L.. Korea PS 

AWerson, Rev. E. W.. Bowie, Tp«.. M ES 
AlcxAHder. A.. New York, X Y. R P 

Akxander. Mr». A. J., Vcrwiilki. Ky., PS 
AlcMDdcr, Mrs. E. A.. Kirkwood. Mo. 

H M 
Alexander. Rev. C. New York, N. Y., P 
Alcunder. Hev. J. A., W«hington, 

D- C. H D 

Alexande^r. Rev. I. R.. Egypt U P 

'Allan. Mr*. E. M.. Airica A I 

•An™. Rev. H. a.. Turkey AECKM 
Allen. Mi»a I.. B.. FJiMtwik N. J. P 

Allen, Mr». M. A.. I^ndoii. Ena. F F M A 
AUen. Miss M. C Hrrkimtr. N. Y. M E 
•Allen. Rev. O. P.. Turkey ABCFM 
Allen. Rev. W. II., Philadelphia, Pa. H E 
AKea. Mr*. W. H.. Philadelphia, Pa. K E 
All«T». Miss E., New York C 

Alliion. D.. Sackvilte, N. R. M C C 

AUo|), Mrs. M. S.. Ilaverford. Pa- ^, 

A F B F M 
AIsop. Rev. R. F. Rrooklyn, N. Y. P E 
•Alway. Mis* H.. India A B M l> 

•Amerman, Rev. J. L.. Japan •* J; * 

•Amerman. Mrs. J. U. Jaiian R C A 

Amtnal, S,. India . „ *: *! 

Andcwi. W. K.. Bo«ton. Mass. A B M u 
AiHlerson. Rev, F. U, Kochc.ter. N. Y. 

A U M U 
Anderson. F. W.. Toronto. Can, H IJ 

Anderson, H. P., New York. N Y. S \ M 
Anderson. Rev. J. A., Pine UIulT. Atk. 

M E S 
Anderson, Rev. R.. Brooklyn. N. Y. C 
Anderson, Rev. T. D., Providence. K. I 

A B M U 
Anderson. Mrs. W.. Brooklyn. N. Y.. M E 
Andervon, Rev. W. F.. Sing Sing. N. Y 

Anderioo. Mn. W. H.. Holly Springs, ^ 
Miss. F S 

Atdrrson, Rev. W. M.. PhiUdelphia, 

Pa. UP 

Anderson, W. S.. Mt. Vemnn. N. Y., M E 
Anderson, Mrs. W. S.. Mt, Vernon. _ 
N. Y. M E 

Anderson, Rev. W. T.. India U P 

Andrew*. Rev. E- C. New York M E 

Andrews. Misa IT.. Marionville, I«. M E 
Angell, Pres. J. B., Ann Arbor, Micb. 

no 



Atif-iice, Rev. H., Philadelphia, Pa, PE 
Aoki, Kev. C. Japan HD 

Applegarth, Rev. H. C, Cambridge, 

Ma>.s. a B M U 

Arbucklc, krv. J. C. Cotiimbus, O. ME 
Archibald. Kev. J. C., India BMP 

Archibald. Mrs. 1. C. India BMP 

Archibald. Kev. S. H.. Jiclland. Vt. 

ABUU 
Armour, Mrs. \V. 11.. Holly Simnfis. 

MiM. PS 

Armsilrung, Mis. £. C, Center Valley, 

Ind. A F B F M 

Arm»tJ-ong. Mr*. W. P.. Burma A B M U 
.\mold. Mis. G. J., I'ruvidciice, K. I. P E 
Arhley, .Mn. A. L., Chicago, IIL C 

Ashmore, Rev. W.. China A B M U 

Ash more. Mrs. W., China A B M U 

Akhmore. Jr.. Rev. W.. China A B M U 
Ashinore. Jr.. Mrs. W., China A B M U 
Atkins, Mrs. E. C. Indianapolis, Ind. 

ABMU 
Alkins. Rev. J.. Nashville. Tenn. M E S 
Alkinkon. Mrs. A. M., Wabash, Ind. 

C W B M 
Atkinson. Rev. C. D.. New Orleans. 

l->. M E S 

Allcrliury. Rev. W. W-, New Yorit, A B S 
Alwaler. Krv. A, E., Uarrr, Vl. M E 

Avison. >l D.. O. R., Korea P 

Avi»oii, Mr*. O R.. Korea P 

AxelsMH. Hev. I., New York SEUC 

Axtell, M»s M. B.. Braill P 

Aycr, A. A.. Montreal. Can. 11 V P 

Avers. Mr*. W. S.. China SBC 

Ayle-stkorlh. Rev. R. M.. Jcrtey City M E 
Bjhcuck. Rev. M. »,. New York. N. Y.. P 
H.iM.n, A. S,. Brooklyn, N, Y. C 

LiAcon. F. Dronjcville. N. Y. R C A 

*U.t(tley. Mrs. B. H.. India M E 

Raer. J- W., Boston. .Mau. II D 

nailey. Mrs. C, Siam P 

Kailev. J. W.. Kalcigh. N. C. il !> 

Baird. Mt.s E. C, India A F B F M 

JIaird, Mrs. L. Chicaao. IIL C 

B-ilrd. Rev. W. M., Korea P 

n.iird. Mrs. W, M.. Korea P 

Baker, Rev. E- E.. Oeveland. O. P 

Baker. E. 11.. Greenwich. Conn. ABCFM 
Baker. Hev. C D., Pliiladelphia. Pa. P 

Baker, Mrs. M. E., Minneapolis, Atinn. 

AR M U 
Baker. Rev. S., Portl-ind. Me. A B C V M 
Baker. Rrv. W. E . Clrvcland. O, H IJ 
Baldwin, Rev. C C Chfna ABCFM 
Baldwin. Rev. C, W.. Ilaltimore. Md.. M E 
Baldwin, Vr«. C. W., Baltimore. Md.. M E 
B,aMwin. M D.. H. R., New Brtinswick. 

N, F, H M 

Baldwin. Re.-. J. A. Charlolte. N. C M E S 
Baldwin. Rev. J. M.. Japan CCMA 

Baldwin, R. Baltimore. Md, ME 

Baldwin. Rfv. S. U. New York. N. V. C 
Baldwin, >trs. S. L.. Brooklyn. N. V. C 
Baldwin. W.. New York. N. Y. M K 

Ballantlnc. Mrs. W. O.. India ABCFM 



A 



39* 



MEMBERS OF THE CONFERENCE 



BtDCf. Mri. C. II., Philadctpbia. P«. 

ABMU 
B^nninga. J. J.. lloiUnd, Mich. H D 

Bnrljcr, Mi*t A. S., Srrva P 

Barber. Mri. S. W.. St. Louii. Mo. W U 
Barber. Scv. W. T. A., London. Enu. 

VV M M S 
Barliour. R«t. T. S., Boston, Ms»t. ABMU 
Barbour. Mrs, T. S.. Boxon. Mass. ABMU 
Bftrbonr. Mr^ W% New York. .N. Y. C 
Biirclar. Rev. T., Glugow. Scoi. ETC 
Barclay. Mrs. T., Glasgow, Scot. E l> C 
Barcus^ Rrv. E. R.. Wm, Tex. M E 8 
Bard. S. M.. HarrUhurg, i**- H D 

Bardeo, Mih M. C. E.. Eroolclyn. X. V., C 
Uarctt, Mr*. G. F., Canal Winchester. 

O. R C U S 

Barker, O. A., Taunton. Klai*. ABMU 
Barklcy. D. G.. B«lfa>t. Ireland I V C 

BarUey, Rev. I. IS.. DeUuil. Mich. P 

Barnes, Re». C. W.. Spnngfiel.l, O- M E 
Barnci. Mrs. C. VV., Sprinf8rtd, O. M E 
Barnci. Miss I. H.. London, Etig. CEZ 
Barnes, Rev. L. C, Pittiburg, Pa. 

ABMU 
Barr. Rev. W. W.. Philadelphia. Pa U P 
Barr. Jin. W. W.. Philadelphia, Pa. C 

Barrett, Miss E., Rochester, N. Y. 

ABMU 
Barrett. T., Slam S 

Barrett, Rev. f. P.. Norfolk. Va.. M B C C 
Barrett, Bev. R. N., Waxahalchie. Tex. 

SRC 
Barrowi, Rev. J. H.. Oberlin. O., A BC K M 
Barrow*. .Mr*. J. H.. Oberlin. O., A BC F M 
Burruws, Mist S. U.. Burma ABMU 

Bartlctl. Mr*. D. K.. Albany. N. Y. W U 
'Barton, Rev. J. L., Boston, .Ma». 

A BCFM 
Barton, O. G.. New York. NY. P E 

Barton, Rev. W. E, Oak Park. III. 

A BCFM 
Barton. Mr. W. E., Oak Park, 111. 

A B C F M 
Barion. Kcv. W. H.. Nrw York. N. Y. M E 
BaikcrvilLc, Mi» A. K. India BOQ 

•Bascre. Mr*. N. P., Japan W 

Batselt. Rev. A. B., Ware, Ma«». 

A B C F M 

oni. Bpy 



B««tow, Rev. J., Peterboru, ' 
Batci, Miis E. C. Turkey 



Bate., J. L. 
Balei, Rev. 



A B C F 



Boston. Maw, H M 

S. S,, Tr>ronlo, Can. B O Q 

Bauemfeind, Mias S. M., Jauan £ A 

Baum, Rev. O. S., Xfonie Viita. Cal- P 
Baylcy. Rev. F. T.. Denver, CoTo. 

ABC FM 
Baylies, Mrs. N- E,, New York, N. ¥., P E 
•Brndi. Rev. H. P., Cliiria A U C F M 

•Reach, Mt». II. P., China A B C F M 

Beach. Mr*. S. H.. jersey Cily. N. J.. M E 
Beamati. Rev. \V. F,. China ABMU 

Beaman. Mra. W. F.. China ABMU 

Beardsliee, Kev. J. W.. Holland, Mich. 

RCA 
BealTle. Mrs, C Middlelown, N. Y. P 
BealLic, Rev. F. R- LouUvilfe. Ky. H D 
Benny. M.n., Mi»» E. India PC 

B»tty>. Bev. H. H . Brooklyn. N. Y., M E 
Beaiichamp, Rev. W. B-. Richmond, 

Va. M E S 

Beaver, F. P,. Dayton, O. A R M U 

Beaver. Mrs. F. P., Dayton. O. ABMU 
Seaver, T.. Bellcfoni. Pa. P 

Beebe. M.D., Rev. R. C, China M E 

B^rh--, Mr«. R, C. China M E 

Bcede, Mi»« H. R.. Ceylon A B C F M 

Becktnan. G.. New Yotk. N. Y. C 

Beers, Mrs. H. N.. New York. N. Y, P 
Bcbrcndi. Bev. A. J. F,. BrooVIyn. 

N. Y. A B C F M 

Behrendl. Rev. S.. Cleveland, O. GES 
*Be1de«i. Mk. W. H.. Bulipiria A B C F M 
Beldinc. M.D., W. A., Troy, N. Y. 

FCMS 



Belk, B«v. S. R., Elbenon, C>«. H E S 

Bell, Rev, C. H- Lebanon. TeniL C P 

Bell, Mr*. C. H.. Lebaooo. Tcan. C P 

Bell, Mi» H. -M., India I 

Bell, M.D.. T. P., AiUbU, Ga. SBC 

Bell. Mr*. T. P.. Atlanta. Ga. SBC 

Bell, Rev. \V. M.. Dayton. O. U B 

Bclteiby. Mrs. E. J.. India S 

Belinn. Mi«ft A. E, Japan M CC 

Benn. M.D., Miss Rachel. China, M E 

Bennett. B. F.. Daltitror*. Md. M E 
Beimcit. Mrs- P. L,. \Vilke*b»rre. Pa.. M E 

Bcnnril, Rev. R. H., Ricbmund, Ky. U E S 

Bentley. J., Brooklyn. N. Y. ME 
Bcntley. Mrs. ]. E.. Knoxvdlc. Tcon. 

■Rrrgen. Rev. G. S., India P 

■Bersen. Mrs. C. S.. India P 

BcrgeD. Mr*. N. S., Lbicola, IB. H D 

UcrBling. R.. Norway S SI C 

•Berry, M. IX. J. C. Japan. A D C F M 
•Berry. Mrs. J. C. Japan A BCPM 

Betty, Rev. L. B., Richmond. Va. M E S 
Bifflcr. M.D,. Miss R, M., Cbina V B 

Billow, L, H., New York. N, Y. ABMU 
Hinfoni. Rev. M. M., Brooklyn. AFBFM 
Bird. Mrs. C-, Africa B 

BUhof*, Rev. C, Japan M E 

BtHlio[), Mrs. C. Japan M K. 

Bishop, Mrs. E. K., Dayton. O. M BCC 
Bfihop. Rev. G. S.. East Orange. N. J.. H M 
Bi»hup, Rev. H., Waxahatchie. Tex.. M ES 
Bishop, Rev. J. G.. Dayton. O. M BCC 
Bitfaop. Miss L. E., India ABMU 

Biihop. L. J. P.. New York. N. Y. H D 
Bishop, Mrs. N., Morristown, K. I. 

ABMU 
Bispham, W., New York. N. Y. P E 

Bittinff, Rev. W. C. New York. ABMU 
Bixler, Rev. J, W., New London, Cann. 

A B C F M 
Bixlcy. Rev. M. H., Burma ABMU 
Blackadder. M)«» A. L.. Trinidad PC 

Blackshear, Rev. J. J., Indianapolis, 

Ind. NBC 

Bln.r. Mrs. W.. Chicago. III. C 

BUmnn, Mrs. I. D.. NaahviUe. Tenn. PS 
Blaichfoid, E. W., Chicago, 111., A B C F H 
Bliss, Rev. E. M.. New York. N. Y. P 
Bliss. Rev. E. W.. Watbinron. D, C- 

ADMU 
Bliu. Mrs. E. W.. Wathinsion. D. C. 

^V B F M S 
Bliss. Rev. II. S.. Upper Mootdalr, 

N.J. ABCi'M 

Bonrdman, Mrs. 5. G., Hartsville, Pa. F 
Boardtn.-tn, Mrs. S. W., Maryvllle, 

Tcan. P 

Boebue. Miss E.. Hansen, Neb. H I) 

Boanrdits, Mrs. J. A.. Philadelpbia. Pa. P 
Bcgifess, Rev W.. India ABMU 

Bonar. Rev, E. E.. Ricliinond. Va. SBC 
Bonar, H. S., Philadelphia. Pa. ELGS 
Bonner, Rev. O. Y., Due West, 5. C, 

AR5 
Bonner. Rev. R. B.. Weaiherford. Tex. 

MES 
Bfloker. Mr» T T.. India ABMU 

Bookwalter. Miss E.. Dayton. O. U B 

'Boone. Mrs. W. J.. China PE 

Booth. K. W„ New York. N. V. H D 

Booth. F. A.. New York. N, Y. P 

Booth. Mrs. F. A.. New York. N. V. C 
Booth. Rev. R. R.. New York, N. Y. P 
Booth. Mrs. H. R , New York. N. V. P 
Borard, Mrs- F. D,. College Park, Cat 

M E 
Burcbsrevink. Rev. Dr.. Madagascar, N M 3 
Ror^rhip-evink. \}t*., Mrdanscar N M S 

Borden, Miis C. Boston, Mass.. A R C F H 
Borden, T. I.. Fall River. Mass.. A BCFM 
BuuKhlon, Rev. F. G,, Saxton's River, 

vt. H P 

Bovatrd. Jr., M.D.. New York, N. Y, ? 



I 





t 




DELEGATES AND UISSIONARtES 



397 



Bowen, Mr*. E. H., Uftnhatun, Kmn. 

A BCFM 
BoTce, Rev. J. V., Philadclphva. I'>. 

RCN A 
Borce, Mt» M., Idivitle, Tenn. A K S 
Boyd. Mi»» A. M.. New York, N. Y. H D 
Uoyd. Rev. J. C-. Mt. I-»bftricn. Pa. V T 
Boyd. Mn. \V. W., St. Louli, Mft. 

.\ B M II 
Boyntoo. Mina E. M.. Oiicu A B M U 

Boyrlon, Rrr. N., Detroit. Mich. 

A DC FM 
Bnckbill, Mill S. C, China MCC 

Bradfard, Rev. A. H., MonlcUir. N. J. 

A B C F M 
BndlcrJ. K.. BoMon. Mat*. H M 

firadkr. Urn. J. E.. Jackionvillc 111. 

A n C F JI 
Bnidt. Rev. C. E. Wicliit*. Kan. P 

Brain. .Min B-. SnrinKfcld. O. P 

Brainard, E.. MiJ^llcbury. V't. H M 

Braiiuud, >lra. I. D., \Valrrvi]le. N. Y. 

M K 

Braincrd, Mr^ E. H.. Lincoln. III. P 

Bfandtzarg, J., Norvrny N L C M 

Brane, Rev. C I.. I-el«non. Pa. IJ H 

Breaker, Rev. M. I.. St. Louii. Mo.. SBC 
Breaker. Mt>. M. J.. Si. Louii, Mc. SBC 
Breed. Rev. D. K.. PittabufK, Pa. P 

Bremer. J., rhilartelphia. Pa, ELGC 

Breneman. Rev. W. P.. China A B C F M 
BrtnnUer. Mr*. L. S.. PhiU., Pa.. M E 

Brent. Rev. C. H.. nooloa. Ma«s. P E 

Breii, Rev. C. Jer«ey City. N. J, H U 

Brett. Mf». C. JcT»ey City, N. J. H D 

Brewltt. Rev. J. C. Geckheaton. Enj. 

U .M F C 
Breyfoget. Rrv. S. C, ReadinR. Pa K A 
Brrvfoael, Mrs, S. C. Rcadmr. Pa. E A 
Bridge*. Miu E. L.. Westfie'd. N. T. 

A B C F M 
Bridgford. J. H.. Hants, Eng, NAM 

Bridgman. M-D , B. N . AMca A B C F M 
Briggi, C. VV.. Philippine* A II M U 

Brigham, Mias A. A., Bennington. Vt. 

A It SI U 
Brimaon. W. C, Englewood. 111.. A B M t' 
BrtakerbofT, £. A.. New York A U & 

Briital. Key. F. M., Wasliington, D. C. 

M E 
Briitnw. Mia* E.. India C H /. 

BroadwclU Mrs. S. J.. New VorV W U 

Brock. Rev. G. 11.. India A B M U 

Brock, lira. G. H.. India A B M U 

Bmhaugh, Rev. C. O.. St. Paul. Minti. 

H S C M 
Brinks. Rev. W. H.. New York. N. Y. 

M F 
Brookf. Mra. W. R.. Morrittown, N. j! 

W D F M S 
Brouwer. T. A.. New York, N. Y. A B S 
Brewer. Mn. W. E„. New York. N. Y. C 
Brown. A.. E*»t Orange. N. J. ME 

BcowD. A. D.. St. Loui*. Mo. A B U U 
Brown, Rev. A. J.. Ka.t Orange. N. J. P 
Brown. Mrs, A. 1., F.ast Orange, N. J. C 
Brown. Mr*. C. C., Springfield! 111. P 

BiowB. Mra. C- P.. Los Angelei, Cal. 

MES 
Brown. E. G.. China C I M 

Brown, E. R,, Dov*r. N, 11. A B C F M 
Drown, Rev. E. W.. Glen Ridge. N. 
Brown. Mr*. E. W.. Glen Ridge. " 
UrowB, <i. (;., China 
Brown, G. W.. India 
Brown, Mrs. C. W.. India 
Brawn, Rev, H. W., Mexico 



rt B V r ni 

e. N. J. C 

c. N. 1. C 

CI M 



Brown, I. C. New York, N. Y, 
Brown, T, C.. Raleigh. N, C. 
Brown. Rev, J". G.. Toronio, Can. 
Brown, J. N., Providence. R. 1. 
•Brown. Mr*. R, S,. China 
Brown. Rev. T. C, Carnitl. Ind 

AFBFM 
Brown, R«». W. A., New York. N. Y. P 



FC M S 
FCMS 

P 

P 

M E 

M E 



Brown, W. A., PhlladelpUa, Fa. UP 

Brownell, Wt», C. C,. Detroit, Mich. P 
IJrown»on. Rev. M. A., Pliiladelphia. Pa., P 
Drotrnaon. Mriu M. A.. Philadelphia. Pa. P 
Bnice. Rev. H. J., India A B C F M 

Bruce, Mr». H J.. India A S C F M 

Bruere, Rev. W. \V.. India M E 

Brtiere. Mn. \V. W.. India M K 

Brtinntr. Mrs. W. F„ St. Loui*, Mo. 

ABCFM 
Bruntcn. Mr*. J. A., Japan H D 

Bryan, Rev. A. V., Japan P 

Bryan, ii.U., Miss M. E.. India M E 

Burhnn, Miss J., Toronto, Can. BOO 

Buchanan, Mra. C. J., Indianapolii. 

Ind. ABCFM 

Buchanan, Mint C. M., Eg/pl UP 

Bvirhannn. J., Trenion, N. J. A B_M U 

Buchanan, .Mrs. J., Trenton, 



abSju 



Buchanan. Rev. W. C, Japan P S 

Buchanan, Mrs. W. C. Japan PS 

Buck, Rev. C. H., Bristol, Conn. U E 

Ducktaan), Rev. M. II., Burlington. Vi. 

A B C F U 
BuckiKh, Rev, C, New York. N. Y. 

GES 
Buckley. Rev. J. M.. New Vork. N. Y. S 
Bueknell, Mrs, W. A., PhiU., I'a. A B M U 
Kiiddrn, Mist. India L M S 

Buddingtoo. O, G.. Wilmington. Del. H D 
Uuell, M.D.. Rev., Doitoti. Maaa. UE 

Bulkley. Mrs. L. D.. New York. N. Y. C 
Ilullnck. Rev. C. S., Jamaica, W. I., BUS 
fiun^pox*. Rev. R. F,. WUmington, 

ii. c: ia E s 

•Btmn. M.D^ Rev. A. C, China PE 

Btinn, MiM Z., Burma A B M U 

Burgess, Rev. F., Brooklyn, N. Y. P E 
Burgc**. Misa M. W .. India C W B M 

BiirKcs^. Mrs. O. A.. I cdianaoolit. Itid. 

C W E M 
Burhoc. Mra. T. H., Burma A M U 

BiLfke. .Mr*. E. W., Chicago, III, M H 

Iturkhuldrr. Mrt. J. P.. India FB 

Kurlingame, G. E.. Chicago, III., ABUU 
Biimham, Mrs. J. K-. Kansas City, Mo. 

ABCFM 
Durnham. Mra. J. L., Kansas City, Mo. 

Burpe, T. R-, Oltawa, Can. C I M 

Burr. C. C„ Auburndnlc. Mast. ABCFM 
Burrage. Rev. H. S., Ponland. Mc, 

A B M U 
Biirrell, Mrs. D. H., Little Falls, N, Y. 

HD 
Durrell, Rev. D. J., New York, N, Y. 

ATS 
BorreU, Mn. D. J.. New York, N. Y. 

RCA 
Burrows. Rev. I. A., Athens, TeniL, MES 
Burt. Rev. W., Italy M E 

Burt. Mrs. W., Italy M E 

Burton, Rev. M. L„ Entcrpriie, Mitt. 

Bufibee, Miss A. H., Spain ABCFM 

'Bushnell, Mrs. A.. Africa P 

•Bushnell, M.D., Miss K. C. China M E 
Bu6hnel>, Mi«t I- £., Chicago. III. 

ABCFM 
Bufhnell. M. B.. Mansfield. O. ABCFM 
Buf-sing, Miss U. v.. New York, N, Y. 

* RCA 

BuMced, M.D., J. R., Brooklyn H D 

Butler. Mis* C. Newton Centre, Mass.M K 
Butler. Mr*. F. A^ Nashville. Tenn.. MES 
Butler, Rev, H. S-, Blair*town. N. J. P 
BullcT. Rev. I. W., Mexico H E 

•Butler. Mrs. \V., Newton Centre, Mas*. 

HM 
Iluttrick, Rev. W,. Albany. N. V., A B M U 
Cabot. F, H.. New York. N. Y. PE 

Cabot. Mr*. F. H.. New York, N. Y. P E 
Cadbury. J., Birmingham, £ng. FFMA 
C^dnun, Rev. S. P., New York. N. Y., M E 




3^' 







- iiii^w 3fr- ^. "^ ~ 



rA.—!i-. s^ ; J. .>» ; -j-t A5.tr 

A a :« V 

"d-=5'V!:*- J<-"i- — J*.. I.-ii1:a .•. 1 j£ _ 

C*r--r,e'- Mn. S. X . "v.tsapi. ^3. ? 

fi^-r.',''^.:^ i<^ k. ? - »-«»— i>_ 5 t~ ? i 

C*.-ri«- it. >-. .'--.aaia. "a ? = 

Casrw-a- ivr* ," ? . rr. j-.in l Ml. ? 5 
Cartw.a. ; O. ?!*• V.'-'t .V V C 

Casr-iKt. Mn. M 1.. " ;aa M £ 

d;*^^ .^ S - Sv.-'.-.t K.fcM- A 2 " 7 X 
C»5*;r=. Mr*, i. 2 . 2«-,ir.--i. jCiii^. 

A- = : • If 

C*;r--i. Hri. = a Ii-lia A = t • M 

C*.-rT- C H.- I^^-T. «.«=. H O 

C».-:^-.rs. M?!. A . H„ 5rv-.c:-r3. A. 2 M V 
C*rT=. K-^. I V. *:-:=» A S M V 

C*i<:i. Mn /. v. Ci rra A 2 V "_' 

Car7.«>iK. ;. S-. .''>• 5r-rr,t* rA. N.j, P E 
Car:>«:t»r. Mr*. C B-, ■>»»£ a*;vi«. 

M^h, _ ** ^ 

Can^svcx, JLrr. 'A'. *., 7C!Ala.ii<^ r a. 

UES 
Carro::, Kt*. E, H_ 'f.'vj-.. T«t 5 EC 
CarroH. K«. H K,. Ki:=i;:-i. X. J. M E 
Carter. M:«» A,. M'.^".*:?. N J- P 

Carr«T, M:i« A-. ?.>»»r4, ,V. J. P 

Carttr. R«-r. U V... C::-« MES 

Canw, Kr». J. M., H::£::sr.-- T«=- 

ME 
Carter. Rer. J. W.. Ra^izh. X. C. SBC 
Carter. Mri. J. W, If., P'.r;:aad. Me. 

A E C F M 
Carter. Mr*. M. D.. LflUMT-::*. K*.. M E S 
Carter, Mm S.. Great Rirer. X, V. P E 
Carter, S. B.. Boston. Ma**. A B C F M 
•C;^rtniell. Mitf M. J., japan U C C 

Ca^e. C H.. Chicago, l\\. A B C F M 

Ca*<. Mr*. C- U.TChiazo. Ill- A B C F M 
Caw, .Mrv G. N., Jertey Citj. X. J. P 
Ca*e, Mi** L. E-. Ja?»n A B C F M 

Ca4selcnan, Rev. A. \'.. Columbiana. O. 

RCCS 
CaitrJa, H., T'jronii, fan. PC 

-C*"idy. «•*_ F. A,. Ispao M C C 

~ - ~. WiUn. La. M ES 

America B F B S 

C*uI'Urtl, Mf» W A •■iew Vork. N. Y.. C 
Caulfcrr, Ttrt. J. 11- ^■-«e^ville. O.. U B 
Cecrl, Ret. R., Sftrnj, Ala. P S 

CtiJico, n. A . FjiII Wivrf, Ma**. H D 

Chaitwkb. Rev. I. ^. Hf^KAUn ME 

Oiiillr. W M., r>>^l^'n[ioli*,rn'l,,AE M U 
ChaKanf. Kev. r,., I'iU'.burK. I'a. P 

ChamberUin, Hrv. G. \V., Rranl P 

Chnmherlain, H. A.. jTi'y City. N J.. M E 
rhamtjTlain. Mr«. II. A.. Jfr*ey City, 



CABlltT.' ftitV. J, 

Ca'trlU, P. r>eP, T 



Chnmlfrlain. M.IJ.. /., India 



M E 
RCA 



Chnmlierl.iin, Mr*. J.. Tnilia K C A 

CliamLcfUin, Kev. L, T.. New York, PAL 
Cliambcrlain, Mm. O. N., Watieka. III. 

ME 
Chamber*. Mr«, J. D.. Clevelaml, O. P 
Chapln. Rev. J. E., Neenah. Win. P 

•ChipiR, UiH J. M., So. AmcriM M E 




1 ~ _ ASCFM 

_i:i<ir'=H» jCtv , •_ T Ml I TTi ~-*^ P5 
.:i r7.t3ii ea . jCh r. =_ ~-inM A S C F M 
^■— =r*. ^^ £. i^ C^eavi. ZI_ A J M r 

-a-! rr.an. -^ » ■- — r "i^k. P< 

•ir^r-.-rjarrr. M.^- Its St_ X^la ME 
r*|3>=^ JC.« 3C A. J^^K A Z II u 

-^a:Tc=-' ien- 3— Eaifx ]| £ 

. 33c=-». Ml-*, a., '-wfef ]| E 

=■;. MzT. H. r_ Irmra. Kmb^ A S M I' 
-ar-t Mrv 1 ?. N^ Y:ri C 

;:=rx. Kj^ ■:. L_ Zr-aaMrrx. X. T. BX 
rark. M_» i- M_ A=xa.' »CA 

rir. i-r. £. -*_ 'aoK FE 

Cor^ Mrv =: -=-, '=« PE 

'. arw. SiT. r. •,. irssKM. 3Cn& C 

Ca;^ £fT. L X. uass Oct. Ms, 

Cirrfc Mrv T. r_ ft-i^-ai^ W. \V5e 
Car^ Mr*. X. G_ Bcmbm. Xmk. 
„ ABCFX 

Car*^ Mr*. *. .K. FT^^aVA. N- J, P E 
Cart Mr*. W. W_ Xe» York W C 

Ciris, Mr*, i W_ Bndk^-n. X. T, H II 
Cjr-ie. Ma* C I— BnxA^^ S. Y. C 
Car-cs. 'Sctrr, J. A. WaZi^cxd. Cvm. 
^ ABMU 

Carts. W. I_ AiIsawT. E. I. S D B 

C :-.!=.;. Rrr. C 5., P*^^J»drfpfcn. P». C P 
C.r=^-_ S- M., E=5a:<x X. Y. P 

C-.-T. RsT. C_ Ba-'T-^jre. Md. HM 

C-.-«. Mrv 'A H- ET-rabetk. X. J, PS 
C-Ji--!s. Her. H. H., JapSB MCC 

C'---«. Mrv R. H_ Japan MCC 

C--b, R-T. E. R, El-lzxhctb. X. T. P 

CV-b, Rer. H. E., Xew Yorfc. X. Y. HM 
Cobb. Rer. H. X_ Ean Oiuce. X. I. 

RCA 
C',bb. Mrv H- X, East Oruse. X. J. 

RCA 
C-^bb. Re*. U H-. Xe» York. X. Y. H M 
Ccbb. Rer. P. I_ Xasbrillc. Tenn.. M E S 
Cocrran. Rex. J. R, Chapd HUi. Te%. 

MES 
Cochrane. Rer. W. W., Barma A B M U 
Cochraac. Mrv W. \V.. Banna A B M U 
Cody. Rer. H. J., Toronto, Can. CCMA 
CodT. L.. Cnba I 

Codv. Mrs. U. Cnb« I 

Coe. Rer. E. B.. Xew York. N. Y., RCA 
Coe. Mrs. E. B.. Xeir York. X. Y.. RCA 
Coe. M.D.. H. C Xew Yoik. N. Y. C 
Coffin, O. v., Middlctown, Conn. 

A B C F M 
Coit, Miss B., Xewark. X. J. ME 

Colby, Rev. H. F.. Dayton. O. A B M U 
Colby, Mrv H. F., Dayton, O. A B M U 
Cole. J. H.. New York. N. Y. PE 

•Cole, Rev. J. T.. Japan P E 

•Coie. .Mr*. J. T., Japan PE 

Coleman. H. C. Morristown. Pa. P 

Cole-:. Mr^. B., New Vork, N. Y. C 

Coles. Miss M., Philadelphia. Pa. PE 

Coley. Rev. H.. Isle of Wight CS 

Colgate, Mrs. J. B.. Yonkers, N. Y. 

ABMU 
Collier, Rev. E. A., Kinderhook, N. Y. 

R C \ 
Collin,. Rev. T. A., Philadelphia. Pa. UP 
Collins, Rev. W. R.. Brooklyn. N. Y. RE 
Collis, Rev. M,, Leatington, Ky. F C U S 




DELEGATES AND MISSIONARIES 



» 



Crtifiofffc Mr*. B. B„ Philidelphla, Pa. P 
Coasnt. T. O.. New York. N. Y.. A E M U 
Coodi, Mill B., Chicntfa, III. V W C A 
Conklin, Mrt. J., Trcnioti. N. J. A B M U 
Conklia, Rrv. J. \V., SjvHagficId, Mau. 

CoflTcnc J. H., Philadelphia. Pa. P 

Cook, Rev. C A., BlQomficId, N. J. 

ARMU 
Cook, Mm. C. II., Xatick. Msm. 

ABCFM 
Cook. Mr*. D. C. Elgin. 111. M ¥. 

Cook. Rrv. E. p.. Savannah. Ga. H D 

Cook. Mm. J.. Boston, Ma»». ABCFM 
Cook. Rev. O. P.. Savannah. Ga. M ES 

Cook. Rev. W. U., Brooklyn. N. Y., A M B 
CooknuD. Rer. F. S., Jptsey Ciiy M E 

Cool, Rev. P. A., Spokane, \Va»h. M E 
Cooper. Mr«. F. K.. Tolwio, O. A B >I U 
Cooper, J. iL, VVmcliciivr, Va. EL US 
Cooprr, Rev. J. W., Nrw rtritain. 

Corn. ABCFM 

Cope'and. F.. Cohitnbu*. O. P 

Corbin. C. C, Websicr. Mass. M E 

Cirtnn. J. F.. .Mexico M ES 

Corkran. Rev. \V. F., Smyrna. Del, M E 
Vcrt-k. N. V. ME 

Je^ Voflt. N. v.. U E 
)iian P E 

Ccnrdl. Mr«. I. H. JaiHin PE 

Cory, Re*. A. E., HawAii FC M S 

Cory, Mrs. A. E.. Hawaii F C M S 

Couch, Min* S. XI., Jaiuin RCA 

Coulias, Rev. T. L.. >forTi»lowTT. N. J., M E 
Cou*in», Rev. W. E.. Madasascar L M S 
Cowcn, Mr& D. K.. Ciricinnati, O. M E 
Cox, a A., Toronto. Can. H V P 

Cox. Mr*. Te8»c. New York, N. Y. C 

Cox, Mr*. 5.. Garden Ciiv. N. Y. P E 

Coyle, Rev. R. F . Oakland, Cal. P 

CoTid. I.. Ctfveland, O. ABCFM 

Craig. Mrs. W., Port Hmie. Out. BOg 
Cr»igh«ad, Mrs. J. R, E., Blackwcll. 

Ok. Tcf. P 

Crandon, Mrs. F. P.. Evanston. 111. M E 
Crmne. Rev. C. D., Yarmoulh. Me. 

ABCFM 
•Cr»n<. Rev. H. A., India M E 

•Cmne. Mr*. H. A.. India M E 

Craven, Rc". T,, India M F. 

Crawford. Rev. A,, Altsandria. Va. P E 
Cre«gM. Rev. CC. New York. ABCFM 
Crewi. Rrv. A. C. Toronto. Can. H D 

Crippen. Mrs. A.. New York A B M U 
Cronkhite. Mrv !_ W.. Burma A B M U 
•Cro.by. Mii* E. T,, New Yofk, N. Y. C 

*- I — D.,. Ill !.■ C,i. I>. \ 



Coenell. J. .M.. New V. 
CorDclI. Mrs. T. M.. Ne 
Coirell, Rev. I. li.. jaf 



Croib^: Rev. W. K.. Erie. Pa. 
Croifield, W'., Liverpool. Eog. 
Crf>»». .Mr*. B P.. Burin» 
Crosa. M.n.. J.. China 
Crouette, Mr». M. M.. China 
Crowe, Rev. J.. PhiUdelphia. Pa. 
Croiier, Rev. W. N.. China 
•Cnlbertson, Mrs. I. N.. Siam 
Cummingn, Mis" E- 



M F. 

H M 

ABM U 

EPC 

P 

UP 

P 

P 

C. Portland. Me. 

ABCFM 

CunnioBham, Rev. A. M.. China P 

Conn 1(1 Bhani. Mr#. A. M.. China P 

Ciinnmgham, Rev. E,. India M E 

Cunnin(fl>»ni. Mr*. E.. India M E 

CuBninBhsm, Rev. F. O., Rockland, 

Mas*. A B M U 

Cunningham. Rev, J.. London. Enf , Iv E' C 
CiinninKhnni, Mr*. J., [.ondon. Eng.. EPC 
Curric. Rev. A. B., Birtninghnm, Ala., I' S 
Cnrrie. Rev. D.. Perth. Ont. P C 

Currie, Mm. W. T.. Airica CC F M S 

Currier. Rev, A. H., OScrlln, O. H D 

Curtis. L. C. Africa A M E 

CurtiK, Mrs. M. G.. Troy. N. Y. P 

Curtis. W. M.. Walkertown. N. C. H D 
Curtii. Rev. W. W.. Inpan A R C F M 

Curtis, Mrs. W. W.. Japan ABCFM 
Cuniiw. Rev. H. M., Cincinnati. O. P 

CushiDK. Mr». A. U. New York RCA 



"CiiiWtig. Rev. C. W.. Itair 
•Cinhina. Mrs. C. W.. Italy 
Cushing, M». G. W. b.. K.'U't Oransr, 

N. 7. • , 

Cushing, Mrs. J. N., Btirtna A B M U 

Cutter. W. D.. New York. N, Y. 



Cutting. C. H.. Brooklyn. N. Y. A U 
Cutting, R. Fi. New York. N. Y. 
Ciivlcr. Rev. T. L., Brouklvn, N. Y. 



Davieii Rev. J. 'r.. Pbiladclpbia, Fa. 
Ddvic», Rev. L. I., China 
IlavicsL, Mr». L, J., China 
Davis. Mis6 A. Y.. Janar 
Dxvi*. B. C. Alfred. N. 



MD 
M U 

C 

»-*'.'»^.. <»*-'■ .' "J,, .■■^■\*i»i J ... *-. I, a 

Daggett. Mi»« S. E.. New Ilaven. Conn. 

A B C F M 
DaIc, Rev. W., l.ondon. Eng. EPC 

Dnle, Mrs, W.. London. Eng. EPC 

Daly. Rev. I. P.. Gla.gow. Sc«.. F C S F M 
Daly, Mrs. J. P.. GImb-jw. Scot.. F C S F M 
ll-ina. Rev. S. W.. Philadelphia, Pa. P 

■Danforth. Mis* M. A., J^pan M E 

Daniel. Rev. C. C... We« IndJet A M E 
Daniel. Miss T., Ilardinaburg. Ky. M ES 
Daniels, Rev. C. H.. Buston. .\tasi. 

ABCFM 
DaHinft. Mi«» P. A., Aobvirtu N. Y. P 
DftrlingTOH. Mr». S. P., Phila.. Pa.. M E 
Dirhiitiion. Rev. V. V. W., Waahing- 

tnn. Ky. II O 

Darsit. Rev. C,, Frarklort. Ky. FCMS 
I)ar»t. Mr». E. \K\. Ev.inston. lit. C 

Darwood. .Mrs. \V. K.. Ne« Yotk M E 

Davidiun. Kcv. W. C. Japan M E 

Davies. Mr*. E. Toronto. Can. BO 

Iclahia. Pa. 

P 
P 

ABCFM 

_. , ._. ... Y. SD B 

Davis, Mrs. B. C. Alfred. N. Y. SD B 
Davis. Rev. E, A., Old Town, Me. 

A BM U 
'Davia. Rev. G. S.. Buffalo, N. Y, ME 
Da.vie. Mrs. 11. W.. Ne* York. N. Y^ M E 
Da\-is, J., Newton, Mass. ABCFM 

Davis. Rev. J. W'.. China PS 

Davis. Mrs. >1, A.. Ocean Park. Me. F B 
DaviH. M:«* -M. C. India P 

•Davi^ Mrs. M. F. C. India ME 

Mlnrii. Mm. M. C. India M E 

Davit, Mrs, W. B., Cincinnati, O. ME 

David, Rev. W. IL, Newton, Maa.t. 

ABCFM 
Davis, Rev. W. S.. India A B M U 

Dnvi*. Mr*. \V. S.. India A B M U 

Davis, Rev. W. V. W.. l»itt»field. Mass. 

A B C F U 
Davison, Miss A. M,. New Yotk. N. Y. C 
Day, Rev. G. E., New Haven, Conn. H M 
Hay. Mrt. K. C., New i'i,tfc. N. Y. M E 
Day. Miss S I„. Boston. Mass.. ABCFM 
Day, Rev. W. F., Los .\nBele>, Cal. 

ABCFM 
Day, Mrs, W. F., Loa Angeles. Cal. 

ABCFM 
Day, Rev. \V. H.. Aurora, III.. A ]I C V M 
D.1V. Mr*. W. U.. Aurora, III-, ABCFM 
Dean. Mrs. C W., Fall River, Ma- 

ABMU 
Drarine. Rrv. I. I„, Japan A II M U 

Dearirae. .Mr*, t. L., Japan ABMU 

Decker. Miss H. M,. Dijion. III. M E 

Deem*, Mri. E M.. Hornellsville. N. Y.^ P 
Drrring, Rev, I. R.^ l.esingtun, Ky.. MLS 
De Haver. A. H.. New York, N. Y. C 
Deininfftr, Rev. J. C. New York M E 

De Jung, Rev. J. P.. Zcelnnd, Mich. H M 
•Drmareit, Rev. N. II.. Japan RCA 

Denby. Col. C, Washington, D. C. H M 
Deaham, Kev. B. (j., N'.* V..»k FC J S 
Dennis, Rev. I. S., New York. N. Y, P 
Drnnis, Mrs. J. S.. New York. N. Y, P 
Dennler. Mrs. Z. P., New York M E 

Di,rny. Mim A. L.. New York, N. Y. C 
Deiinv. Mrs. T.. New York. N. Y. P 

DePeu, Rev. J., Bridgeport, Conn. 

Derby, Un. P. H., Springfield, Mass. 

A B C P M 




_i 




400 



IIEMBBRS OF THE CONFERENCE 



P«ncV»B. Mrt. 5.. Kew York. N. V. C 
UcrrKk, kev. W. B., Fliuhiae. N. Y. 

A M F 
D*twiW, Mf». W. E , New York V E 

Dcrint. Re*. J. B,. N«w York. N Y. P 
'Deriiu. Mm. J. D., X«w York, N. Y. P 
Dick, Kev. S. M., rruvicJcnce. R. 1. M E 
Dicktry, Mrs. S. C IndiarupaliL Iiwl. F 
Oickinfon. Mrs. C. H.. Newtrk, N. J,. M E 
Dickauo, Miu. PcicrborDwsh. Ont. PC 
New York. N. 



Dickton, H. U. 
Dickton, Rrv. 
Pick»on, Mr*. 
DickftoD, Rev. 
Dickton, Miss 
Uirkvon. Mien 
N. V. 



y. HD 

11 , Crylon A RC FM 
H- Ceylon A B C F M 
S., Philadelph!*. Pa, P 
. Peter boiou nil, Ont.. P C 
M. I-, Cuni)cr*ville, 

\a E 

Frcdcrkkthurjc, Va.. SBC 
V*.. SBC 
iJingcc, 1.. f~ HiiHikivn. n. t. ABMU 
Dinsmoor. Mis* A., tdooklyn FSSA 

Diltnar*. Rev., New York S 

Dixon. Rev. A. C. Itrooklyn .\ B M U 
Dixon, Rev. H. C. Toronto, Caa.C C M A 
Ilownc, Mis* U., Cincrnnati. O. H D 

Dcane. W. C. Albany, N. Y. S 

Doanc. W. H., Cincinnati. O. ABMU 
Dobliink, Co). E. I-., Newark. N. J. II M 

ABMU 



Pill, Kcv. J. S.. Frcdcrkkthurjt, 
DiH. Mr». J. S.. Frederick »burg, 
iJingce, t:. F_, Brmiklyn. N. Y. 




DoUhin.. Htv. F. S., PhiLa.. Pa., 
Dobbin*. Rev. J. Y., Montclair, N.J 
Dobb». Rev. O. G.. Brockville. Ont. 

C C M S 
Dohba, Rev. S. L., LafayHle. Ala.. M ES 
Dobrns. Rev. W. R^ St. Joseph, Mo. PS 
Dockiuder, E, S.. Cleveland. O. 
Dodge. R«v. D. S.. New York. N. Y. 
DodKe, R. E., New York, N. Y. 
DorlKe, W. E,, New York. N. Y. 
Dod»on, Rev. W. P.. Africa 
Do<Uon. Mr*. W. P.. Africa 
Docgrtt, L. L., Sprinsficid, Mail. 



M E 



H D 

P 

C 

I' 

M E 

M E 

HD 



DoKsett, Mr«, L. L... SpriDgAeld. Mau. 

H D 
Dohenv. Rev. R,R.. New York. N. Y.. M K 
Donahue. M.D.. Mi«> j. M., Oiina M E 
Dorce, S. G., Hayti A M E 

Dorenu». Mi« S. !>.. New York. WU 
Dorman. R. A., New York. N. Y. C 

Donnaii, Mr*. R. A.. New York. N, Y. C 
Dorward, Rev. I. C, Africa A B C F M 
DousliM, Mr*. F. a., Newark. N. J.. R C A 
Dowa. v.: F.. China ABMU 

Dowdell. Mr*. F- C. Auburn. AU. M ES 
Dowkonll. M.D.. G. D.. New York II D 
Dowling, Mi» M. A , China ABMU 

Downev, Rev D. C. . Hronklyn, N. Y- -M E 
Downic, Mi>i A. K.. India ABMU 

Downir, Rev, P., India ABMU 

Downie, Mr». D.. India ABMU 

Downing, Mi»« A. E-. New York C 

DreMe. Kev. C. W., So. America M E 

Oree»e. Mr*. C. W., So. America M E 

Dring, Rev. W.. Aatam ABMU 

Drummond, Rev. D. R., St. Thomas. 

PC 
KD 
UB 
UE 
UE 



r>nl. 
Drury. Rev. T. B., New York. N. Y. 
Drury, Rev. P. \V., Dayton. O. 
Duba, Rev. C. N-. Chiru 
Dull*. Mr». C. N.. China 
Dudley, G., Poughkceiiaie, 




N. Y. 

A B G P M 

Dudley. Rev. T. W.. Louiivllle. Kr. P E 
DuUe*. Jr.. W.. New York, N. Y. P 

Duncan. H. C. England S V M U 

Duncan, Mi*i jeuie, Siratlord. Ont. PC 
Duncan, Rev. t. McD.. Woodvillc, 

OnL PC 

Duncan. Mr*. K. M., WooJville. Ont.. PC 
Durcan, S. W., Brooklinc. Mm9., A II M U 
Duncan, Mrs. S. W.. Brooklmc. Mat*. 

ahmu 

Duncan. Rev. W, \V., SiiarUnburs. 

S- C. M E S 

Dtmsing. RcT. A. E., Dofton. Msiis. 

ABCPM 



Dxirim, Mrs. 11. F., Boston. Mu*. 

ABCFM 
Durfce. Miu S. C Providence, K. I. 

abuu 

Daryee. MIh M. O.. Newmrb. N. t. H M 
Dutchct, G. C. Brooklyn. N. Y.. A B M U 
Duthie. Kev. J.. India LMS 

Dutton. E H-. N*w York. N. Y.. Y M C A 
DuVctncl. Rev. F. U.. Toronto, Can. 

CCMA 
•Dwight, Miss C. P., Weat Turkmr, 

Dwight. Rev. 11. O., Turkey A B C P M 
Dwighl. Rev. T.. .New Haven. Conn. 11 M 
agle. Kev. J. P.. I.ttlle Rock. Ark.. SBC 
T-.afl. Mr*. E. C, Connersville. Ind. M E 
Earle. Rev. C. C. Borton. Mas*. ABMU 
F.>iitFrIin, Mr*. ). D., Atlanta, Gt. SBC 
FatiMi. Miss E.. Pct»i» P 

■EaMon, M(M S. C. India WO 

Exton, A. H., Daltimotc, Md. HE 

hataa. Kev. E. I)., Itelait. Wit.,ABCFM 
Ealrn. Mr*. E D,. Brloil. Wi... A B C F M 
Eaton. Mr*. G. H.. Calali. Me., A B C F M 
Eaiun. Rev. T. T.. Louisville. Ky. SBC 
Kckman. Rev. C. P.. New York. N. Y. ME 
Eddy. D. B.. Auburn. N. Y. H D 

liady. M.D.. Mills M. P.. Syria P 



Eddy, Rev. W., Syria 
Edmandv Mr*. M. C., 
MaiB. 

Edinondt. Rev. 



W. J., 



Chotnut HOI, 

ABMU 
Ex«t«r, Ebk. 

BFBS 
Edmondi. Mn, W. J., Exeter, En«. 

n p n C 

Edsoo. Rev. E. H.. Rochesler. N. Y.. PE 
Edward*. Mi*t F. L, Oeveland. O. H D 
Ettwardi, Rev. j. H., New York PAL 

Edwards. Mita L., Brooklyn. N. Y. H H 
Edward*. Rev. T. C, Kdwardsdale, Pt. 

AbCFM 
Edward*, Rev. W. E., AjhUad. Va., M ES 
Edoardi, Rev. VV. S.. Baltimore. Md.. ME 
Ehrgoll, Rev. A., Burma ABMU 

F.tleri, E. F., New York, N. Y. HO 

Eikrt. Mrt. E. F.. New York. N. Y. C 
Eklund. Rev. II. \V.. BrooklyTt, N. Y.. UK 
Kkval), E. M., C-hina CA 

EkvaU, Mt», E. M.. China CA 

Elder, Rev. J. F.. Albany. N. Y., A B U U 
Ellinwood. Rev. F. F., New York, N. Y» P 
Elliot, tl. K.. New York, N. Y. P 

Elliot, Mn H. R., New York. N. Y. C 
Elliot. Mi»i S. ).. Salt L«ke CllT. 

Uuh PE 

Elliott, Rev. J. H., New York. N. Y. HD 
' * ~ ' ~ ME 



Elli.. fecv, a: C, Erie. Pm. 
Elllf, Mr*. S. A.. Rocheater. 



N. Y. 

ABMU 
Bridce, 

ABCFJI 



ElliMn. MiM A. B., Summit 

Del, 
ElJi«on. W. P., BoMen. Ma»*. 
Elmcndorf, Rev. J.. New York. N. Y. C 
Elmore, Mn. W. T.. India ABMU 

Elwla. Mi**. China CMS 

Elwin. Mn* K. M,, China. CMS 

Ely. Rev. J. R.. India p 

Elv. Mr*. Z, S.. New York. N. Y. W U 
Emblcton. Miii; M. .M., India UP 

Emerton. Mr*. E. S.. MadlsonviUe. O. H E 
Emery. Misi I. C. New York, N. Y. P E 
Emery. Rev. W, S.. Norwich. Conn. PE 
Enrell, Mr«. J, Syr»cu.e, N. Y. CWBM 
Knslish. Mil* F. M.. India M E 

Erdman, Rev, A., Morrislown, N. J, P 

Krtlman, P . Korea P 

E.tcy. J. ;.. Drattlcboro. Vt ABUU 
Evani. Mi*s A.. Lcxinsioo, MonU U E 

Evant, Rev. B. B., HuntiaKton. W. 

Va. U E 

Evans. Mi*« M.. PainewUlc. O, A B C P M 
Evans. MiM S., Japan PS 

Evan*. Rev. W. F., Prc*cott. Ark- M E S 
EvelcUi, R«v. F. N., Bunw ABMU 



DELEGATES AND MISSIONARIES 



401 



ETelrth. itn. F. N , Burm* A B M U 

Evfrell. Mi*s E. D., Syria P 

Ewbaok, Rev, A.. London. EfiB. SAMS 
Ewbank, Mr*. A.. Ltiiiiliin, Kng. SAMS 
Etrittg. Rrr. A. H., India P 

F-10B. Mr». A. H.. Irdia P 

•P»M. Rev. J. G., Chin* RCA 

*FaaS. Mn. I. <;.. China H C A 

Kabs. C. H . Ma^liHon. N. J. II 1) 

FairbanV. Mt>. Henry. India A B C F M 
Fairbanks. Mr». E. A.. Greene. R. I. 

C W D U 
Fairbanks, Rev. K., St. Jahnsliury, Vt. 

A BCFM 
Faii-baoka, Mra. B.. Si. johnsbiiry. Vt. 

A B C F M 
Falriield. Mr*. E. R.. MantficLd. O. 

ABCFM 
Fakoncr, R«». A., Pictou. N. S. PC 

Falconer. Mr*. A., Pictou. N. S. P C 

Falconer, W. H.. New York. N. Y. M E 
Pales. D.. Lake ForeM. 111. H M 

Farnham. Rev. E. P., Saletn. Ma<ia. 

A B MU 
Pamom. Mm, H. H.. New York, N. V.. P 
Farquhar, X. II.. Wa^hingtnn. 1). C-. H M 
Farrar, Mi« C. P.. Chicane. Ill.A B C F M 
Parrar. Mikt F. E., Lhicfttfo. IIL. A BCFM 
Parwell, Mr^ C. B., Climco, 111. P 

Fanlka. Rrr. J. B., Madiwn. N. J. ME 
Fannce, Rev. W. H. P., Proviaencr, 



ABMU 
A BM U 
ABMU 
M ES 
M ES 
C 

c 



R. I. 
Far, Mill!) £. E.. Burma 
Fare, Mi»s M. D , India 
•Fcara. .\lrt. A. \V.. Cliina 
Feam, M.D.. Rev. I. D.. China M 

Fcllt.w». 1.. New Yurk. N. Y. 
Fellows. Mr.. J.. New Yurk. N. Y. 
Fcnn. Rev. W. H., Portland. Mc. 

ABCFM 
Feno, Mr». W. H.. Portland. Me. 

ABCFM 
Ferguson, H)» E. D.. Stamford, 

Conn. P E 

Fcriruson, Rev. S. G.. Martinibure, 

\V \',. M E S 

Fcriiuion. \V. J.. StrailorH, tint. M C C 

Fcrgutoik. Rev. W. T., Bowling Green. 

My. CP 

Ferrii. P. A., So. Norwalk. Conn. 

ABCFM 
Ferri*. Mrt. G. H.. India 7. B M 

FerriH. Rev. I. M., New York. N. Y. H M 
Ferri.. H. M.. New York. N. Y. 

A F B F M 
Fcrrr. Mr*. E. S , Hanford. Conn, M E 
Ferry. G. I.. Mendhanv. N. J. M E 

Field. E-. New Yuik. N. Y. C 

Field. F. H., Bro^'klvn. S. Y. ^^ C 

Field. Rev. T. C... Elyria, O. ABMU 

Field, Mrs. W.. WilminRton. Del. ^ M E 
Rdde. Mi« A M.. China A B M U 

Findlar. Rev. VV. 11., India W M S 

Findlny. Mr^. W. H.. India W M S 

Fisher. Mrv. Chicagrj. Ill- M E 

Fisher. Mrv C. 1.. New York. N. Y. C 
Fisher, Rev. C. P.. New Haven. Conn. 

ABCFM 
F>«ber, Rev, I. F.. Cleveland. O. M £ 

Filch. Re*. F. S.. Buffalo. N. Y. 

A B C: F M 
F;lichen. Jr., Rej 
i-'itigerald. ~ 

feno. H F S 

Fitsuerald. Rev. S. O.. Phila.. Pa. V P 

Fiwk. Mr.. A- H.. Clavcrack, N. Y. ME 
Flagler. II, M.. New Yurk, N. Y. P 

Flanders, Rev. C. K„ Biddeford. Me. 

ABMU 
Fbnigeo. Miss L.. Philadelphia. ?a. P 
Retcher, Rev. O. O., SuAicld. Conn. 

ABMU 
Flelcher. Rev. P. C. Eureka Springs. 

Ark. ^1 E S 



A » t. I- M 

^en. Jr., Rev. T. F,. Ithaea. N. Y.. P 
rrald. Rev. J. ft.. St. Lotils. Uo.. M £ 
rrald. Rev. O. P., Nasbville. 



■Flickinser, Rev. D. K.. Africa UB 

Flini. J. T>.. Fall River. Ma«.. M K 

h'lynn. Mrs. H.. Eesienitr. Ala. PS 

Folbom. Krv. O. W., Hath. Mc, ABCFM 
Folts. G. P.. Herkimer. N. Y. H U 

•Foote. Rev. F. W.. India M E 

■Fuoie, Mrs. F. W.. India M E 

Forbes Rev. J. P.. DcLand, Fla. SBC 
Fcrd. Mrs. E. F.. Omaha. Neb. A B C F M 
Ford, Rev. 11. M.. Hillsdale. Mich. F B 

•Ford. M.D., Mrs. O. M.. Africa P 

Ford. Krv. .S. T., Lowell. Mass. ABMU 
Forrest. Miss F.. China M CC 

Forrest. W. M,. India FC M S 

Forrest. Mrs. W. M,. India FCMS 

Forsyth. Mrs. H. H., Chicago. 111. V 

Forman. Mrs. S. R.. jemcy Cily. N. I. P 
Foiketl. Rev. G. E.. Louiiville. Ky., M ES 
Fo»s. Mrs. C. D.. Philadelphia. Pa. M E 
Foss, Mi»« I. C. Micronesia ABCFM 
Foster. Rev. F. M., New York. N. Y,. H D 
Foster. M.D.. H.. Clifton Springs. 

N. Y. H M 

Foster, Mrs. H.. Clidun Springs. 

N. Y. H M 

Foster, j. W.. Washioftoo. D. C. P 

Koster. S.. New York, N. Y. P 

Fowlc. Rev. J. L., Turkey ABCFM 

Fowle. Mrs. J. L.. Turkey ABCFM 

Fowler. Mrs. A.. New York, N. Y. C 

FoK. A. J.. Oeiroii. Mich. H M 

Fox. Rev. I,, New York, N. Y. A BS 

FoK, Mrs. L. R.. PhiUdclphia. Pa. P 

•Francis, Rev. J. M.. Japan P E 

•Francis. Mrs. J. M.. Japan PE 

Francis. Rev. L., Brooklyn. M. Y. RCA 
Frank. Rev. I. H.. Louisville. Ky. U B C 
Fracer. Rek-. K. D.. Toronto. Can. P C 

Freeland, Miss J., Japan C P 

Freeman. Rev. J. E.. Yonkers. N. Y. P E 
French. Miss K., China ABMU 

Friafaic. Mrs. A. I.., ]>e:4 Moines, la. 

A B C F M 
FriM. W. G.. Sol America C A 

Friuell. Rev- W.. Toionto, Can. P C 

Frosl, Miss A. G.. India C VV B M 

Froit, Rev. H. W., Toronto. Can. CI M 
Froti. Mrs. H. W., Toronto. Can. C I .M 
Frost. Rev. I. M.. Nasbville, Tenn. S S C 
Frost. Mrs. K. A.. Barkers, N. Y. P 

Fry, Rev. C. L,. Lancaster. Pa. H U 

Fry. M.D.. E. S.. Edinburijh. Scot. 

E &I M S 
Fry, Mrs. L. T^ Lancailcr. Pa. ELGS 
Fuhrman. Rev. F... Newark. N. J. G E S 
Fuller. Rev. A. C, India ABMU 

Fuller. Miss M. B., Northampton. 

Maas. A B C F H 

Fuller. R. O., Cambridgr. Mass.. ABMU 
Fuller, Mrs. R. O., Cambridge. Mass. 

ABMU 
Fullerion. Rev. B. P.. Si, Louis. Mo. C P 
Funk. Kcv. A. E., New York. N, Y. 
K link ho user, Hev. G. A.. Dayton, O. 
•Fiirness, Mrs. D.. Meaico 
Fufsl, Miss M.. Lock Haven. Pa. 
QoKc, Misi F. C. Turkey ABCFM 

»-.a([c, filiss M. I.. Worcr^ier. Mass. A A 
tiaiky, M., Philadelphia. Pa. RPS 

Calloway, Rev. J. G.. Newion. MJas.-M ES 
'Gatpin, Rev. F., China UM PC 

Gait. Miss A., Siam p 

Gamhir. Mrs, W. A.. Cincinnati. O. ME 
Gamrrtsf elder, Mrs. S. J.. Napcrville, 

III. EA 

Gandier. Rev. A.. Halifax, N. S. PC 

Gardner. Rev. C. S.. Greenville. S. C. 

SBC 
Gardttcr, Mrs. D. B.. St. Paul, Minn. .M E 
Garrcn. J. B.. New York. N. Y.. 

A F !t F M 
Gam'ioa. U.D.. J. U., St L«uis. M-j. 

F C M S 
Gary. Ub* E.. China M ES 



CA 

UB 

ME 

P 




MKS 

r 

MB 

or 

y, Y. 

ABUV 
_ r IL Stw T«»fc. K. Y. S V SI 

~ J, ■! ■!■. Ibm P 

l««. & Jt, IMh P 

lu.- i- R. y«« 

)t:j HCA 

, Mn. I. %Kw Ywlt. >'. Y. P 

ftr>. e. Vh^ Nn VoA A B S 

Um. E. &. SConidi. C«w. 

ABCPM 
G)n«4. Xn. O. F. MiiMiiln»i. Com. 

PE 
<V«^ lt««. A^ Aabaf^ IL t P B 

■niiiiB. MiM M. J^ twkcy A BC F M 
GkM, H«M U bsnl H E S 

GkML B«T. W. P, Aslaws. Ga. U £ S 
•COZvC R<«. Do. Chm A B C F M 

~ ~ K. W. P, ftiliililnliii. Pa. ME 
Kc*. ;. r. BrWMM. Pa. R c u s 
^ mn. C U. BroaBrm. ?(. V.. M E 
C U BoMo^ Uw. 

ABCFM 
R««. H. D, AA-ia 

ABCFH 
CoodooMfa. Vn. H D.. AMe» 

ABCFM 
Coadin. Mrs. E^ Arscnuu M E 

OoMfmao. E.. Clria«o. IIL ABMU 

Coodnun. F. S.. X«« Vorfc Y M C A 

-CoMtvio, E- a. India M E 

"Goodwin. Mn. E. B^ lofit U E 

Coodw.n, J. J.. N«* Ycri^ K. Y. P E 

Cofdoa. Mr*. A J.. Boatoo, Maaa. 

ABMU 
Cordon. MiM J. P.. India 
Gordon, M.D., M. L.. Japaa. 
Cordon, Mr». H. U. Japan 
CnaHdh. 1U«, F W.. India 
OonctMr. Rer J. F.. BalttnoR, Md., 
Gould. Mi.« H. W.. Ne« York. N, V 



GnBa. Mn. }. F, U^ 



CrUbht. mm U. B^ ton 
Gr«aa. M.D. Mm L. jGia 
Graac- Bm. A Du lajaa 
Cra«. Mrv_A. D^ Japnn 






Rn. n. D^ Ind« 
Mrv H. D, !■>«■ 
C majf d f fcc MiM E.. AlrSc* 
CranCMT. R«<. VV. M, N«« 
GraMk Dl B- Sb. Ammtm. 
Gr«Ucr. W. IL. Phrl 



N. Y. 
ABCPB 

HE 

UB 

PE 

PE 

MES 



Pa. 



P 

P 

UB 

YnribPE 

SAMS 



UE 



ABCFU 

HEA 

HEA 

ABCFM 

ABCFM 

ABMU 



ABCFM 

ARC FM 

ABCFM 

WM S 

ME 

H M 

ABCFM 

Sbelbirvine. Ind. 

AB M L' 

"Gould. M.D., O. W- lodia ABMU 
•Goutdy. MiM M. E, Japan ABCFM 

Cowen. Re*. I. W.. \Verha<rl>cn. 

N. J. H D 

Gavrn. Mr*. I. W.. Wcebawkca. N. I. 

RCA 



G^ld, J. M.. I'DTtUad. Mf. 
Goold. Rev. L A.. 



GnMtr. Mr«. W. r! PiSZ! P>^ U E 

Ccfcrt— , Ker. j. S.. Rocbctter. K. V. 

ABMC 
C«aM«a^ U.TK H. &. Londi^ &^ 

CnBek, llr«. A. a. SciaaK 
CabdE. R««. O. H.. HMii 
Gnlicic Mr*~ O. H.. Raiaafi 
-Gulick. BcT. T. U. J 
-Gtilidu Mn- T. I_ J 

Cutno. Re*. E. &. Atdcbonw 

C WBB 

Cuthfie. Rrv. D., Baltiorarc;. Md. P 

■Cunmoo. Rer. G. H . India A BCFU 
H»ak. Mm- M. A . MytnWwti. Pa. tJ B 
Hackett. E. A. K.. Futt Wavne. Ind. f 
■Hackrtt. Rev. H. M. >1^ India CMS 
Hidden. A- M.. New York. N Y. C 

IlaJIer. Mr^ M.. Anptau. Ca. PS 

lUdler. Mr>. W. F. L.. Ed»wd<nlfe. 

'Ilanard, Rev. F. P., Anam 
'Ilasvard, Ufi. F. P., Anan 
HaBTn. Rev. F. E.. iapatt 
HnKtn. Mr*. F. E., JapaB 
llabn. Rev. B. D.. Springftdd. 



E 
ABMU 
ABUV 
FCM5 
FCHS 
Mm» 
ABMU 



-i 




DELEGATES AND MISSIONARIES 



4*>3 



Hiil, Rev, J. E.. Japan 
Haines, Kr\. M. L,. In 



CP 

ndianapQliv Ind. P 
•Hainw. M!»« M. M.. Japan A F B F M 
Ha;detnan. Rev. I. ,M.. New York. A B M U 
lUldcman. Mrs. I. M.. New York C 

Hak. Rf r. H- G.. Boslun. Mm.. A B C F M 
Hall, Rev. A. W.. .Syritcuw, N. Y,, W M S 
Hall, Mrs. B. F.. Wilmington. N. C. V S 
Hall Rpv. C. C. New York. N. Y. P 

Hall. E. C. Jameatown. N. Y. A B C F kf 
Hall, Kev. tf. A., New York V M C A 

Hall, H, H,. Nrw York. N. Y. C 

•Hallam. Rev. E. C. B,. India F H 

•Hallam. Mrs. E. C. B.. InJia F U 

Hallmao. Kev. H. S.. Brrlm. On(. M M B 
HaUry. Kev. A. W.. New Vcwk P 

Hatser. Mm. L. B., Kew York RCA 

Hamblen. Rrv. S. \V.. Japan A B M U 

Haoitlton. Rev. J. T., Bethlehem. Pa. 

MCM B 
Hamilton, Rer. S. U., Englewood, N. J.. I' 
Hamilton, Mrs. T. A., Birmingham. 

Ala. SBC 

•Hamlin. Rev. C. Tuikey A B C F M 

Hamlin. Rev. T. S.. WB»hinBton. !>. C. P 
Bamraa, Mra. A. V., VVaBhingt'in, 

DC. ELCS 

Hammond. Rev. H. C. Braiil PS 

Hammond. Mi»s S. J., Paraguay M £ 

Hammond. Rffv. S. P.. Newark, N. J.. M E 
Hand. A.. Scranton. Pa. P 

Hand. C. W.. New York. N. Y. P 

Hanna. Rev. W. A., Mexico. Mo. M E S 
Hannrnm. Rev. W. il., India P 

HaiMon. Rev. O., Burma A B M U 

HarbiKin, S. P.. Pitlil.iirp. Pa. P 

Harcoun, Mrs, C. A.. Chiougo, III, C 

Hard, Mr«. M. S., Kinstton, Pa. M E 

Ilardie, J., Dirminnhant, Ala. PS 

Hardy, Rev. K- N . yincy, Mass. H D 
Harford. Mr*. L R., Omaha. Neh. UB 
Harford- Batteraby, M.D.. C. F., EiMJt, 

Eng. L M C 

Hargrove. Mr*. T. B., Kansaa City. Mo. 

M ES 
Harlar. R«v. M. E.. Brooklyn, FCMS 
Harlan. Mrs. M. E., Brooklyn FCMS 
Barlaock. lin. M. E.. Waahinglon, 

D. C. ME 

Harper, Rev. J., Xcnia. O. H D 

Ilirrington. Rev. F. M.. Chili M E 

Hjftis. C. H.. liackensack. N. J. HCA 
ttarriii, Kev. E,. Toronto, Can, A I 

Harris, Rev. M. C. San Francisco, 

Cai. M E 

Harri*. Mrs. R., New York A B M U 

Harria. Mra. S. S.. Citra. FU. M t: S 

Harris. W. T.. WashinKton, D. C. H M 
Harrison. B.. Indinnapolii. Ind. P 

IlarriaoD. Rev. f. U'., Kurea S 

Hariiaon, Mr«, L. F., Worcester, Kau. 

ME 
Harrlaon. Rev. W. B., Korea P S 

HarriaoR. Mt», W. B., Korea P S 

Harriiville. Rev. L. Chicago, ill.. H S C M 
Harrower, Rev. P,. New Brighton, 

N. Y. PE 

Hart. Rrv. S. G. Egvpt. V P 

Hartley. Rev. W- S«. Thomaa. Onl.. B O Q 
Ilartrasfl. Rev. C. D., Hartlord. Cann. 

A BC FM 
Hartzell. Rev. J. C-. Africa M E 

Hirizler, Mrs. H. B.. Harrisburg. Pa.. M E 
Harvey. C. W.. HarrinbiirB. Pa H P 

'ITarvey. Misa E. L.. India M E 

Harvey, T. M.. London. Kng. W M .S 

HarwDod, Mrs. G., Newton, Mass 

W B M U 
•Hascall. Rev. W. H.. Burma ABMU 
•Haseall. Mra. W. 11.. Burma A B M U 

Hankell. Rev. E. B.. Bulgaria A B C F M 
Haskell. Miaa M. M., Bulgaria A R C F M 
Hatch. Rev. F. S.. Monson. Mbm, 

A DC FM 



Hatch. M.D., Mils G.. Norwich, OnL 

A BM U 

Hatch. Rev. H. H.. ttoHville, N. S. BMP 
Haleh, Miss J.. Lao* P 

Hauler. Mrs. M.. Detroit. Mich. M E 

Haven. Bev. W. I.. New York A B S 

Haven. Mrn. W. I., New York, N. Y. C 
Havilind, Mr*. E. H,. Africa F M 

Hawe«, Rev, E., Hartford, Conn. H M 

Hawkes. Miss H. E.. Burma A B M (j 
Hawley. Miss F.. New York. N. Y. P 

Haydn. Rev. H. C. Ctereland. O. P 

Hayc Rev. I. N.. China P 

Hayes. Mr*. J. N.. China P 

Haye». Kev. I. O.. Africa NBC 

Hays. Mrs. C. C, JohnMown. Pa. P 

Hayier. Rev. J.. C. .America J B U S 

Hayward, Rev. A. H,, Florencevillc, 

N. B. BMP 

Hazard, Miss C. Wcllesley. Mass. 

ABCFM 
HaiaH. R. G.. Peace<Ialc R. I..A B C F M 
Haaen. Rev. A. W.. Middletown, Conn. 

ABCFM 
Haien. Rev. W.. India A B C F IVf 

Headland, Rev. I., China M E 

Hearn. T. A,, China M E S 

Heck, Miss F. E. S,. Rateigh. N. C. S B C 
Hcfley. Rev. W. G.. lacksoo, Tcnn., U ES 
Hcil. Kev. W. F., Allcniown. Pa U E 

Heine. Kev. <;. C. Monlrcal, Can, P C 

Heisig. Rev. T.. Freehold. N. J. U D 

Helm. Mi>« M., Xanhville. Tenn. M £ S 
Helmkamci, Rev. J. F., Rochester. 

N. V. CES 

Hemphill. Rev. C. R., Louisville. Kt. P S 
Hen(Ier!.on, M.D.. A. 1I-. Burma AB M U 
Hendcinoii. Mis. A. H.. Burma ABMU 
HenJcrntm, Kev. 1., Toronto, ('an. M CC 
Hcrilrrnrn. Hcv. J. M.. Brooklyn A M E 

Hen<lrix, Mrs. A.. Fayeiie, Mo. M E S 

Hendnx. Kev. E. R., Kansaa City. Mo. 

M E S 
Hcnken, Mi«( L.. Brooklvn, N. Y, 
Henry. M.D., Miss V. M.. Egypt 
'Ilcfiburn, M.D., J. C. Japan 
•Hepburn. Mr?. J. C, latjan 
Herbcn. Rev. S. J.. Newark. N. 
Herbcn. Mrs. S. ),, Newark. N 
Hcrrick. Rev. H. N.. Wibaah. 
Hcrron, M^^. A. R.. Pittsburg. Pa. 
Hiden, 0. A... Finland M EF 

Higzenboihem, Mrs. W. B.. West 

Point Ga. M E S 

Higgins, Mrs. C C. Columbus. O. M E 
Hill, Rev. E. M.. Montreal, Can. 

CC F M S 
Hill, Rev. F- P.. Portland. Ore. P 

I. F.. Boston, Mass. ABCFM 
L., Salem. Mass. ABCFM 
A.. Ballimore. Md. M £ 

Hill, Rev. W. R., PDughkecptie, N. Y. 

Ilillman, Mra. J.. Troy. N. V. ME 

HilU. L. C. Philippines P 

Hills. Miss S. H.. New York. N. V. H U 
Hinckley. Rev. H.. Ro*lindale. Mash. 

ABMU 
Aodover. Mas*. 

ABCFM 
Hitchcock, Rev. A. N., Chicago, III. 

ABCFM 
Hitchcock. Mrs. A. K., Chicago, in. 

ABCFM 
Hitchcock, Rev. A. W.. Newburynorl. 

Ma.s. ABCFM 

Hilt, Mrs. I. R.. EvanatDD. IP. M £ 

Hjerpr, Rrv. K. G., New Britain. 

donn. S E M C 

Ilodge. P. G.. Cambridge. Maw. H D 

Hodge. Mis* M. E.. Philadelphia. Pa. P 
Hoffrcker. J. H., Washington, D. C. H M 
Hoffmann. Rev. H. W., Brooklyn C 

Hoge. Rev. P. H,. Nashville. Tenn. PS 
Hogselt, Mrs. J. J.. Danville, Ky. P 



n 

«. N. 1. 
k. N. 1 
aah. ind. 



C 
UP 
P 

P 
M E 

ME 
M E 
U P 



HJIJ. Mrs. I. 
Hill. Mr*. J. 
Hill. Mrs. S. 



Hincks. Mrs. E.. 



J 




MEMBERS OF THB CONFERENCE 




Uotbrook, Mrs. C. F.. Sakm. 

ABUU 
Holbrook, Mi»s £■ H., San Fnncuoo. 

C*L KIE 

•Bolbrook. M.D., Miu U. A.. Japan 

ABCFM 
HoIlK, Rev. C. A.. Middlrtown, N. Y., M £ 
Hollifield. Rev. A N.. Newark. N. J^ C F 
Ilolmei, O. B.. New York ABCFM 
Holmes, Mrs. F. L.. UTuinis. Haaa. 

ABCFM 
Holmes, M.I>.. G. W.. Persia P 

-nolmea, Mt» U. C. Syria P 

Holuiet. Rev. W. S.. Uurcai. S. C. P E 
HoU. Mrs, C. S., Chicago, 111. P 

Hoti, Miu M. £., Ba»ton. Ma^^s. M E 

Holwav, W. O.. Wa«hin«on. DC. H M 
Hope. UiM A, NcK» VofV. N. Y. C 

(lopkin. Rev. R., MottucaJ, Can. 

CCFMS 
Hopki 01. C A.. BrookHne. Mas*. ABCFM 
Hupkinv Mra. C. C. Brooklr". N- V., P E 
Hopkin.. Wr». G, U.. New Yoek. N. Y.. C 
Hopkins. Rer. H., Kansas Ciir, Mo. 

Hopkins, Rev. W. H., Pougbkecp»«. 

N. Y. ABCFM 

Horlty, Rev. W. E., Malay Fed.u- M E 
Horr. ftev. E.. Maiden, Man. A 11 C F M 
Hurr. Rev. G. E.. Botcon. Ma>». A B M U 
Morton. Mrv (X H.. Chicago. 111. C 

Ho»». Rew. E. E-, Na»hviilc. Tenn. M ES 
IIosMck. Miu B.. Evansvillc, III. ? 

Hotaling. 1.. Booton. Ma>k. A B M <J 

Hoichki». Rev. W. R.. Africa A F B F M 
Holt, Rev. J. W.. l>a3rton, O. V II 

Hough, Rev. S. S.. Altoona. Pa. OB 

House, Kev. G.. Wcic Indiu J B M S 

Houxton, Mlm E. R.. Japan PS 

"Hou»lon. Mr»- J. H.. Braail „P 

Houtton, Mi(» f. H.. Cuba PS 

Houston, S. F., Philadelphia. V*. P E 

Hou.lon. Rev. T. W., China P 

HouitoB. Mrs. T. W.. Chin* P 

Hovcy, Mrs. A.. Newion Centre, Mass. 

How, Mr>. W. S.. Phita.. Pa., ABCFM 
Howard, J. U, Hanfurd, Conn. A B M U 
Howard. O. O^ New York, N. Y. H M 
Howetl. Miss £.. China P 

Howell. Mrs. I. B.. Philadelphia, Pa. P 
Howerron. Rev. I. R.. Charlotte, N. C, P S 
Howie. Mi»» J. japan MCC 

*Howland. R«v. S. \V.. Ceylon. A B C F M 
•Hnwland. Mrs. S. W- Ceylon, ABCFM 
Hart. Mr». J. B., Stamford, Conn. 

A B M U 
Hoyt. Re». W., Philadelphia, Pa.. A B M U 
Hubbell. Rev. W. N., Springfield. 

Maaa. A B M U 

HubH, Rev. £.. Baltimore. Md. C 

Hue^tis, Rev. S. F.. Halifax, N. S.. M C C 
Huey. S. B.. Philadcl]>bia, l*a. P 

HulbcTT. Rev. £. B.. Morpn Park. 111. 

A B M U 
Hulbert, Rev. H. \\\. Clerelaod. O. S 

Ilulburd. C. H.. Chicago. III. ABCFM 
Hull. C. A.. Brooklyn. N. Y. ABCFM 
Hull, Rev. C. F.. Patcrton. N. J. M E 

Hull. Rev. R. B., Brooklyn A B M U 

Hume. Mrs. C. R.. Ana<Iarko, I. T. P 

•Hume, Mr*. H. D., Indta ABCFM 

Humphrey. M.D., J. L., India M E 

Humphrey, Mrs, J. L., India M E 

lircy. Mrs. Z. M., New Haven. 

Brooklyn A B M U 
Roxbury. Mass. 

ABMU 
Haaaictitt. Rev. W. L.. C, C.losler, Mia^ 

Hunt, Mrs. E. M.. Trenton. N. J. _ „ P 
Htmt, Rev. E. W., Toledo. O., ABMU 
HuBt. Rev. R. M., Jamaica Plains. Maaj. 



Humphrey, 

Conn- 
Hnmpitone, Rev. 1.. 
Hunncman, Mis* I.. 



Hunter, D. A., Edinburgh, Scotlaod. FCS 
Hunter. G.. New Brunsw.ck. N. /., UD 
llunlington. Rev. W. K., New York PE 
Hupficld. Mrs. H. Baltimore. Md. MP 
Huriberl, Mrs. E. S., Chicago. HI. C 

Hurlburl. C. E., PhaadelpTia. l-a. AIM 
Hurlburt. Kev. J. L.. New York M E 

HurM. Hev. J. P., Waihiagron, D. C. ME 
Hurrt. Rev. W. C, OdasM. Del. M £ 

Huaaey, Mrs. A. M.. Africa A F B F M 
■Uucsey, T. B.. PaleiXine A F B F U 

HttaloB. Mrs. H., Newton, N. J. U E 

Huston. Mrs. J. T.. VVoostcr, O. P 

Uuichinaon, Rev. C. X., Hackettvlown, N.j. 

ME 
Hutchinson. Mrs. W. C. Xcoia. O. UP 
Hulton, Rev. U. U.. New Bruoswlck. N.J. 

RCA 
•Hyde. Rev. J- C. Africa ABMU 

Hyde, Rev. W. D.. Brunswick. Me. U M 
Ide. Mr>L. G. H.. Milwaukee. Wis. 

ABCFM 
Ide. H., Brooklyn, N. Y. P 

Ihian Ullah. Rev., India CMS 

I ngrrsoll. Rev £. P., Brooklyn, ABCFM 
Ingle. Rev. J. A.. China PE 

•Inglis, Rev. T. E., India P 

•Ireland, Mrs- O. R.. Africa A B C P H 

Irvine, Rev. A. India BOO 

Irvine. Mrs. M. O.. Danville, Ky. PS 

luara, W. M., New York. N. Y., .^ B H U 
Iiaacs. Mrs. W. M., New York. N. V. C 
Isham. Rev. G. W.. IndU M E 

Ubam, Mrs. G. VV., India ME 

Ivcs, Rrv. J. &. HartJord, Conii. 

ABCFM 

f aclcson. Rev. J. L., Chkaco, 111. ABUU 

Jackson, Mr*. M.. Philadelphia, Pa. C 

lackson. Rev. S. M.. New York BM 

ackson. Mrs. T. G., PUtbttsb. N. V. PE 

acobs, B. F., Chicago, 111. ABMU 

acobs, F. H.. Brooklyn, N. Y. HB 

ames, U. R., New Yort, N. Y. P 

ames. D. W., New York ABCFM 

antes, J. P.. S. Domingo AME 

'ameson, Rev. M., Burma ABMU 

aneway, M.D.. E- G.. New York, RCA 

aneway. Mrs. E. G.. firm Yorfc RCA 

aneway, J. J., New Bruoawick. N. J. 

RCA 

Jar\i». Miss Locy. New York, N. Y. S 
lay. Miss C. New VotV. N. V. PE 

Jay. Mrs. M.. Richmond. Ind. A F B F M 
layne. J. E., New York, .N. Y. SDA 
Jefferson, Rev. C. E.. New York. N. Y. 

ABCFM 
Mrfferys. M.O.. \V. H., China PE 

MetTerys, Mrs, \V. H.. China PE 

JefThes. Rev. C. J., New Castle, Pa. PM 
Jeffries, Mrs. W. S.. El Pa«», til. C 

jefts. Mrs. L. T.. HndKM). Hasa. MB 
Jenkins, Miss K. M.. Mt. PIcaaant. O. 

AFBFK 
enkini^ Rev. H., Cbiua ABMU 

rnkins, Mrs. H., China ABMU 

cnkins. Rev. H. D., Kansas City, Mo. P 
enkins. J. G., Brooklyn, N. Y. C 

cnnings. Miss C, New York C 

rnninsr. Mis* G.. ('hina CIV 

cssop. Mrs. ].. Brooklyn, N. Y. HE 
essup. Rev. \V., Syria P 

essup, Mrs. W.. Syria P 

esup, M. K., New York. N. Y. t 

ewdi, Mrs. C. A.. Hartford, Conn. 

ABCFM 
ohanasoo. Rev. C. J., Boston. Mass. !> 
obason. Mils B. G.. IlinMlale, HI H D 
ohnson. Rev. E. P.. Albany. N. Y.. RC A 
ohnson. Mrs. H.. New York. N. Y. WU 
ohoson. Mrs. H.. Chicago. 111. P 

ohosos. Rev. T. G., Farmingtoo, Conn. 

nM 

Johnson. Mn. J. C.. Fannington, Conn 

ABCFM 



Is 

1 



J 



DELEGATES AND MISSIONARIES 



40s 



I 

I 



Johnton, Mil* K. V., Japan F C M S 

JohOMii. M.D.. Mn. S. £.. India U P 
{ohnxHi, Mra. T., Burma A B M U 

ohoMsn, Rrv. T. C,, Kictitnond, Va. P S 
ohnwn. M.D.. T. S.. India M £ 

olinioa. Mrs. T. S., India M£ 

ohnMon. .M.D., Mrs-. India U P 

ohnmon. M.D., F. K., Franklin. Pa. 

ABMU 
, ohiuton. Rev. H.. Baltlmoiv. Md. M E 
ohnstnn. Rev. II. A.. New York. H. Y. P 
©hMton. Mr^ H. A New YotI.. N. Y. C 
ohnston. Rev. R.. London, Ottt, PC 

; ohn»ton, Mr». W. C. Africa P 

ohnstone, Miss A. E., Daitmuutli, N. S. 

n M P 

Joati. Mrs. A. H.. Ilion, N. Y. ME 

ones Mr.. C. I!.. BiookJine, Ma<». W U 

one». Mrs. E. M.. ChicaK". Hi C 

on«». Rey. H- L,, Wilke^barre. Pa. P E 

ones. Mr.. 11. ti.. Phila.. Pa. ABMU 

■ one*. Rtv. J. C, Raleigh, N. C. M E S 

ones, M". f. P., Imlia A B C F M 

' onei. R. tA, Haverford, Pa. A F B F M 

urdan. Rev. L. G., t^ui.viUc. Ky. NBC 

' ordan, Re». L, H., Toronio, Can. PC 

ordsn. Rev. W. VV., Clinton, Mass. 

ABCFM 
ludd. Mrs. O. P., MiddMown, Ccnn.. M E 
Jndd. O. R.. New York, N. V. H D 

Judd. Rev. W, B.. Hc^!s^d»ville. N. J. 

Judwn. Rev. E., New York ABMU 

JURcB, Rev. D. n., Fall River, Ma^i. 

A H M IF 
Jntteo. Mr*. D. D,. Fall River, Maia 

A UM U 
Kammcrer, Mi«* A. M.. Jajian E A 

Kirlson, Rev. A-. China C I M 

Kavanaah. Rev. A. S.. Broaklyn M E 

Kay. M.M I-. I., China C I M 

Kt*»cy. Mn.. >Jrw York. N. V. ME 

Keen. Mn. T. F.. Pliiladclnhia, Pa. C 

Keen. Mrs. S. L.. Philadelphia. Pa. M E 
Keen. M.D., W. W., Pliila.. Pa. .\ B M U 
KeiBwin, Mr*. A. N., Wilminglun. Del. P 
Keller. L.. Scranton, Pa. ABMU 

Kclley. Rev. W. V.. New York M E 

KclIoKg. A. B.. Buffalo, N. Y. FCMS 
Kellogz, a S.. New Yurk C 

Ketly. Ti. A.. Pinsburg. l-a. P 

Kelly, Mra. G. A.. Pituburit, Pa- P 

Kelly, Bev. G. C, Nashville, Tenn. M E S 
KelMy. \\n. S. A.. New York ^ ^ ^ C 
KelMy. Mrs. W. I.. Me:«ien A F B F M 
•Kemper. Mi*» 11. L.. India M E 

Kennedy. I. S., New York, N. Y.. ^, P 
Kennedy, Mr.. J. S.. New York, N. Y. C 
Kennedy, Rev. w. H.. Syracuse, N. V. 

WMCA 
Kent. Mrs. J. B^ Putnam, Conn. ABMU 
Kephart, Rev. E. B., Ann\nlle. Pa. U B 
Kerr, Rev. R. P.. Riclimond, Vn. 
Ktrr, Mrs. R- P.. Richmond. Va. 
Kerry. Rer. G.. London. Eng. 
Ktrry, Mrs. C.. London, Ensr- 
Kilbotne. A. W.. OraiiBe, N. J. 
KilRour. R.. Torontn, Can. 
•Kimball, MD.. Mi** G. N.. Turkey 

ABCFM 
Kimtifr, Rev. T., New York, N. Y. PE 
Kinn. C. A.. London, Eng. R T S 

King. Rev. II.. Providence, R. I., A B M U 
King. Rev. L, Auatralia L M S 

King, Mrs. I., Australia L M S 

King. Rev. J. M., Philadelphia. Pa. M E 
KinB, W, C.. Sprinnileld, Ma«». .'k B M U 
King. Mra. W. G.. New Yo:k. N, Y. C 
King, Rev. W. I., India M E 

Kingsbary. M.D.. F. L. Bulitaria 

ABCFM 
Kingsbnry. Urs. F. L.. Bulgaria. 

ABCFM 
Kinpom. R<r. H. A., Nw York, N. Y. 

HM 



PS 
11 M 
BMS 

nz M 

P 
PC 



Kumler. Rev. T. P. E„ Pittsburg, 
Kumlcr, Mrs. J. P. E.. Pituburg, 

Kupfct, Rrv. C. P., China 



Kip. Rev. L. W.. China RCA 

Kip, Mrs. L. W.. Cbina RCA 

Kirvcofe, Mn. A. R., Huntington, Ind. 

UB 
Kirk, Mr*. H., Belfaot. Ireland IPC 

Kituedge. Kev. A. E., New York. N. Y. 

H M 
Knapp, Rev. S.. Southington, Conn. 

ABCFM 
Knapp, Mid S. T.. New York, N. Y. P E 
Knerland. Mi»& B. E., New York M E 
Knceland, Mrs. M. D., Boston. Maj9. P 
Knisht, Mrs. L., St. Louis, Mo. P 

Knight, Mrs. S. H., UmncapoUs, Hinn. 

M E 
Knight. W. P., China CI M 

Knighi. Mrs. W. P.. China C I M 

Knipp, Rev. J. E., Dayton. O. U B 

Knotls, I, E., New York. N. Y. SVM 
Knotw. Mrs. J. E.. New York, N. Y.. H D 
KiiDwIcs. Mrs. J. H.. New York M E 

'Knuwlion. Mrs. L. A., China ABMU 
*Kno«. Rrv. t*. W,, Japan P 

•Kbok. Mrs. G. W., Japan P 

Knox, Mrs, J. DcWiu. New Yotk RCA 
KnoK, Mrs. J. M., Ilaliimnre. Md. P 

Knuhct, Rev. F. H,, New York. ELGS 
Kollen, G. J-. Holland. Mich. II M 

Kote. Rev. E. B., Alricai NBC 

KreckpT, Mm. li., lapan U E 

Kfcider, Mrs. J. 11 , Annville, Pa. C 

Krotcl. Rev. G. F.. Ea»t Orange. N. J. 

ABS 
Kuhlen. Ntics L. B.. India ABMU 

Kiihlmen. Rev. L., Frederick, Md. 

ELGS 
Kuliring, Mrs. G. A., Toronto. Can. 

CCM A 
Pa. P 
P*. P 
^..pfct, Rrv. C. P., China M E 

Kurti, Miss S I., India ABMU 

Kyle, Mill A. M., Boston. Uut. 

ABCFM 
UB 
America P 

America P 

iladelpfaia. Pa. U P 
Kyle, Mrs. M. P.. Alexis, 111. U B 

Kyle. Hcv. S. V„ Alexis. 111. H D 

LackihJrr, Hrv. M., Indiana S 

Ladd. Mis. E. H., Colombia P 

Ladd. Kcv. J. S., Bul8;tria M £ 

LaPetra. Rev. I- H., Chili ME 

LaFlarnnie, Mn. H. T., India BMP 

Laflin. Mr*. G. H.. Chicago. 111. P 

Lagcrquisi. A. W.. China CA 

LageTqmsi, Mn. A. \V., Cliina C A 

Lngronr. Hrv. W. S.. Sardin. Misa. M ES 
Ijiird. Mro. S.. Philadelphia, Pa. ELGC 
■Lambly. Miss M. K.. Japan MCC 

UinbuTh, M.D., W. R.. Nashville, Tenn. 

ME.S 
T.amrraiiK, Mrs. M. S,, Englewuod. lit. C 
Lamsan, Mrs. C. M., Auburndalr, Mais. 

ABCFM 
Lanison. Miss K. G., Boston, Mass. 

ABCFM 
Undi.. J. P., Dayt-oii. O. H D 

LanRdor). Rev. W, M., New York. N. Y.. P 
Liitiginbjther. C. K-, New Vork C 

L.-i,ntiine, W . .S., Trcninn, N. J. P 

Lapslry, J. S.. Annlsion, Ala. P S 

Larkin. Mrs. VV.. Cobleskill. N. Y. 

ELGS 
La«h^r, Rev. ('•. W., Cincinnati. O. 

ABMU 
Lathrop, Rev. E., New York. N. Y. 

ABMU 
Ijilhrop, Miss H., Providence, R. I., 

A B C F M 
•L.i(hror.. Miss M. C. India W U 

I-il.nier. R. 1-. Philadelphia, Pa. V P 

Ijitter, Rev. A. P., Rosemooi, Ont. HD 
I-ailghrin, Rev. J. ft.. China P 





MEMBERS OF THE CONFERENCE 



4 



t^ughUa Rev. J. \\'.. St Loou. Ho. C 
Laven. Rev. A. H., St. Gcorgr, N. B. 

BMP 
Lkvenr. Ura. R.. Ml. Vernoa. N. Y. U E 
■La.. Uu» E. M.. Srrn P 

La.icDcc. Miu O. H., New Vorfc RCA 
L**Trncc, K.. Ntw York. N. Y. C 

Liwrcnce. Mn. R. W.. New York C 

LawrcfKc, W. U.. Chicago. lU. ABMU 
l-»*.. M.D.. R.. Africa FCS 

'LawK)!!. MUt A £.. India M E 

LavioB. R«v. A. C, Camden. N. J. 

ABUU 
Lawton. C J., Alrica A M E 

Lar. I. C, New York. N. V. C 

Lm. Rev. F. T., Afnca F C M S 

Leaycraft, Mist A. C. New York. M E 
Lcjveiafi. Mrs, j. E.. New York, N. Y., C 
I^fc. Kev. ('.., (Tiina P 

Lcdbrtier. Hev. ;. H.. Denver. CoL M E S 
Lee. Rev. E. T.. Cmctniiaii. O. P 

Lcc. Rev. J. W.. Si. Luuit. Mo. M E S 
I.eech, Mrs. J. M., NMhvillr, Tcnn. M E S 
Leeds, Mrs- S. P., Hanover, S. H. 

A B C F M 



fcff, 



Mrs. J.. W'oTxnster. Ma»s. M E 

nrcry, Mi»« E., So. America M E 



A H C F M 



P 




A^r^ > 1 1 Liw^ i*< .««a«. ^., m 

■Leiich. Mi<». Ceylon A li i. r in 

'Lritch, Misa M. M.. Ccykm A B C F M 
Lifl^cScuT. Rev. U. W.. New York, 

N. Y. C A 

l-poiDgton. Rev. G. C, Braid P 

l^onard. Rev. A. B.. New York M E 

I.^onBTd. G. L.. New York YMCA 

Leonard, Rev. J. M.. MelroM. MaM. M E 
Levering, Rev. F. H., India ABUU 

LeveririB. M.D.. Mrs. L F., India 

A B^t U 
LcverinK. J.. Rattimorc. Md. SBC 

I^vy. Mark. New York S 

Lewt». Mr». H,, .Mt- Vernon, N. Y. M E 
I-ewii, E. E.. Sioux Citv. la. ABMU 
Lewia. Mr*. E. E.. Sioax Cilv. la.. ABMU 
L«wis. Rev. I- W'.. Louisville, Ky. M E S 
Lewis, Mrs. M. N.. Kimira. N. Y. P 

Lewis. Urt. R. V,. Irvinron, N. Y. C 
Lewis. Rev. S.. Cbina M E 

Lewis, Mrs. S., Cliina M E 

•Lryeoberger, Mrs. J A., China P 

Lryenbergrr. Rev. J. P,. Toronto. Can. 

PC 
Lhamon. Rev. \V. T., AUeihenv, Fa. 

F C M S 
LIchlcnbcTgcr, Rev. J. P., Buffalo. N Y. 

FCMS 
•Ligums. Rev. J.. Japan P E 

•Lindberg. Mlu Nf.. Atnca A 1 M 

I-in(l*ar. Rev, J. S.. Boston. Mass, P E 
Lines, Rev. E. S., New Haven, Conn.. P E 
L'ppard. Rev. C. K., Japan H L U S 

Llppincott. Mn. J.. Newton Centre. Mas*. 

ABMU 
Liltle, Rev. A.. Dorcbcster, Maaa. 

ABCFM 
*LiHle. Miss A. C. Micronesia ABCFM 
Liitic. Rev. F,. Augusta, Ark. M E S 

Litlle, .Mrs. H. S.. Deuison, Tex. P 

Liltle. Rev. 1. I,.. Cliina P S 

Lloyd. Rev. A S., New York. N Y. P E 
Ltoyd. Rev. J. J.. Lynchburg. Va. P £ 
Lloyd. Rev. ft'. F.. Louisville, Ky. M E S 
l^bcnstine. W. C, New York. N. Y. P 
Loch. Rev. J. W.. Brooklyn. N. Y. C 

•Locke. Rev. A. H.. China PE 

•Lcitke. Rev. W- F... Bulgaria ABCFM 
•Ltickr. Mrv W. E., Bulgaria ABCFM 
LoKan. Miss M. E . India U P 

Logan, Rev. M. P.. Wyilieville. Va. P E 
Lonrc. Rev, N. L, Minneapolis. Minn. 

H N L 
Longacre, Rev. A. New York. N. Y. M E 
Longden. W. C. China M F. 

I.ongden, Mrs. W. C. China M E 

Longstrcih. Mra. C. A.. Phila.. Pa. IT D 



l^oomis, Krv. S. L.. Boaao. ABCFM 
Lord. Rev. H. D.. Brooklyn ABMU 
Lorimer, Rev. C. C. Boston. Maaa. 

ABMU 
Loucka, Rev. A. C. Ilion, NY. M'E 

Longee. W E.. New York, N. Y. C 

Lounsbury. Rev. E. W.. CbJca«o, IlL 

ABMU 
Love. M.D.. R. M.. Paraguay SAMS 
Loveioy. Rev. W. P.. Atlanta, Ga. M E S 
Lovejoy, Mr*. W. P.. .Mlania. Ga. MRS 
I»vrli, Rev. R , London. Eng. R T S 

Low. Seth, New York, N. Y. H M 

Low. \V. G.. New York. NY. PE 

Lowe. Mrv E. M.. Kansas City. Mo. 

FCMS 
Lowrie. Miss R., PhilaJclphia, Pa. P 

Lowric, Miu .S. R., Wamnr's Mark. Pa , P 
Lowry. Mrs. A. U. Philadelphia. Pa. R E 
Lowry. Rev. H. II., China M E 

Loyd. Miss M. DeF.. Mexico M E 

Lnheck. Rev. H,, New York HD 

Lucas. Rev. B I) , China U ES 

Luce, Rev. \V. A.. Taunton. Mats. U E 
Luther. .M.D., Mr». C. V., Burma. ABMU 
I.iiiher. Rev. B, A.. Burma ABMU 

Luther, Rev. K. M., So. Orange. N. J. 

ABMU 
Lybycr, A. H., Turkey p 

Lyman. Rev. A. I., Brooklyn. ABCFM 
Lytnan. Mri. D. 1)., LaGrange. 11). P E 
Lynch. M.D.. F. P.. Alria ABMU 
Lynn, Rev. E., India B 

Lyoi^ M.D.. C. H., Chin* P 

Lyon. Miu £. A.. Oiina FCMS 

Lyon, Rev. G. W., Maditonville. Ky. 

M ES 
Lyons. Rev. S, R-. Monmouth, lit UP 
Mabie, Rev. U. C, Boston. Mass.. ABMU 
Msbie, Mrs. H. C. Busion, Mass.. ABMU 
Mabic, Rev. H. S., Southfield, Mass. 

ABMU 
Mabie. H. W.. New York. N. Y. HM 
Mabic, Miss M., Boston, Mass. ABMU 
McAfee. Rev. C. B., ParkviUe. Uft. P 

McAllister. Miss A.. Africa P 

McBee, S., New York, N. Y. P E 

McBryde, Rev. H. J„ Lcainglon, Va, HM 
McCall, Rev. H. f , Brajil H B 

McCalU. B. II.. Washington. D. C. tlii 
McCampl>ctl. Mr». M. J., Louisville. Ky., P 
McCarroll, W.. New York. N. Y. C 

McCancc, Rev. D. B.. Japan HU 

McCancc. Mrs. D. B.. Japan H If 

McCartney, M.D., /. H.. China M E 

McCanney. Mr». J. H., China M E 

McCanncy. Mra. S. E. K . China M E 
McCarty. Rev. S. L.. Tallaha.iee. Fla.. H D 
McClure. Kcv. J. G K.. L-ike Fofc.t. Ill, P 
McOurc. Rev. <V. T., Marshall. Mo., M £ S 

r 

AIM 

P 

ME 



I 



McConatighy. Mtss B. II., China 
McConkey. J. H.. \Va»h«w, N. C 
McCook, T. J.. New York. N. Y, 
McCurd. Miss M., Lewision. Pa. 
MrCormack, Kev. S. B., I'lttsbnrg, Pa_ P 
McCormtck, Rev. H P., Mexico SBC 

McCowan, Rev. \V. S.. Paierwwi, N. J. 

U E 
McCracVen. H. M . New York. N. V_ H M 
McCurdy. J. C. Philadelphia. Pa. A B M U 
McDonald. .\., Cincinnati. O. P 

McDonald. Mrs. G. W., Allcghcnjr.r»., U P 
MrDnnnld. I S., Minnrapntii, Minn. P 
McDonald. \V., Brooklyn. N. Y. M 

McDowell. Rev. W. F.. New York M E 
McElveen. Kcv. W. T., Boston. Mais- 

AUCFM 
McEtwain. R<^•. J., Bojton. Maw. 

McEwcn. Miss. Lake6cld. Ont P C 

McEwcn. Rev. H. T.. Amstctdam. N. Y. 

HU 
McEwcn. Mn. H. T.. Aratlerdam. N. V.. C 
McEwen. Rev. W. S.. Pittsburg. Pa. P 



DELEGATES AND MISSIONARIES 



407 



uid, KcT, 
■ad, Un. 



K. 



W Eppt 



«ypt 



r»n, Rev. I. G.. India FCMS 
r»n, Mrs. J. G.. India FCMS 

y, Kev. S. S.. Nrwcasllc. Pa. F M 
irr. Rev. E- B,. Lao* i- 

ary, Mn. E. B.. Laos I* 

lU, Rev. R. H.. Hunier, Ont. 

CCM A 
iIkd. Rev. J. A., Bridgeport, Can. 

rcc 

•v, Rev. G. H., India M E 

nr, Mrs. G. K.. India M E 

re. Rev. W. S.. Harardvilk. 
in. ME 

>ib, Re*. J. a., Jamaica, W. I. 

W MS 
Rev, J. S., Buller. Pa. UP 

, Mrt. M. D.. India U P 

, Rev. W,. DaytoQ, O. UP 

vtf. Mr«. r. C, New York U 1' 
lie, Kev. A., C4imbricl2e, Mats. 

A B C F M 
bin. Rev. W., Cincinnati. O. P 

hir. Rev. W . K.. China A B M U 
I, Rev. R. H., Washington, D. C. 

PE 
ley, Miss M. B.. Ncvr York M E 
l«r. W., Washington. IX C. H M 
ney, Mrs. E. P.. Binehamton. 
Y. P 

gbl. Miaa L. New Vork M E 

ght, Mrs. J. A.. Hidlry Park, Pa. P 
en, D.. Edinburgh. Scol., U P C S 
HI, Mrs. £>., EdiaDuigh, Scotland 

U P C S 
ta. Mi«s G. M.. Tofkcy, A B C F M 
chlan, Mr*. J. .S., Oiicago. [II. P 

fhlin, Mra. S.. Foroote. Can. PC 
rio, Hcv. D. D.. Delroil, Mich. 

A B M U 
rtD, Miss E. D.| Boiton. Matt. 

ABMU 

rin. Rev. J., India ABMU 

--'■■■- c 

C I M 

P 

MES 

SDB 

P 

Brooklyn. A B C F M 

ME 

P 

H M 

P 

P 

UP 



nn. nev. j., tnaia 

B, Rev. A.. Cincinnati, O. 

n, H., ('htna 

n. Miss J. F.. Perili 

n. R<:v. J. H.. DallM. Tex. 

rn. Kev. A., Rocbvillc. R. I. 

d. Rev. J., ,Scr;iutfin, Pa. 

d. Rev. T. B., B 

4ion, Mri. J. L.. India 

llan, Mc4. /., Atricii 

rry, F. M.. New York, N. V. 

r. Rev. T. M., Japan 

r. Mn, T. M.. jipan 

fher. Rev. J., Piitsburg, Pa. 

igbtoo. Rev. J. P., Turkey 

A B C F M 
igbton, Mra. I. F., Turkey 

AKCFW 
T»on. Mi« E. L., Eoiton, Maiv, P 
rson. Rev, S. T., Lawteacevillc, 
J. P 

rsQiii Mra. S. J., Lawrenceville, 

J. P 

■•ton. Mis*. Hamilton, Ont. PC 

«lon. Mrs. I. N., Ilamilloii. Onl, P C 
ish, Kev. D,. J rjmnlQ, Cnti. P C 
. Rev. W, P.. C hmi» M E 

ir. Mi»s. Providence. R. I. P E 
U. Rev. W. N., Providence, R. I. 

PE 
Eiams. D. W.. New York. N. Y. P 
liams, Rev. T. S.. Montreal, Can. 

PC 
im, F, W.. Turkey A B C F M 

inc, G. W., AccringtoD, Eng. 

BMS 
dmr. Rev. R. S., New York. N. Y. 

A BMir 
thur. Mrs. R. S.. New York. N. Y. 

ABMU 
niel, J. W^ Cedar Rapids. la. U D 
Uld, Rev. J. A., Toronto, Can., P C 



Macey, Mra. E. K.. Weslcnt SpringB. 

ill. C 

Macka/. Rev. A. B.. Montreal, Cui. PC 
Mackay. Rev. D. 5.. New York S 

Mnckajr, Rev. M. O.. Liverpool. Eng. 

BMS 
.Mackay. Rev. B. P., Toronto, Can, PC 
Mackenzie, Rev. R.. San Francisco, Cal., P 
MAckensLc. Mra. R., San FrBtici»cc. Cal„ P 
Mackeniie, Kev. VV. I)., ChicagLi. III. 

A H f* P M 
.MacUren. Rev. D.. Alexandria. Can. P C 
.Maciarcn, J. J.. Totonlo. Can. M C C 

MacI.suKhlin, Mrs. £. L., Kalamuou, 

Mich. ABCFM 

MacLaucLn, Mils E. D.. Boston, Mass. 

ABM ir 

•Maclay. M.D., R. S., China H M 

MacMillan. Rev. J. W.. Lindsay, Oni., P C 
MucWtllJc. A., Allantic City. N. J, H D 
Maghee. Miis F.. Evaiisvillc. Ind. C P 
MagTudcr. Kev. J. M., Sp&rtAuburg. 

S. C. PE 

Magvire, Rev. G.. Alrloi I 

Msguice. Mrs. G., Africa I 

Mahan, A. T., New York. N. Y. HM 

Main. Rev. A. E.. Plainficld. N. J. S » B 
Ma.n. Rev. W. M.. Syr.-icuse. N. V. H D 
Mams. Kev. G. P.. New Vtrrk. N. V. M E 
Mnilland. A., New Vork. N. V. P 

Makepeace. Rev, F. B.. New York. N. Y. 

^ ABCFM 

Mallory. Mrs. E. P. T,, Macon. Ga. 

SBC 
Manett. Rev. J. C, Sweetwater. Tcnn. 

MES 
Mann. V. A.. Orange, N. J. P E 

Manning. Rev. J. W.. St. /ohn. N. B. 

Manning, Mrs. J. W.. St. John. N. B. 

Manscll. Mrs. F P.. India M E 

MansAvM. D.. New Haven. Conn. P E 
MaitilB. Rev. F. E, Braitlcboro, Vt. 

ABMU 
Marin. Rev. M. C, Spain ABMU 

Macin, Mra. M. C, Spain ABMU 

Markue, Mrs. I.. Philadelphia, Pa. PE 

•Marling. Mra, A. W.. Africa P 

Marricol!. Miss J. A., New York H D 

Marsh, Rev. C. IL. Lindsay, Ont. CC M S 
Marih, Mrs. C, II.. Lindsay. Oat. C C M S 
Marshall. A. W.. India P 

Mnr-ihall. Rev T., New York. N. Y. P 

'.Martin. Rev. C, Laos P 

Martin. Miss F.. E.. Oltcrbem, Ind. ME 
Martin. Mr*. G. E-. Philadelphia. Pa. P 
Martin. Rev. W. A. J.. Braniiwd. Onl. 

PC 
Mason, Rev A. DeW., New York RCA 
Mason. .Mrs. A. DeW.. New York H 1) 
Mason, Rev. J,. BrooVlm. S. Y P M 

Maxoxi, Mra. O., Wincheiidon. Mass, 

A U i: F M 
Massey. C. D.. Toronto, Can. il V P 

Mai*ey. Mr'. -A- [_, Philadelphia. Pa. P 
'Massic. Rev, H. K.. China FK 

*Matsic. Mrs. R, K.. China PE 

Masters, M,D., Miss L., Thornton. Ind. 

M E 
Mastick. Mrs. S. C. New York. N. Y. C 
Moterr, Rev. R. M., China P 

Matecr. Mrs R. M . China P 

Mather, S.. Cleveland, O. P E 

Matlhews. Kev. G. M.. Dayton. O. U B 

Matthews, Kev. G. W., .^mericus. Ga. 

MES 
Matxunan, F,, Japan H !> 

Me.nJ. Mr<. E. S,. South Iladtcy. Mass, 

ABCFM 
'Mead. Rev- W W. Turkey ABCFM 
'MeaJ. Mrs. \V W . Turkey ABCFM 
.Mears. Rev, D. O.. Albany. N. Y. P 

Mehius, Kev. F. K-, So. America CA 

Mechlin. Rev. J. C. PcTsi* P 



MEMBERS OF THK CONFERENCE 



Meckel, Rer. T. C. Erie. Pa. E A 

MHliury. Ml» II. L-. P«>ia ? 

MMkcr. Rev. J. M.. Pttemon. N. I. M E 
Ueek«. .Mr*. R. V.. Weehawken. K. 1. 

RCA 
MceMF. Rev. R. B.. Worec^lrr, Mass. 

ABSklU 
Meigs. Rev. F. E.. China FCMS 

MHgii, Mr». T. B., New York. N. Y. C 
Hefcltelsoii, Mil* J.. Africs M E 

'Melton. Miss A., Persia P 

Menkel. P.. Afnca P 

Mrnkel. Mrs. P., AfHu P 

MetiHl. Rev. P. A.. Waihingion. D. C 

GES 
Mcrerfilti. Mr*. L., Oak Park, Itl. M E 

Mere<liil>. Rev. R. R.. Drookl^n. A Q C F M 
Mrtrnfhky. Rev. A., Dcilin. Ucrminy C S 
Merrill, Air*. 1>. F., Montctair. N. I. M E 
Merrill. Mrs. P.. New YorU. N. Y. C 

Merrill. W., Milwjukec. Wit. P 

•Merrins. FL M.. China PE 

•Mcrrin*. Mrs. E. M., China P E 

Merritt. Rev. C. B.. Somerjworth. N. H. 

ABMU 
MrtcaK. E. P., Providence. R. 1., H D 

Middendorf. Miss L. F.. New York C 

Mithur*. A. >V.. New York. X. Y. C 

MilUr. Rev. A- C. Conwar. Ark. MES 
Millar. W. H.. New York. N. Y. H D 

Millard. Rev. C, W., Yonkers, N. V. M E 
Millard. Mr*. C. W., YonUers. N. Y. ME 
Miller, Mrs. C A., New York. N. Y. C 

Miller, V. O.. StnnifuTd. Conn. M E 

Miller. D.. Rcjidms. Pa. R C U S 

Miller. Mr». D. M.. Brooklyn. N. V- P 

Miller. F_ L.. Philadelphia. Pa. P E 

Millrr, Mr*. K. M. F., New York. N. Y-. C 
Miller. Rev. F, S . Korea P 

Miller. Rev, II. K. Tspan RCL h 

Miller, Mt,. II, K. Japan RCU^ 

MillfT. Mrs. I. H.. Uncoln. Neb. P 

Miller. Mrs. L. O.. ITiaytDn, O. U B 

Miller. Rev. R. J., PiMshurg. P«. 1.1 P 

Miller. Rev. R. W.. Philadelphia, Pa. II D 
Miller. Mi« T.. China CIM 

Miller. Rev. W. H.. Bryn Mawr, Pa. P 

Miller. W. T.. New York. N. V. R P 

Millican, Rev. C. K.. Dunkirk. Md. MES 
Mills, A., MorriiiiDwn. N. T. P E 

Mills. H. C, IIuRalo. N. Y. ABM IT 

MiUs, Rev, J. S.. Denver, Colo. U H 

Mills. W. W., Marietta. O ABCFM 

Milla. Mrs. W. W., Marietta. O 

ABCFM 
Mitchell. Mr». A., Philadelphia. Pa. P 

Mitchell. Mr.. C. E.. New York. A H C F M 
Mitchell. Rev. C. N.. Bolivia BMP 

Milchell, Mrt. C. N„ Bolivia BMP 

Mmitn. Rev J. F.. Rome. C«. MES 

Mnffatt. MrR. R., Africa CCFMS 

Mohn, J. C, Reft»line. Pa. UEC 

Mohorter. Rev. 1. H.. BoMon, Mass. 

FCMS 
Mokoney. M. M., Africa 
Moland, W.. Philadelphia. Pa. 
Mollcr, Mi»s C. Ne« York 
Holler, C. P., Brooklyn, N. Y. 
Moller. Miss L.. New York 
Monforl, Rev. t.. Cincinnati. O. 
Monroe. Rev. H. A., Phila.. Pa. 
Monigcirnery, Miss IL. China 
MoniiT'iiTiery. Mrs. W. A., Rocbester. 

N. Y. ABMU 

Mood. Rev. J. H^ Mexico M E 

Moodie. Mrs. T.. Montreal, Can. 

CCFMS 
Moody. Mrs. D. L,, Northlield. Ma« . H M 
Moody. Rev. E.. HilUdalc. Mich. F B 

Moody. Rev. T. L.. Diekiion. Tenn.. MES 
Moody. \\. K . Nnnhfirld. Ma«. H M 

Moon. A., ChicftRo. III. SDA 

Moore, Uiss B. M.. AtlanUc City. N. I. 



AME 

P 



C 

P 
M E 

P 




Moore. Rev. E. C™ Providence. R. I. 

ABCFM 
Moore, F. C New York. N. Y. C 

Moore. H. I>., Haddnnfietd, N. J. P 

Moore, H. M.. Somerville. Mass. 

ABCFM 
Moore, Rev. I. M., San Anioniu, lex. 

Moo«. Rev. T. M.. Oaytor, N, J. P 

Moore. Mrs. J. M.. Qaytoo. N. J. P 

Moore. Rev. J. P.. Japan R C U S 

Moore. Mr*. J. P.. Upan R C L' S 

Moore. Miss L. Catletuburg. Ky. MES 
Moore. Miss .M.. Dallas. Tex. MES 

•Moure. Miss M. A.. Bnuil M £ 

Moorr. Rev. W., Ottawa. Can. PC 

Moore, Rev. W. \V.. Richroood. Va. PS 
Moran. Miss A.. India UP 

Morehouse, Rev. H. L.. New York, 

ABMU 
Horsan, Rev. C E., Richmond. Va. 

FCMS 
Horsan. J- P.. New York. N. Y. H VP 

Morsan. .Mrv M., Rattiinon-. Md. ME 
Morgan. Rev M. A. .McKae. C^ MES 
Morgan. Mrs. M. A.. .McRar. Ga. MES 
Morgan. R. C, London. Kng. H U 

Morgan. Mrs. R. C. London. Eoff. H H 
Morsan.JRcv. T J . New York. ABMU 
D.. Korea 



ME 

N BC 

NBC 

P 

NBC 



Morris. Rev. C 

MorriA. Rev. C S., Africa 

Mum^ .Mr». C. S, .Africa 

Mom*. Mrs. E.. Indra 

Morns. Rev. E. C. Helena. Atk. 

.MojTis. Mrs- E. C-. Plulodelphia. Pa. P 

Mams. E. F , Mon«>n. Ma**.. ABCFM 

Slam*. Miss M. H., Lmhervillc. Md 

ELGS 
Morris. T. W.. New York, N. Y. P 

Morrison. Rev P. M.. Hahfax. N. S.. PC 
Mor«, Rrv. I,. 11,. India 
M.ir»e, Mr*. L. D . India 
Morse. R. C. New York. N. Y. 
Morse. Mi»s R. F., New York 
.Morl'in. Rev. J.. W. Indies 
Murlon. Mrs, I., W. Indtes 
If. 



Moses. Mrs. 



bo. 

BOi 

YMCS 

YWCA 

PC 

PC 

E.. lodiaoapolis, Jnd. 



FCUS 

ME 

PB 

ABMU 

SVM 



Moses. >fiss I., So. .America 

■Moshrr, Miss C. B. China 

Moss, Rev. L., Plainlield. N. J. 

Molt. J. R.. .New York. N. Y. 

Mollcl. Mrs. H.. New York. N. Y. PE 

Mnwalt, Sir O,. Toron'o. Can. II V P 

Moxom. Rev. P. S., Springfield, Mass. 

ABCFM 
Mudge, Rrv. L. S.. Trenton. N. J. P 

Muller. Rev. L, D. C. PasMic N. J.. M t 
*Mulliacr. Miss C. Mexiro MES 

Mullins. Rev. E. Y., Louisvilt*. Ky.. SBC 
Murray. D.. New Branswick. N. }.. RCA 
Murray. Rev, J. L., St. Catherine. ClB. 

PC 
Murray. Rev. R,. Halifax. N. S. PC 

Murray. R. I.. New York. N. Y. C 

Murray. \V. D.. New York, N.V VMCA 
Murray, Rev. W. I„ S,, WilminKlon, 

Bel. \| E 

Musser. Rev. C. J.. Pliila.. Pa.. RCt"S 
Mutchmofc, Mrs. S. A.. Phila., Pa. P 

Myers. Rev. A. R. New York. N. Y.. II D 
Myers. H. S.. Hillsdale. Mich. H fl 

Myers. Rev, Q. A., China M E 

Myrland, Rev, E. L., Chrisiiania, Nor 

way H p 

Nalder. Mrs. T.. Windsor. N. S. BMP 
Nash. A.. Cleveland. O. Y M C A 

Nastnilh, ). IJ. Toronto. Can.. CCFMS 
Nasmith, Mrs. I. D.. Toronto, CaiL 

CCFMS 
Nastaii. Rrv. R. H.. Africa P 

Neeld, Rev. F. L.. India U E 

Neeld. Mrs. F. L-. India HE 

Neely. W.. New York. N. Y. UP 

Nclscir. A. H.. Chicago. HI. ABMU 



^ 



DEUSGATES ^tlD MISSIONARIES 



409 



If 
I 
ft 



I 



I 

ft 

I 

ft 



Nelwij. Rev. E. A.. Bnxtl SBC 

NrlMn. Mrs. E. A.. Bnuil SBC 

Nelson, Hev. H. W,. Onrva, N. Y. I' E 
Nclton. Rev. T. H., Bruil M E 

Nelson. Rev. J. R.. W»co. Tex. M E S 
Newlwld, Mi%» C. A.. New York C 

NeocoRib, Miss !I, D., India ABMU 
NewRuo. Mr»- T. I*.. Nt* York M K 

Ncwmu), Rev. ). W.. Birmingham, Aim 

Newman, Urt. J. W., Bitniinghani. Ala. 

M E S 
Newman. Rev. 5. M., Waiihinzion. 

U. C. A 11 C !■■ M 

Niccolls. Rev. S. J-. St. Louii. Mo. P 

Nichols. Rev. R. A., Worecster, Maai. 

F C M S 
Nichols. W. H.. Brooklyn. N. Y. C 

Nicholion, Rev. G. W., Britlgcport, Conn. 

ABM U 



Nicholion. Mi» K. S., Philiu. Va. 
N.choJion, Miss M. P.. Phil«.. l-a. 
Nichobon, Rev. W. R., Phila,, Ta. 
Ntles. Mrs. N.. Ma.li.on. N. J. 



K E 
K E 
RE 
PE 

PE 
M E 

U£ 

Mr. 

U E 



Nile*. Rev- W- E.. Concord 
'.Vind. Rev. G- D-, Uracil 
.N'indc, Mr». M. C. DcUoii, .Mich. 
Ninde. Miw M. f... Dclrt.d. Midi. 
Ninde. Rev. W, X.. Detmh. Mich. 
Noble. Mis* A. J.. BufTalo, N. Y. 

ABM U 
Nrtble, Rev- E. A., Brooklyn. N. Y. M E 
Noble. M.D,. W. C. China A B C F M 
Noble. Mr*. W. C. China A B C F M 
North. Mrs. E. J., Mt. Vernon. N. Y. 

North, Rev. F. M., New Yarlc M E 

North. Mr». F. M.. New Ycirk M E 

Nottbca. W. J.. Atlanta. Ga. S [U- 

Norvell. Mr«. \V. E.. Nashville. Tctjn.. I' L' 
Ncye». Mrs. C. H- Wam-n. Ta, M E 

Noyea. Rer. E. U., Ncwion Ccnirc, 

M»»». A B C F M 

Noyei. Mrs. H. D.. Hyde ^«'*: J*J?t „ 

Nutter. Rev. C. S.. St. .Mlwns. Vl M E 
•.Vutting. M.D.. D, H.. Turkey. A BC F M 
'NutiinK. Mr^ I). II.. Turkey. A B C F VI 
Nutlmg. Mrv C. B., Turkey, ABCFM 
Nmiing. Miss M. (.;., Turkey. ABCFM 
Nutlina. Rev. \V.. Providence, H. 1. 

A R C F M 
OtKf, C. K., {"hi«iun, 11L V M C A 

Odell. Rev. \V. P..^cw York. N. Y. M E 
Odell. Mrs. \V. I'.. New York. N, Y. M K 
OrfKcrs, Miss E.. Chicago. 111. M h 

Oemr. Rev. J. H., New Y..rk RCA 

Oetingcr. A.. PhiladHpbia. Ha- AIM 

O^burn, Rev. T. J., Summerficld, N. C. 

•Otdtather. Mrs. J. M.. Persia P 

■Oldham. Rev. \\ . I-"., Malaysia M E 

•Oldham, Mr». W. F.. Malaysia M E 

OltsoD. Kcv. E., So. America C A 

niniWead. Rev. C. T.. New York V F. 

•Olmslead. M><.* S. IE.. Turkey. ABCFM 
O'Meara. A. E-, Toronto. Can, C L' M A 
O'Mcan, Rev. T, R., Toronio, Can. 

C C M A 
Orbio. C. PiusburK. Pa. M E 

Ordway. Mr*. S.. Sndn*. N. Y. P 

Orue. H. M.. New York. N. Y. H D 

nrr. A. K.. New Vmk. N. Y. A B S 

0«ads. Rev. T., Japan ABCFM 

Oibom. Rev. A. C- Colombia. S. C. 

A B M U 
OsboTlie. Rev. L. S,. Nrwark, N. J. P E 
Osbonie. Rev. W. B.. India M E 

Osborne, Mr-t. \V. B.. India M E 

Osgood. H., Hr«Ion. Mn*.. ABMU 

•Orgood. Mr«. H. W.. China ABCFM 
Osterhout. Rev. I. V.. Providence. R. I. 

HD 
Owen. Rev. C.. China LMS 

Owen. Rev. J. A., Jersey City. N. J. ME 




Owco, Rev. W. A.. New Roehelle, N. Y. 

nivens, Rev. W. S., Chicago. III. U P 

Packard. Rev. E. N.. Syracuw, N. Y. 

ABCFM 
Packard, Mrs. K N.. Syracuse. N. Y. 

ABCFM 
Packer. E E.. Albany, N. Y. ABMU 
Paine. R. T.. Borton, Mass. P E 

Palmer. Mm. A. F.. CambridBe. Mass. 

ABCFM 
Palmrr. Rev. A. t.. New York. N. Y.. M E 
Palmer. Mrs. A.X. New York. N. Y., M E 
Palmer. Miss E. E.. St. John. N. B. 

Palmer. H. E. W.. Atlanta. Ca. M E S 
Palmer. Miss M. E., Indtanapoli*. Ind. 

ADCFM 
Palmer. Uiu M. M., Japan P 

Palmer. R.. Noank, Conn. ABMU 

I'nlmorc. Hev. W. B.. St. Louis. Mo- 

M ES 
Pangolli, Rev. F. N., So. America ABS 
Park, Mr*. S. S.. Gatveston. Tex. M ES 
Parker, Rev. E. \V.. India ME 

Parker. Mrs. E, W.. India ME 

Pnrker. Mi» T. A., Mexico M E 

Parkn. Rev. H. B.. New York A M E 

Parmelcc. Mi»s li. F.. Japan ABCFM 
Parcish. Rev. C. H.. Louisville, Ky,. NBC 
Parrote. Mis* J. K., Burma ABMU 

Pationi. MiH. Rye, N. Y. P 

Pardon*. Mi» F^ C., New York. N. Y. P 
Par5on^. W. H.. Rye. N. Y. C 

l-attriaBc, Kev. S. B.. Chins ABMU 
Patmdirc, Rev. VV. G.. Cincinnati, O. 

A B H U 
I'atun, Kev, r. G-, New Heliriilcs P 

Patrick, Miss M. M., Turkey ABCFM 



CLS 

I' 

CP 

H E.S 

U VP 

M E 

PS 



t^ctcrson. itcv. U., London, r-na. 
Pall<r»on, Rev. G.. Orange. .\. J. 
Pnttcison. J. M.. St. Luun. Mi>. 
Paitilin. Rev. C E.. St. Louis, Mo. 
I'auisoB, cK-Gov.. Pennsylvania 
Pa:roii. Mrs. A., Curwcntville. I*a. 
PaKon. Miss .V V.. Meaicu, Mo. 
Paitun, Rev. C. H-, Si. I^ui*. Mo. 

ABCFM 
Potion. Mii» E.. India P 

J'aitoii. Rev. F. A„ Princeton, N. 1. P 

Paul. Mr*. H. N,. Philadelphia. Pa. P 
Pa:.tnn. Kev. T. \V.. China PS 

pRKton. Rev. W. M.. PrinceloB, N. J. P 
Payton. Mrs. \V., Danville. 111. M E 

Pcaljody, C. F^ New York, N. Y. P E 

Pearcc, Mri. £.. Syria P 

Pcarcc. Rev. J. E.. Bridgewater, Masa. 

.ME 
Pcarce, Rev. T. W.. China LMS 

Penrce, Mrs. T- W., China LMS 

Pearson, A. IT. Northfield. Minn. H M 
Peck. M.D., A, P., Cliina 
Peck. .Mrs. A. P., China 



ABCFM 
A B C F .M 

RCA 
RCA 

N. y. H D 

A H C F M 

ABCFM 

PE 

PE 

Men 

P 

P 



Pceke. Kcv. H. V. S„ Japan 
Peeke, Mri. H. V. S.. Japan 
Peel. M.D.. E. VV., New VWk, 
Pert, Rev. W.VV., Turkey 
Feet. Mrv W. W., Turkey 
•Penick. Rev. C, C., .Mrica 
•Penick. Mrs. C. C. Alrica 
Penner. Rev. P. A.. India 
Penrose. Mi^s V, F.. Philadelphia, Pa. 
Pentecost. Rev. G. F-. Yonkers, N. Y. 
Pentreath, A. tt.. New York. N. Y. B 

Pepper, J. K.. Memtihis. Tenn. M E S 

Penne. H,. Brnr>klyn. N. Y. Y P 

Perkins. E H-, Bafilmore, Md. P 

Perkins. Rev. VV.. London. Eng. W M M S 
Perrin. Rev, T. H., St. Louis. Mo. C 

Pcrrine. Rev. S. A., A8«m ABMU 

Perrinc. Mrs. S. A.. A.sam ABMU 

iVrry, A. T.. Harltord. Corn ABCFM 
I'erry. Rev, H. F.. Chicago, 111. ABMU 
Perry, Rev. I. DeVV.. PhiTa.. Pa. P E 

Perry. Mrs- J. W.. New York. N. Y. C 




4IO 



MRMItEKS OF THfi CON'FCRENCE 



I 



Peterkin, Re-r. G. W.. Pu-kcnbori, W. 

\"»- PE 

Peters, G. M.. Cincinnati, O. A B M U 

I'elen. Rev. M. C, N>w York A B M U 
Pct«rM)n, Rev. F.. MinneapolU, Mino. 

A KM U 
P«iee. Mtv J. II., Iap.nB 
Pcllii. Mr.. A.. EliMlKth. N. ;. 
Pdiui. Mi»» !.. New Vork 
Philip. J. W.. Brooklyn. N. Y. 
Phillips, Rfv. C. So. Africa 
Phillip.. Rev. v.. V... " " 



Philhpt. Rev. M.. 
Phillips. Mri. M. 



r 



1 itKcisDiii, n, \,., uosion, 
Pickcli. MiM M.. Mexico 
Fifkrit. Min M, L, Mrxico 
Pickford. Mn. A. M., Salem. 



I^ercs. L. L., Trenton, N. J. 
Pierce. Rev. I, W.. China 




ABC FM 

A BM U 

A DM U 

HM 

CS 

RuiUna. Vt. 

ABCFM 
India L U 5 

D.. Salem, Man. 

A BMU 
Phillips, Mrs. S. H., Salem. Mkm. 

ABMU 
Phillips. Mr*. T.. New CaMle. Fa. 

F C M S 
•Phraner. Mr«. S. K-, Lao» P 

Phraner, Rev. W., Eaii Oranirc. N. J. P 
Pitkard. Rev. W. L., Clcvelanil. O. 

ABMU 
Pickemgill, W. C. Baston, Mass. Y P 

A F H F M 
A F B F M 

A B M V 
Pierce, Mi** A. L., Roxbury. M&». 

ABMU 
Y p 

. _ _ SBC 

Pierce, Nr«. L. W.. China SBC 

Pietion, Rev. A. T., Brooklyn, N. V. H M 
Pterin. D. IL. Brooklyn. N. Y. H M 

Pienan, Mr». O. L., Brooklyn. N. Y. H M 
■PierwD, Rrv. I., China ABCFM 

•Pierioo, Mil* L. B.. China ABCFM 
PieWM. Rev. A.. Japan RCA 

I'iclerA, Mrs. A., Japan RCA 

Finder. Mis* S. A.. New York. N. Y., H M 
Piper. Rev. F. 1^. Boilon. Mau. A A 

Piicairn. R-, Pittuburx. Pa. P 

Pilkin. A. I., Schenectady, N. Y. P 

Pill, Rev. R. H.. Richmond. Va. SBC 
Pittman, Rev, C. R., Fcriia P 

Planii. Mr<, M. C, Appleton, Wia. M E 
Plan. E. P., Poughkeep.ie. N. Y.. Y M C A 
Platts. Rev. L. A., Milton. Wis. S D B 

Plumb, Kcr. A. H., tto^ton, Mbm. 

ABCFM 
Pliinkett. W. H., Adams, Maaa,, ABCFM 
Pohlraann. M.D.. Rev. A.. Africa K I. C. S 
Pollard, K. n.. VVashfniron. D C Y P 

Pollard. Mr*, I,. Phitadelphia. Pa. SBC 
Pollard. Miss 1.. PhiUdelphia. Pa. SBC 
Pol1ti{:k. Mist. S.. India ABCFM 

Pond. N. P., Rochcitrr. N. Y. II M 

Pool. J. C Brooklyn. N. Y. RCA 

Pooley, Mm. R H.. Rneklord, III. M K 

Poner, Rev. E. L.. Indis UP 

Porter. II. K., PilislH.rir. Pa. ABMU 
Porter. Rev. J. B.. Japan P 

Pnrlrr, Rev. J. F , L.ind«in, Kng.. P M M S 
■ - ABCFM 

ABCFM 
taheny. Pa. U P 
Pnrtcr. Rev. T. T.. Persia P 

Pr.»l, Mr^. W. F,. nemer, Cnlo,. ABMU 
Poicat. Rev. K, M., PhiJa., Pa.. A B M II 
Poller. Rev. II. C. New York. N. Y. P E 
Poller. Rev. J. L.. Persia P 

Potter, Mr». J. T... Persia P 

Poweliion, C F . New York. N. V. Y P 
Powell. Rev. A. C Baltimc-rc, Md. P E 
Powell. Rev. W. E., Parkecsburg, W. Va. 

ABMU 
Power. Rev. F, D.. Washington. P. C. 

FCMS 
Power*. F. P.. New York, N. Y. H D 

Power*, Rev. W. D., New York P F, 

PrMI. C, M.. Brooklyn, N. Y. ABMU 
PratI, Rev. L., Norwicl;. Ccan.. ABCFM 
Pratl. Mrv. U. Norwieb, Conn., ABCFM 



fnrirr, i\ev. j. tv, j-iitKinn, 
Porter, Rev. I, S.. AiiMria 
Porter. Mr<. J. S.. Au»rria 
Porter. Mrs. M. C. Alleali. 



Prut, Mrs. N. D.. ChiaoD. IIL t 

Pntt, Mr*. S- B., Buckland. Maas. 

AEtCFH 
Prentice, Mr*. W. P., New York. N. Y. P 
PreniiM, Mi« M. W.. New York W UO 
Preaaly, Rev. F. a. Due Wert, S- C 

ARS 
PreMlr, Rev. N, V... Mexico ARS 

PresUv, Mr>. N. E., Mtxteo ARS 

Prewly. Kev. W. L.. Due We*. S. C 

AKS 
Prenion. Min E. A.. Japan _MCC 



ES 



MES 
MF. 

r 

HE 



Prerton. Rev. S. C. CatletUvine, 1^. 

Price, Mils E. K, Chicaio, IIL VWCA 
Price. Hev. P. B., loplin. Mo. X E 

Price, Rev. F, M.. Sircronemia ABCFM 
PriL-e. Mrs. F. M., Micronesia ABCFV 
Price, I. M., ChiciR-i. 111. HD 

Price, Rev. I.. \\e« Indie* WMII5 

Price, Rev. R.. Clarfciville. Tetin. HD 

Prichcll, Rev. J. H., NashtiUe, Tcnn, 

HES 
■Priest, MiM M. A.. Japan ME 

Procter. H. M.. Rovton. Man. A BCPU 
•Procter. Miti M. A., Turkey ABCFH 
Prudden. Miss L.. New Haven. Coon. 

ABCFM 
PriiBh, Rev. T, H-. Pitt^bnrs, Pa. YF 

Pto!cmy, Misa B.. India PCW 

Pullman, Rev.. Africa S 

Purington. Kev. D. B.. Granvill*. 0. 

ABlir 
Purves. Rev. G. T.. Princeton. N. J. V 
Puscy. Rev I. H., WeW Indiea BUS 

Pvlr. Mi*» M., China 
ftiatllander. Rev. P.. New York 
Quigley. .Miss H.. Louisville, Kr. 
'Quine. Mm. W. K.. Chicago. III. 
OtiirV. Mm J.. Mintiespoli*. UioK. ME 
RsddiPe. Rev. W., Wa^hin(^on. D. C- f 
Rader. P. S.. Jrlfrr^on City. Mo. UES 
Rader, Mrs. W.. San Francisco, CaL 

ABCFM 
Raalaiid. N, M.. India FCU5 

Rams. Kev. F. M , Cincinnati, O. FCXS 
Rainsrord. Rev. W. S,, New YoA Pt 
Rambo, A.. Philadelphia. Pa. P 

Ramsay, Rev. D. M.. Ottawa, Can. PC 
Ramsay, Mm. O. M-. Ottawa, Can. PC 
Ramsey, Rev. D. M„ Charleston. S. C 

SBC 
Rand, G. R.. Tonawanda. N. V. FCMS 
Randall. Mrs. T. II., St Ix.«i», Mo. S 

Rankin. Mis* A. C. New York, N. Y. ? 
Rankin, Rev. D. C, Nashville, Tena. PS 
RascuusscD, Mis- H. £., Wenonah. N. J, 

Ratrlilfe, Rev. C. A., Africa M F. 

HaTcliffe. Mrs. C A.. Africa U t 

Raven. A. A., Braoklyn. N, Y. C 

Raven. Mrs. A. A.. Brooklyn, N. Y., RCA 
Raven. Rev. J. H., New Bnuuwtch, 

N, J. B D 

RawlinK*. E.. London. Ens. H K 

Hay. Miss F. K., Albany. N. V. ABMU 
Raymond. Rev. A. V. v., Schenectady, 

N. Y. r 

Raymond. W. H.. Nashville, Tcnn. PS 
Read, Mrs. £. It., Rnxbtiry. Masa. 

ABUV 
Read. Rev. E. G.. Somervillr, N. 1. RC.\ 
Reed, Rev. H. W.. La Crosse. Wit V P 
R«d. Rev. J. J.. New York. N. Y. ^i^ 
Reed, Mrs. J. J.. New York. N. Y. ME 
Rrcd, Rev. I.. T- CumniinBlon, Mass. S 
Rreil. Mr* W. B,. ChambcmbDrw. P». P 
Reevea. Mr*. C. I.. Montclair. NT J. ME 
•Reid. Rev. C. F.. Korea ME$ 

Reid, Rev. T., nr«>»klyn. N. Y. P 

Rcld, Mrs. J. M. New York. N. Y. ME 
Reid. Rev. O., Momdair. N.J. C 

Reid, Rcr. W. J.. Pitlsburs. Pa. UP 

Reid, Mrs. W. )., PitobarB. Pa. V? 




I 



b. 



Renensnvder. Rev. J. B., New Yorit. 
N. Y. E L C S 

Rcmcntiirder, Mr»- J. B.. New Vorlc C 
Rcmingtoo. E.. llioo. N. Y. ME 

KhM. S. J., I'cr.ia P 

Rho»dc». Rev. C. L., New York. A B M U 
Bhoad«. RcY. W.C. P., Brooklyn. A B M U 
■Khodci. Kev. M. I.. Japan MBCC 

Rice. Mi** L. W., lialtimotc. Mil. Y F 

Rice, Miss M. S., Fcnt» ABCFM 

Rice. Rev. T, H^ Atlanta, Ga. 1" S 

Ricbud. ScY. T., Clima S D C K 

Richanls. Rev. C f].. FhiUdeluhia. I'o. 

A B C 1- M 
Richard*. Rev. H-, Africa A B M U 

Ktchju-ds. J. A.. Monlclair. X. T. ME 

Richard., Kev. W. H.. flamfieW, N. J. P 
Kichardion, Hev. J. B.. New Voik V P 
Rich»rd»on, Rc». W. R-, Columbi*. S. C. 

MES 
Rickelt. W. K., London. Eag. H M 

"Kiekrtti. Mi?* A. M., Ijini P 

Rick». Rev. W. B.. Helena, Ark. MES 
RidBlef, Miu C B.. New York. N. Y.. M E 
Ridley. Rev. W.. Caledonia CMS 

Riev:^. iln. I». P., New York, N. Y. P 
Rife. M.D.. C. F.. Microne»i» A B C F M 
Rigaa, Rev. C. T.. Turkey A B C F M 

Riggs. Rev. E.. Turkey A B C F M 

RillB», Mrt. K., Turkey ABCFM 

Riga*, Rev. J. ¥.. East Onntc, N. J. P 
RilH. Mis« M. t. China C t M 

Rinebart, Mr*. E., Sea Cliff. N. Y. M E 
Rinman. J.. China SEMC 

Rinman. Mri. T . China S E M C 

Roberta. Rev. B. H.. No. Chill. N. Y., F M 
Roben*. Mr*. E. S.. No. Cliili. N. Y.. F M 
Robcns, K. W., New Vark, N. Y. P E 

Roberts, Rev. J. E., Manchciicr. EnH. 

B M S 
Roberts. Mm. J. H., Otna ABCFM 
Roberta. Rev. W. II.. PhiUdelphia. Pa. P 
Roberts, Mri. W. I!.. Burma A B M U 

Knberlkon, Mr*. H. A.. Nova Scolia, 

Can. r C 

Robertson. Mr». R,. New HcbridM PC 

Robin*on. Rev. C. E.. Scramon, P«. P 

Robinson, .Ui»« R. E., India M E 

Robinson, Mrs. S. B.. Ritrliraond. Va. P S 
Hobin«on. Hev. W- S.. Jersey City M E 

Robson. Rev- C. Penh, Scotland U P C S 
Robson, Mr*. G., Perth, Scotland L K S 
Rockefeller, J. D.. New York A B M U 
Rockefeller. Mrs. J. D.. New York. A BMU 
Rockcfdler. Jr.. J. I).. New York, A B M U 
•Rodger*, ma Si.. India P C 

Rogcci, Mini £. I.. CoLfax, IIC. M K 

Roseri, I. M.. Win»toti, N. C. PS 

Rogen, MiM U, Syraciaie, N. Y.. C W B M 
RoBets. Mt». M.. New Yotfc. NY. ME 
Kondlhalcr, Rev. E. IS., Salein. N. C, Mor. 
Hoosa. M.D.. D. B. St. J.. New York. 

N. Y. H M 

Root. M.D.. Mias P.. India ABCFM 

Rapes, Mrs. A. G., Morriatawn, N. J. 

A B M II 
RopeJ. Mrs. W. H.. Brooklyn. N Y, W U 
Roscoe. Rev. II. L.. India M E 

Roscoe. Mrs.. H. L.. India M £ 

Roseland, Kev. J. C. J , .Awalin, Minn. 

ELGC 
Rosenberger. A., Oskaloosa, Ta. 

AFBFM 
Rois, Mr». W- E.. Montreal. Can. M C C 
Rolh. \V. y. Congo C A 

Rowe, \V. H., New York. N. Y. C 

Rowland. ySt^ A. J., Phila.. Pa, A B M U 
Rowland, Ir., C. A. Alliens, Ga, Y P 

Rowland. Jr.. Mrs. C. A, Ather», Ca. PS 
Rowley. Kev. P. H.. FM River. Mass. 

ABMU 
Rowley. MUi M. E-, New York M E 

Ruddlck. MiM E.. Buck.pon. Me. M E 
Rudisitl. Rev. A. W.. Tn-ilia ME 

Rndisill, Mr*. A. W.. Itidia M E 



Ruih, Rev. J. W., Praitville, A!a. MES 
Hu»»ell, Mill E., Japan M E 

Russell, Rev. F., Brideepart, Conn. 

ABCFM 
Russell, Rev. F. H-, India PC 

Ruiaell. Mrs. C, Spriogficld. Mass. 

ABMU 

Rutiell, Miss J. D., New York. N. Y. H D 
Hus*ell. 1. E.. New York. N. Y. C 

Kiitscll. Miss M. H.. Japan M E 

Russell, Re*. R. M.. Piltsburg, Pa. UP 
Ryckman. Rev. £, b., BrockvilLe, Ont. 

MCC 
Saarinen, M., Finland F 

Sahine, Rev. VV. T.. New York. N. Y.. R E 
Satlura, Mrs. H. G., Bniton. Mass. 

ABMU 
Sailer. T. H. P.. Phila.. Pa. Y M C A 

St. Jolin. n.. Madison. N. J. 11 D 

Sampey. Rev. T. R.. Louisville. Ky. 11 D 
.Sample. Kev. R. b' New York, N. Y. P 
Sampson, Mrs. J, «., Fantops. Va. PS 
Sampson, Hev. T. R., Sherman. Tex. PS 
Sanborn, H. J., SonterviJle. Mass. 

ABCFM 
Sanboro, Mi» M. E.. Brooklinc. Mass. 

ABMU 
Sanders. Rev. C. S., Turkey ABCFM 
Sanders, Rev. D. J.. Charlotte, N. C, H D 
Sandcri, F. K., New Haveti, Conn. 

ABCFM 
SandcTf., Rev. II, M.. New York. ABMU 
Sander*, M.D., J. A.. New York C 

Sandrri, Kev. J. S-, Many. I.a. MES 

Sanford. Rev. A. B., New York M E 

Sanford, Rev. A. K., New York M E 

Saiilurd, M)»a C. H.. Philadelphia. Pa. P E 
SangMer. Mrs. M., Brooklyn. N. Y. RCA 
Sankcy, Rev. J, P. RochcMer, N. Y. U P 
Sargent, Mrs. E. P., Brooldine. Mass. 

ADMU 
Sargent. Rev. F. D., Putnaoi. Conn. 

A R C P M 
Satchell, Rev. J. T.. Philadelphia. Pa., M E 
Savage, Mrs. C. S., Hamilton. N. Y. 

ABMU 
Sawyer, Rev. J. E., .Syraciise. N. Y. M E 
Sawyer. Rev. J. T^ Shreveport. La. M E S 
Sawyer, Kev. ft*. T.. Allegheny City. Pa. 

UP 
Scarritl, Rev. C. \V., Beltnn. Mo. MES 
Scate. Mrs. O. W.. Maiden. Mass. ME 
Schaeffer. Kev. W. A.. Phila.. Pa.. ELGC 
Sirbaflf. Rrv, D. S.. Cinc.nnali, O. P 

Schaiiffler. Rev. A. F., New York. N. Y., P 
Schauffler. Mrs. A. P., New York, N. Y., P 
•Schaufiier, Rev. H. A.. Turkey A B C F^ M 
Sciiell. R.. New York. N. Y. H M 

Scnenck. Uin A., Persia P 

Schenck. K. R.. New York. N. Y. RCA 
SchirfTelin. W. J.. New York. N. Y. C 

fechteren, C. A.. New York. N. Y. H M 

-IchiJlinK. Rev. C. }., Burma ME 

Scliilhng, Mrs. C J., Burma ME 

Schmidt, Rev. E,. Etmira. N. Y. CES 
•Schnalr, Rev. I!. E.. Africa P 

•Schnatr, Mrs. IT. K.. Africa P 

Schneider. Mt«. B., Turkey ABCFM 
Sclinell, Mm. J. P., Northgood, No. Dak.. P 
Scht.lt. Rev. G.. Ballinore. Md. E L G S 
Schr.walter, Rev. C. DjnneUnn. la. Men 
Schrciber. Rev, A.. Barmen, Germany G 
Scburman. J. G„ Ithnca, N. Y. H M 

Schuyler, Misi F., New Rochelle, N. Y. 

PE 
Schwab. Miss L. S.. New York. N- Y.. P E 
Schwcinitz, Rev. P. de, Bethlehem. Pa., 

Mor 
Scofietd. Rev. C, T., E. Northdcld. Mass. 

HD 
Scott. A,, New Brunswick, N. J, HM 

Scott, Mm A-. Africa XJBR 

ScaU. Mias A. R,. India p 

Sron. R. H Paducah. Ky. MES 

Scott, Rev. E., Montrnl, Can. PC 



1=^' 




SoHL Uh^ E, Si-__ 

ABU IT 
Scan. FriBk H, N«w Votk^Jl. V. C 

Sam. Urv t. £^ EvMataaTlIL A B M U 
SoRM. Kr< J. HeP, Tmmmi. Ca^ PC 
ScMO. Hn. L A, lUMc% Man. H E 

Sm^ Mo. T. &, wS^Tn. A B M U 

9kw. w. w-Tri I , To. PS 

-tie. PfcSi, P*. H D 

-^&.Wm«b.O. P 

Ma. S &, X«n* M E 

fii^ii. Bn. J. W_ CiMiJIi. a.tU F B 
TiiMan. Rn, MMKml. Co. H U 

Tiijwwi. MivL A, X«« Y«rfc. P E 

' III I. Ifcv Dl C Bctoo. Umi. PE 

' 11 I. M.D, IU<. L S., late ftCA 
^iiil I. Un. t. L, Iad« RCA 

Til Mil, ftc*. M. T, S'c« P»lB. H. V. S 

' ~ Un. M. W- ta** ItCA 

-^'-'^■—^VeA 
SMi^ liRL t. E, Ctf<Kf«. Tex. MES 

SS K««. %. B. CUM SBC 

Swi|_Mn. W. a, CM»„ SBC 

Sb«> tx* E. M-, Mcxko A F B F U 

Sdlc>: Mn K. E.. !■«**■_ il E 

Mm* M. R. B^ OBt»no, Cml^ 

»«. S^ TittWTtll.. P». _. P i 

^k. R«. a F.. Bfo«B«x>d, 

Tk«. "ES 

SMIfc lUr. J. E-. Dwt«i. Colo. P 

SS Rrt. J. Si^ Butt. Ot,. MoM.^^ 

^ C. M.. Up»n ABCFM 

t. l_ H.. CkTrtmad. O. , P 

Rf*. R. C. Ph>i*-. P«-. A B il IT 
M.U., W. F.. Chin* £ 

Un. W. F.. Chio* P 

. XLD-.A. l~. Chwa ABCFM 
« MiM i" . Turfcr, ABCFM 

.rf \ln. U. U. rhil**rlphia. P«.. M E 
«»rf«; R«v. a I-. Nc* Vofk ATS 

Sfcwid. Uiu M. H.. J-P*n -> 2 ^ E J? 

«Moa. Miu M . Bwnn* A B .M U 

.•mi. Mtv J. C. "^'''•J* .- • xl Sc 

htnlrv RcY. I. U. Ra*nokc. \ ». M Ej 

T,Sii.r; uL a F_. f hibJcIph* P-.. C 

,«. Mr*. B. J.. l'l»u)field. ^gJyy 

Sfaonwfty. Rev. W. B.. Sw»m|Mcatl 
Muk. " "^ 

■ ■ »*« K n INif*. Onl.. t I, r M a 

^,r, F I>;:r.HvOn.-.CCFMS 

, 11 n. Nrw Vorlt. N. Y. P 

. «PY F Z.. Chun SBC 

:::■ M^ ! . Br^voklro. N. V. 

,.„' r, n.. 11"'!" 

Rev W. \V . Chin. 
,; Mr. \V W. ChiM 

L,'''t" fcVlddchia. P.. 





M F. 

P 

CA 

CA 

ME 

P 

P 

ME 

HD 

in, C 

Mil 



K. Uptn 



iSSlMl. li*r». A. L,. Lake Roland. 



Skn, Rev. L. £.. Hcmtloo. Ou.. C C M .A 
Sl^nore. Mn. W. B., New Yoric D M 
Sladf. F. U. New Yoiic. N. Y. f 

S\MXtt. Miu 1., MauwMi. N. J. A B M U 
SUwwn, Mrs. W. B., Mt. Vernon. M. Y. 

UE 
*SIerprr- Mr«. H. E., Alaika, AFBFM 
SIoM. Mm B.J., Piit«burK, Pa. Vf 

Skiu. Hn. J. E., Lul>cck. S. C A K S 
Slou. W. &. London, biw. C 1 M 

SlouK, J.. New York. N V. P 

Slacim, w., Colondo Spring, Cola., U M 
SouB. A. W^ Cbicaco, 11). A B M U 

Small. Rcr. J. B., Atrica A M E Z 

Snull. Mrs. J. F.. Boiion. Mau. M E 

StB*n, Rev. K. D.. St Louia, Mo. MES 
Smith. Mra. C. S.. New Ywrk, N. Y. H M 
Smith. Re*. E.. Halifax, .V. S. PC 

Smith. Re*. E. R.. New York, N. Y. M E 
StBiih. Miu F. E.. New York. N. Y. C 
Sntiih. Rer. G. F.. Raleifh. N. C MES 
SraitI). H. H., Columbta, S. C Pa 

Smith. Rrv. J., IndU ABCFM 

Smith. Mn. /., Indi* A B C F U 

Smith. Bev. J.. Boiton. Mb«. ABCFM 
Smith, Mr*. J.. Benton, Mu>. ABCFU 
Smith. Rev. 1. A., Savaunh. Ck. MES 
Smith. Rev. J. E.. Kccne. N. H. A B M U 
Smith. Mn. J. H. O., ChkAsu, 111. C 

Smith. Mr^ J. P.. Riclimimd, Va. PS 

Smith. Miu U C, Africa ABCFM 

Smith, Bcv. L. L., Strasbuw. W ELUS 
Smith. Rev. it. Chicaso. 111. ABCFU 
Smith, Mt&. M.. Chicaiiu. 111. ABCFU 
Smith. R. O.. China H D 

Smith, M.D,, S. New York. N, V. HU 
Smith, Mn. S.. New Votk. N. Y.. A 8 M U 
Smith. Miu S E., Si. John, N. B. MCC 
Smith. Mn. S. E., Canada C 

Smith, S. F., Ilavenport, la. ABCFM 
Smith. Mn. S. F.. Davenport. la. 

ABCFM 
■Smith. Miu S. U.. India F B 

Smith, Rev. T. S.. Ceylon .* B C F M 

Smith, Mn. T. S.. Ceylon A B C F .M 

Smith. Mn, W. C. Brooklyn. N. Y. ME 
Smith. Rev. W. D., Frederickibuis. Va. 

PE 
Smith. W. H., I^oeoix. Aric MES 

Smith, Rev. W. M.. New Ya«^k. N. Y. P 
Smith. Rev. \V. T.. New York. N, Y. « C 
Smith. U.D.. W. W.. Lmchburc Va. 

MES 
Smith, W. W.. PouKhkcepjie. N. Y. 

Y M C A 
Smylic, Min S., Meridian, Miss MES 
Smyth. Rev. G. B., China H E 

.Smyih, Mrs. C B.. China U E 

Smvih. Rev. N„ New Havcit, Conn. H U 
Snelton. Rev. F. G., Africa A M E 

SoifT. Rev. W. V,'.. Ocvciand. O.. FCMS 
Snodgrass, Mias M. A., China P 

Snodcrmaa, Rev. W. C, PUinficld. N. J. 

ME 
Snowden. Rev. T. H.. Washington. Pa. P 
Snnwdrii. Mrs. J. H., Uashingion, P^, P 
SnydM". Rev. F. L.. Siom P 

Snyder. Mra. F. U, Siam P 

SommcrviUc. Rev. J., Owen Sound, Can. 

PC 
Sommervillc. Rev. R. M.. New York. R P 
Sooboonaxnna. A., India H D 

SootWll. Rev. W, E., China MFC 

Soothill. Mn. W, T... China MFC 

Sopcr, Rev. J.. Japan ME 

Soper, Mn. J., Iipan M E 

Sorsa. Mid* H., Cliina FKS 

•Sparkt. Mi.» F. T,„ India M E 

SpauldinflT. Rev. C. 11., Boston. Ma^s. 

A BM Vt 
Spauldins. H. B.. MuskoEce. I. T.. MES 
Spearr, A.. Hntton, Masa. M El 

Speer, R. E,, New York. N. Y. P 

Spclman. Miss L. M.. New Vorfc H U 



I 
I 



A 




DELEGATES ANO MISSIONARIES 



413 



Spcaerr, Rev. J. H., No. Adins. Mass. 

ABMU 

Spencer. Rev. T. O.. lapaa M £ 

Speccct. Mrs. J. O.. Japan M K 

Spencer, Mint M. A.. Inpan M E 

Spencer, Mr*.. \V A,, riiib.. P«. M E 

SpeoccT. W- H.. SWowhegan. Me., A B M U 
Spraguc. F. D., rrovidcncc. R. I. H D 

Sprcng. M(i. E. M.. Cleveland, O. K A 

Sprungcr. Rev. S. F., Bcmc, Ind. Men 
Stafford. Rev. I. T., Atlanta. Tck. M E S 
Sukeler, Rev. C A.. Waihinron, D. C. 

AR M U 
sukeler, Mr«. C A.. Washingtwu IJ. C. 

A B M U 
Stamback. Mri. M. D.. Louisville. Ky. 

WU 
Standeffer. Rev. R. M.. Oxford. Mim. 

M ES 
Smdcs. W. H.. India B 

Stanlcj. Rev. C. A,. China A B C F M 
Stanler. Rev. F. J.. Japan P 

Stanley, Mrs. F. J., laiian P 

Stanley, Rev W. \V., SufToIlt, Va., M BCC 
Stan wood, Miis E. li., Bo«ton, Maaa. 

A B C F M 
Stark. C. R., Providence. R. I. A P M U 
Steady. II. M., Africa A M E 

Sleariu. Rev. \V. F., Norfolk. Conn. 

A B C F M 
SiebWnn, Cle^rge C, Nrw Ynrk, N. V. C 
StebWn*. Rev. II. H., Roclie»t«. N. Y. V 
Stedcnan. Mi»« A. E., Itotton. Mas«. 

A B M U 
Steele. Rev. D.. Philadelphia. Pa. C 

Steele, Rev. J. D.. I*hila.. Pa RPGS 

Stcpbeiu. E. W.. Columbia. Mo. SBC 
Stephent. Miu d., India M E 

Stephen*. Rev. J. V^ Phila.. I'o. H I> 

Stephena. Rev. P.. Louisville, Ky SBC 
Stephenaon. M.D., F. C. Toronto. Can. 

MCC 
Sieahen»on. Mr*. P. C, Toronto. Can. 

MCC 
Stern. Rev. B. S,, New Bremen. O. 

RCUS 
Slerry, G. E.. New Vork. N. Y. A B S 
Sreveiw. Ht». E. H., IlaUimnre. Mi!. M K 
Steven*, Rev. E. O.. Burma A B M U 

Slevena. .Mr*. £. O., Burma A It M U 

Strvtns, Rev. E. S.. Japan F C M S 

Stevens, Mr*. K. S., Jnfian FC M S 

Stevens, C. E,. Cincinnati. O- H H 

Slevena. H.. Domhay. India IIB 

Slevena. Mr«. J. E., Eliaabelb, N. J. ME 
Slevena, M. D., Miis N. A., Japan 

F <: M s 
Sieveni, W. A.. RocheMer. N. Y.. A B M U 
Stevenson. Rev, A. R., Schenectady. 

N. Y. P 

Stevenson. Rev. J. R., Chicago. HI. S V M 
Stevenson, Mr«. N. W.. Allegbeny. Pa. 

UP 
Stevcnion. Rev. H. M.. Clovei. S. CARS 
Slevenaon. Rev. T. P.. Phila., Fa. R P 
Stevenson, W. P.. Ronellr. N. J. 1* 

Stcvcnw>n. Mr.. W. P.. Ro«lle, N J. P 
Slewart, Rev. G. B.. Auburn. N. Y. P 

Stewart, I.. New York. N. Y, P 

Slrwart. Rev. J. A., Rochrsier. N. Y. 

A B M U 
Stewart. Mrs. J. T.. St. Paul. Minn. M E 
Stewarl. Kev. L. H., Cleveland, O. M E 
Stewan, Rrv. K., India U P 

Stewart, Mr*. R., India U P 

Stewart, Hev. T., Dflrtmouth, N. S P C 
Stewart. Mra. W. 5.. Philadelphia. Pa. P 
Stieknev, Mr*. I>, Itriinklyn, N. V. .U E 
StiscT, W. E.. New York, N. Y. P 

Slllea, H- Richmond. Va. H M 

SUllwell. Mrs. E. R.. Dayton. O. A B M IJ 
Stillwell, J. H.. Haylon. I). AOMU 

Slimson. Rev. H. A.. New York, A H C F M 
Slimion, Mr«. H. A,, New York. N. Y. C 
Slirea. Rev. £. H.. Chicago. III. P E 



Stitt. Rev. W. C. New Yorti, N. Y. H M 

Stin, W. J.. New York, N. Y. ME 

Siobndgc. Rev. (',. E., Brooklyn M E 

Sinck. E , London. Eng. CMS 

Stoddard. Rev. C- A.. New York. N. Y. P 
Stoddard. Rev. I.. India A B M U 

StoevcT, Miss S. E., niiladeLuhia. Pa. P 
St'>rvrr. W. C, New Vnrk. N. Y. H D 

Stolpe. Hev. M., New York, N. Y. C 

Stone, Miss E-. New York. )t. V. W U 
Stone, Rev. G. M.. Hartlord. Conn. 

A BM U 
*Slone. M.n., T. S., India M H 

•Stone. Mm. j. S.. India M E 

Stone. Rev. I. S.. Chicago. Ill P E 

Stone. MiM U. S.. New York. N. Y. W U 
Sione, S.. New York. N. V. H M 

Stonebridge. \V. F., New York H D 

Story, Mr*. C. R.. Buftalo, NY. A B M U 
Stradiau. Mrs. F„ S.. Hamilton, OoL. MCC 
Sirickland. Miss M. B.. Tuscaloana, Ala. 

PS 
Striker. Rev. M. W.. Clinton. N. Y. P 

Strong. Rev. A. H.. Rochc^lcr, N. Y.. H M 
Strang, Kev. E. E., Boston, Matv 

ABCFM 
Strong, Mrs. E. E., Bo4ion. Mass. 

ABCFM 
Strong, Miss E. F., ML Vernon, N. Y. 

ME 
Strong, Rev. J., New Vork. N. V. H M 
Strong, Mrs. J., Ml. Vernon. .N. Y. ME 
Strong. Rev. J. H., New Britain. Conn. 

A BM U 
Strong Rev. T. W.. Northficld. Mtnti. H M 
Strong. T. G., New York, N. Y. P 

Strow. Miss U M.. New York M E 

Stuart. Miss S.. Alexandria. Va. PE 

Studebaker. Rev. A. H.. RrnnVIyn K L G S 
Studebaker, Mrs. A. H.. Brooklyn, E L G S 
Sttidehaker. C, Indiana H V P 

Siurges, Miss S. M.. Mansfield. O. 

ABCFM 
Sturgis, W. C. New Haven. Conn. P E 
Stursherg. J., Germany N M I 

.Sublette, Mies S., I^xington, Ky.. P C M S 
Suman, Miss M.. Burma A B M U 

Summerbcll. Rev. J. J.. Davlon. O. C 

Summers, Mr«. C. G.. Balliroore, Md. M E 
Summcy. Rev. C.. Clark*villc, Tenn. P S 
Suninei. Rev. A. T., Annville. Pa. V B 

Sulbcrland. Kev. A., W. Toronto. CaiL 

MCC 
Sutherland, Rev. \V. S . India C S F 1* 
Swain. M.D., Miss C. A.. India M E 

Swayne. W.. New York, N. V. PE 

Sweeny, Rev. Z. T,, Columhus, Ind. H M 
SwifT. IrfiH. India RCN A 

Swindell, Rev. F. D„ Goldiboro, N. C. 

M ES 
Swindell. Mrs. F. D.. Goldsboro, N. C. 

M ES 
Symmingtoo, Rev. J., Africa C A 

Taft, Rev. G. W., Japan A B M U 

Taft. Mrs. G. W., Japan A B M IT 

Tail. J. F.. MontclBir. N. 1. ME 

Taft. J. H . New York. N. ¥. M E 

Tagg, kev. F. T., BalliRiare, Md. M P 

Tarcolt. Mrs. W. A.. Rucklucd. III. 

ABCFM 
Talmadge, Rev. D. M., ChifM RCA 

Tarbox. Mrs. II. F^ Batavia, N. Y. P 

Talc. Rev. J. H., Pbil.n.ielphia. Pa. UP 
TayW. Mrs. A„ lliiladelphia. Pa, P 

Taylor. Rev. A. W., Norwood. O., FC M S 
Taylor. Mil* B. P., Springfield. Masa. 

ABMU 
Taylor, Miss E. G.. China CIH 

Taylor. M.I).. F. H.. China CI M 

Taylor. Mr*. F. H.. China C I M 

Tavlor. Mrs. F. \V.. BufTalo. K. Y. 

ABMU 
Taylor. Kev. <}. B., \V. Appomattox. Va, 

ii n 

Taylor. Mi% H. W..Boilon.MaM. ABMU 



I 



4'4 



MEMBERS OF THE CONFERENCE 



Tmyier. Joseph, Indii F F M A 

Taylor. Bev. T. H.. CWna C I M 

Tavlor., M». f. U., Chins C I M 

T«yW. Mr*. I. !_. Wyojains. O- I' 

T»ylor, Mr*. J. L.. ClpvcUnd, 15. H M 

T»ylor. MiM L., Noriolfc. Va. P E 

T»ylor, S. E.. N*w York. N- Y. S V M 

Taylor. Mr&. S. K.. Bo«toa. Mus. A A 

Taylor. Mrs, S, L-. Mt. Jackion. Pa. P 

Taylor, Mrs, W,, Japan A R C F M 

Tend. HcY. E. S.. Somcnrillc. Ma»». 

A B C F M 
TeaU. E. M., Chicago. 111. P 

Tchbctim C F- Paiadpna, Cal., A F U F M 
•Teirord, Mi** C. M.. Japan A B C F M 

Telleen, Rfv. 1.. Rock r»Und. 111. E LGC 
V. H. M.. Obcflin. O. 



Tenney, Rev. 
Tetiny, Rev, C. B.. Iiiian 
Twry. Bcv. R., New Vntfc, N. Y. 
Thsin, Mr>. A. R.. 



ABMU 
C 
Oak Park. 111. 

ABCFM 

•Thayer. Mrs. C. C. Turkey H M 

Thayer. Rev. L. H-. PorUmouih, N. H, 

A B C F il 
Thfyer. L. J- BocheHcr, N. Y. H D 

TTiing. S. D., Bo««TT. Mats. A B M IJ 

Thoburn. Mlm I.. India M E 

Thoburn. Rev. J. M.. :ndia M £ 

Thobtirn, Jr., Hev. J. M., Delioit, Mich. 

.ME 
ThoBUa. G. C. Philadelphia. Pi, P K 

Thomas, Mrs. G. C. F'hiladclphia, Pa.. PE 
Thomua, R*v. J.. China D F D S 

Thomas, Bcv. J,. I.ittle Rock, Ark.. M ES 
Thomas, Mrs. lonaibin, Tojirkn, Kan. P 
Thomas, Kev. J. C. New York. N. Y.. M E 
Thomas. M.D.. Rev. J. S.. Uos P 

Thomas, Mrs. J. S,, I-aos P 

ThoniM, Mrs. R. 11., Baltimore. Md. 

A c b p \r 

ThDTMs. Rev. S. W., PhiUdclphia, Pa.. M E 
Thomas, W.. New Ynrk, N. V. l" 

Thomas. W. G.. E. Orange. N J P 

Thorap>on, Rev. A. C-. Boston. Majs. 

ABCFM 
Th'unpson, Mri. A. C Boitoo. Mass- 

ABCPM 
Thnmpsort, Miss A- DeF., Japttii RCA 
ThomrsoTi. Mrs. C. E., New Haven, 

Ci>nn. M E 

Thompson, E. I'., Brattlcbora. Vt. 

ABCFM 
Thompson, Rev. I. H., Brooklyn M E 

Thompson. Rev. R. W.. London, Kng. 

LMS 
Thompson. Miss S. D.. NcwIod, N. J. P 
Thompfion, Rev. S. W., Qu' Appelle. 

N W. T. PC 

Thompson, Mra. T. S., St Piul, Minn. 

A a M u 
Thcmpion. Rev. \V. E., LUtle Rock. Ark. 

M ES 
Thompson. M.D., W. L., A( tea, ABCFM 
Thompson, Mr*. VV. L., Africa, ABCFM 
Thomaon. M.D., Bcv. J. C. Monlreal, 

Can. PC 

Thomaon, Rev. S. A. Ph^Ptiis. Arii. M E 
Thoamoa, W. B., New Orleans, l^ 

MRS 
Thorpe. Mr*. C. N.. Philadelphia. Pa. P 

Thrr«hcr, J. B., Dayion, O. ABMU 

Thnrbur, Sirs. \V. H., Providence. R. I. 

M E 
Thursion. Rev. J. L., Whitinsvtlle, 
Mass. ABCFM 

U. A«bKm, N. Y. H D 

'ievi Ynrk, N. V. C 

Tiacn. Rev. J. J.. Nashville. Tenn.. M E S 
TiUiuKhast. Rev. C. A., Stanlordvillc. 

n'y. mbcc 

Tipple. Rev. E. S., New York. N. Y. ME 
Titsirorth. Rev, J.. Milwaukee. Wis. 

ABCFM 
Todd, Kev. E. S.. Baltimore, Md. M E 

Todd, Miss C... China ME 



.TIB**. 

Thurston, J. L. 
Tiffl, H- N.. Nt 



Trnslow. T.. Brooklyn, ^ 
Truslow, Mrs. J. L., Sui: 
Tunuell. W. V., Washin 



Todd. Mrs. H. T.. Dorchester, Man., WU 
Tomes. Mis* M, .V. New York. N. Y.. PE 
Tomkins. Rev. V. \V., Phila., Pa. PE 

Tooker. N.. Oxange. N. J. P 

Tornblom, Rev. FT C.. Hartford, Conn. 

SEMC 
Torratbce. M.D., D. W.. Palestine FCS 
Torrence, Miss J., Oitna HP 

Torrcy. C. C Andovrr. Mua. H D 

Tnrrey, E., Bostnn. Mass. ABCFM 

Tarrey. Miss E., Japan ABCFM 

Tou, Rev. E. U.. Midasascar L F C 

Tuwntend. Rev. C., East Orange, N. J. P 
Towson. Rev. W. E., Japan MES 

Trask. S.. New York. N. Y. C 

Travis. Mr*. J. A, Waahinglon. D. C. P 
Tribou, D. H.. W'ashinftton. D. C. H M 

Trimble, Rev. J. B.. Siou* City. la. ME 
Troop. Rev. G. O.. Montreal. Can. H D 

Truchcart, Mrs. S. C, Nasbville. Tran. 

MES 
Tnin, Rev. C. U., Boonvillt, Mo. 

ABMU 
.. Brooklyn. N. Y. ME 

iinmil. N. J. P K 

.'u!)hmBton, D. C. H D 
Tupper, Jr. Kev. H. A.. New York C 

Turkic, Rev. A. J., AlleRbcny. Pa. II D 

Turobull. Rev. L. B.. Durham, N. C PS 
Turner. Mis. C. P., Philadetuhia. Pa. P 
Turner, Mr». F. M.. Brcmklyn. .\ B C F M 
Turnrr. F. P., New York. N\ Y. S V M 

Turner. Rev. H. B.. Hampton, \'a. II D 
Turner, Rev. II. M., Atlanta. Ga. A M E 

Turner, M.D., W.V., VVesl lnJ>c», U P C .S 
Turner. Mrs. W. Y., West Indies, U PCS 
Tustin. Mr*. F. B., Phila .Pa. ABMU 
Tustin. Mrs. K. w.. Baltimore. Md. 

ABMU 
Tuitle, Rev. A. H., Newark. N. J. MB 
Twinu, Mra. A. X, New York. N. Y.. PE 
Twiss, Miss F. L.. Merlden, Conn. 

ABMU 
Tydings. Miss E. B., Mexico MES 

Tyler. Rev. B. B.. Chicago, IIL FCFM 
Tyrcr, Geo., Baltimnre, Md. SBC 

Tyler, Mrs. G. S.. Baltimore. Md. SBC 
Tyler, Miss S. K.. Africa ABCFM 

TynK. Mrs. T. S., Japan P E 

Uoangat, Kev. E„ India ELCS 

Undcrhill. Mrs. E. T., Boston, Mass. 

ABMU 
Underwood, Rev. H. G., Korea P 

Undcrwond. J. T., New York, N. Y. P 
Upham, Rev. A. G.. Boston. Masa. 

ABMU 
Upham. Rer. S. F.. Madison. N. J. ME 
Upton, .Mrs. W.. Providence. R. I. PE 

Van Allen. M.D.. F.. India ABCFM 
Viincc. Kev. J. J., Nashville. Tcno PS 

Van Clcef, Mrs. P. D,. Jersey City. N. }.. B 
Van Dcventer. Rev. K-, Uawkinsvilk, 

Ga. tiD 

Van Dyck. Rev. A. S., New Bruns- 
wick, N. }. RCA 
Van Dyice. Bcv. H., New York. N. Y. P 
•Van Hook. Mrs. L. C. Persia P 
Van Horn, Rev. fi, W.. Japan CP 
Vnn Horn. hln. li, W., Japan C P 
Van Horn. Rev. J. M., Vaflvcr. Pa. CP 
Van Home. D., Tiffin. O 11 D 
Van Kirk. Mrs. W.. Piltaburg. Pa. ME 
\a:i Leer. Miss M. F.. Africa E LOS 
Vannemnn. M.D., W. S., Persia P 
Vannemar. Mrs. W. S.. Persia F 
Van Nest. Miss K.. New York RCA 
Van Ncrdcn. W.. New York. N. V. P 
Von PsMcn, W. J.. Hurlinglon, Vl. HM 
Van Schoick. M.D.. I. L.. China P 
Van 5choick. Mrs. t. L., China P 
Van SteenburKb. W. H., New York, 

N. Y. RCA 

Vauirhn. Rev. W. H., Waco. Tex. MES 
\'cd3cT. Rev. H. C. Chester. P«. H D 




DELEGATES AND MISSIONARIES 



4t5 



Rev. R. A.. Ucridiaa, Miss. 

c xt c* 

Un. C. r., Jap2n RCA 

C. v.. MadUun, N. J. H J> 

MiM C. C, Chili M E 

M.D., Mr>. C. y. Allegheny, 

4.D.. C. C. Koitft P 

ft*. C. C, Korea F 

lira. J. H.. nurma A B M U 

fte*. S. R.. Burma A B M U 

dn. S. K.. BurmA A D M U 

Ir*. E.. New York C 

Rev. P„ Phila.. Pa. K C U S 

lin. Rev. H. J.. China S F M 

. R.. dinlon. K. J. H M 

ju F. M.. London, Eag. C £ Z 
U). Rev. \V, W., Maiictu, Ga. 

M ES 
*t. Mm. A. L., Pliila.. P«. C 

D.. Ur>. P. J. k. New York. 

SDB 
, Rev. t, P«ri», Ont, M C C 

I, Rev.T.. Alri« MM FC 

MvM P- J-. Bottnn, Mum. M E 

Ifi. C, Otk Park. II).. A B C F M 
lev. H. K., I^ii Angclc!.. Cal. F 
iev. H. P., Lexineto^n. Ky^ M E S 
bltM t.. Millon. WiH., A Q C F M 
Ur». M. A., Mumgufflcry. AU- 

^ H C 
A'.. Hartford. Conn. A B C F M 
Un. W. A.. Re«»'i Uills, 

Rev. W. P., Huntington, 
L A U M U 

Rev. A. C, Stwicklcy. Pa. U P 
Rev. R., Belleville. Ont. C I M 
Rev. A., Jersey City A Xf F. Z 
Rev. J. D., Covington. Ky. M E 
I, Ifri. A., Newton Centrp, 

ABMU 



tIM 

OB 
P 

wu 
c 
c 



icr, J.. Philadelphia, Pa. 

, Africa 

liu E,. China 

lis* G.. India 

IM 11. II.. Neworit. N. J, 

, I, S.. New York, N, Y, 

ia> S- H.. Newark. N. J. 

A R C F M 
ev, W. H.. Newark. N. J. 

ABCFM 
Rev. R. H., Toronto. Car. P C 
cv. F. W.. India M E 

In. F. W.. IndU M E 

G,. Crcrmany H V P 

J.D., L. C, New York, N. Y. 

ABCFM 
tfrs. L. C. New York. N. Y. C 
L> D., Naugalnck, Cana. 

A B C F Nt 

4 A. L.. China RCA 

iaa E. B.. Terrc Haute, Ind. 

ABCFM 
E. K., Three Oak». Mich. 

ABCFM 
tfra. F- K., Three Oaks, Mich. 

ABCFM 
lev. C. J.. ChJIIicothe. Mo.. M ES 
1, Rev. G., Turkey A C 

I, Mm. G., Turkey A C 

I. J. H., New Vnrk A R C F .\1 
Ml. Rev. B.. Tuikegep, AIn. H M 
r. Mrs. N. M.. Boston, Mtus. 

ABMU 
1«. C. E.. Baltimore, Md. P 

lev. C. F., GUitonbury, Conn, 

ABCFM 
In. P., New York. N. Y. M E 
irs. W. E.. Aurora, N. Y. P 

Hi», HamiltDn, Ont. PC 

ilrs. J.. Haitiilion, OnT. P W U Q 
. C, Wa.hinBtoii. D. C H M 

Ura. J. G., Persia P 

1. Janie*, Guelph, Out. S 



Wattcrs, Rev,. Piltsburg. Pa. H P 

Watlcrt. Mr* W., rhila^elphia. Pa. P 

•Waugh. Rev. J, W.. India M E 

•\Saugli. Mr.. I. W,, Indm M E 

Wayland. F.. New Haven. Conn.. ABMU 
Weaver, Mr*. A., Mexico I 

Weaver, C. K., Rochester, N. V. P 

Weavej, Rev, C S., Philippioes FC M S 
Weaver. Mr*. C. S.. I'hihpjiincs F C M S 
Webb, Miss A. K., Spain A B C F M 

Webb. Mitt M. (;., Turkey ABCFM 

Weems. Rev. J. M., Pha%ix. Arti. M B S 
Wciiihtnian, Mi»> L. S., Washioulon, 

D. C C W B .M 

WTir. J.. Japan M E 

Weisfcomen. Rev. F. W., Philadelphia, 

Pa. E L G C 

Weiskoiten, Rev. S. G., Brooklyn, N. Y. C 
Went. S. L.. HarrikburK. I'a. U £ 

Welch, Kev. H., Middletown. Conn. M E 
Welch. P. A.. New York. N. Y. .M E 

Wclestcr. Mr*.. IlamJltoo. Ont, PC 

Welle«. Mrs. A, M.. Wilkcibarre, Pa, P 

Welles. Kev. E. T.. Africa ABMU 

Wellei. Mill G. M.. .Urica ABMU 

\Velle«Iey-Wca!ey, Rev. E. G., I-rovi- 

ilence. R. I. H D 

Welling, Mri. J. C. Chicago, HI. H II 

VVcIIb, Hev. C. L.. Brooklyn. N. Y. RCA 
Well*. Mr«. D. B.. Cbicago. III. P 

Well:., Rev. f. D., Brooklyn, N. Y. F 

Welh, Mi5» 1,. A., Japan P 

Wells. Rev. W. I,., We*t Fayette, O. MP 
WcUh. II.. Philadelphia. P«. P E 

Welion, Rev. D. M., Toronto. Can. II V 
West. Un. L. M., Aiiica U B 

Wetion, Mix (>., Newton, Mam. 

ABCFM 
Weiilon, Rev. H. G., Cliesler, Pa., ABMU 
WBrton, I. B., Sianforrlvilfe. .N. Y. 

MBCC 
Weston. Mri. T„ New York. X. Y. P 

Wheaton, Mrs. A., My»lic Conn.. ABMU 
Wheeler, Mrs. A. J,, Na»hville, Tenn. 

SBC 
'Wheeler. Mrs. C. IL, Turkey ABCFM 
Wheeler, Miss E. C. Turkey ABC F K 
Whei-lrr, W. H,. Gnnnell. la. S 

Whitakcr. Rev. O. W., Phila., I's. HE 
Whttcomb, G. H., Worceiter. Masi. 

ABCFM 
Whiicorab. Mrs. N. W.. Oceao Park. Mc. 

FB 



SBC 

PS 

PS 

SBC 

M E 

P 

PE 

P 

P 

C 

PE 



While. Mi.* C. J., tliina 
White, Rev, II. W.. China 
While. Mm. H. W.. China 
White, Rev, J. E., Raleigli. N. C. 
•White. M.U.. M- C. China 
While. Rev. S.. OranBe. N. J. 
•White, Jr., Mr«, T. R., Japan 
•While, Mrs. W.. China 
White. Rev. W. R,. Philadelphia, Pa. 
White. Mrs. W. W.. Monicla'r. N. J. 
Whitehead. Rev. C, Pittsburg. Pa. 
Whitehead. Rev. J. II.. Pawa.c, N. J. 

RCA 

Whitfield. T. J.. HawWn»vil]e. Ga. H H 
Whitfofd. A. IL. Buffalo, N. Y. II D 

Whitford. Rev. O. V., Wnlcrly, R. I. 

SDB 
Whitford, Mr». O. V.. Wewcrly. R. I. 

SDB 
Whitfofd. Rev, W. C, Milton, Wi». S tl 1! 
Whitln. E.. Whitintvilte, Ma<i«.. ABCFM 
Whitlocfc. Hev. E. D.. Lima. O. ME 

Whitman, Rev, A. O., Atlanta, Ga. S 

Whitman, Mrs, B. F., Cleveland. O. 

ABCFM 
Whitman. Rev. B. L.. Wa»htngton. D. C. 

HD 
Whitmorc, Mr». M, E.. Alliance, O. 

Reus 
Whitney. Miti F. A., Worceiler. Ma»». 

ABMU 
Whitney, G. C. Worceater, Maa»., ABMU 



* 




i 




MicronMis 

A B C F M 



416 

WbitncT' Rer. J. ¥., 

Whiton. Rev. J. \' New Vork ll M 

Whittcmorc, Rev. E. C. Walervtilc. Me. 

A R M U 
Whittrmorc, J. E.. CcmbridK*. Miui. 

A B M U 
Wbininshill. Rev. D. C, New Orleans. 

La- sue 

\Vhyu.ck. Kcv. r'., Africa R B M IJ 

WicktTsliatn. Rev. L. B.. Boone. la. M E 
Widerman. Rev. L. T.. Baltimore, Md. 

M ¥, 
Witjlil. Mm. C, China P 

WiKht, Krv. I. K,, China P 

Wighiman, Mm. M. D.. CharlcMon. S. C. 

M KS 
Wllbcrforce. Rev. D. V., Africa U B 

Wilbur. Mifs N. J.. Chili M E 

Wilcox. Kcv. W. C. Afrtci A B C F M 

Wilcox. Mr*. W. C. Africa A » C F M 

WiWer, H. A.. Newton Centre. M«». 

A B C F M 
Wilder. W. R., New York. N. Y. C 

Wilkte, Rev. J.. India PC 

Wilkin. Mr». A. W-. Favrttrvillc, N. Y. P 
Wilkinson, Wr». A. G , WashlnKloo. D. C. 

S LC 
Wilkioaon. E. S.. Norlh Adams. Ma!i%. 

A » M U 
Wilkinson, Rev. F.. DartmonTh. N. S. 

Wjlkuuon. Mn. B. W.. Providence, R. I. 

A B i: K M 
Willcox. Mr*, fi. B.. Chicago. III. C 

Wlllenhrock. .Mr». A.. New York M K 

Willmm*, Rev. C. Accrinsron. Eng.. B M S 
William*. Rev. E. M.. Chicago, 111. H M 
William*. Mr*. E. S.. Minnca[iolis, .Minn., P 
Williams, Mrs. ll. I-. CThina A D C F M 
William*. Rrv. H. P.. Pbtlipplrtc*. FCMS 
William*, Mr*. H. P.. Philippine*. FCMS 
William*. J. B.. Gla« ton bury. Conn. 

A B C F >f 
WHHatn*. I- L.. R-ichesier. N. V. P 

Wtllinm*. M., New Vork, N. V., A B M U 
William*. .MiM .M. E., New Voik M E 
William*. T.. Philadelphia. Pa. C 

William*. .Mr*. W. P., Hartford. C«nn. 

A B C F 3if 
Wjllingham. Rer. R. J.. Riclimond. Va. 

SBC 
Will)*, Mrs. R. B., .Searcy. .\rfc. P S 

Wilh.. Hrv. S. T.. Ni-w York FCMS 
Williiion. A. L.. Northampton. Ma*«. 

A BCFM 
WilliXon. Mrs. A. L., Norlbamntnn, 

Man. A B C F M 

WilUon. R., Philadelphia. P». P 

Wilmcr. J., R.-ipiil«n. Vb, PE 

Wil.nn. A. W.. Brooklyn. N. Y. II P 

Wil*on. Rev, C. T , Pal*»(inc CMS 

Wilson. Rev. G.. Edinbticgh, Scotland 

CSFM 
Wilton, Mis* J. A-. Cermantown, Pa. P 

Wilson, M.n., Mt»« 1. C. I'erjia P 

Wihon, Rev. J. O.. New York, N. Y., M E 
Wilson, Rev. N. A.. India PC 

WiU<m. .Mr*. T. H., Philftdrlphia. Pa„ M E 
Winchester, Rev. A. B.. Victoria. B. C. 

PC 
Winchester, Rev. A. B., China PC 

Wind«or, Mm- R., India ARCFM 

Wing. Rrv. C. S.. Brooklyn. N. Y. ME 
Wingatc, Mi** M. I)., Chicago, III. 

ABCFM 
Wiaget. Rev. B.. Chicngo, 111. C 

Winget. Mr*. I., Chicoito. IH. FH 

Winn. MiM M. L., japan RCA 

Winjor. Rev. R,. India ABCFM 

Winslofl. C. H.. Rictimond. Va. SBC 

Winton. Rev. C B. Mexico MKS 

Wise, Ml** L. E . Mr.n»(ield. O.. A B C F M 
Wiihard, J. G., Feraia P 



MEMBERS OF THE CONFERENCE 



I 

I 



Witbard, L. D., UontcUlr. N. J. C 

Wiihord. Mr*. L O.. Montctair, N. I. C 
Witlicr*iK)om Rev. I. W., AUrabeny, Pa. 

UP 
Wjthey. Rev. A. E., Africa M E 

Wiinry, Mr*. A. E„ Africa M E 

Willie., Kev. H. C. Africa U E 

Win, Mrs- B. F., Dayton, l>. UB 

•Wilier. M.O., W.F., BoMofl. A B M f 
•Wodehou»c. Rev. R., Afnca W M 

•Wodchouie, M(». R., Airica W M 

Wocllkin, Kcv. C, Briwklyn A B M U 

\Vii!(. Rev. F„ ;., <:rtty*buTg, P». ELCS 
Wolf. Rev. L, B. India ELGS 

Wolfe, Mr*. A. M.. Coeymant, N. Y., U E 
Womeldorf, Rev. C. R., Braail PS 

VVflmcldorf, Mr*. C. K., Braiil PS 

Wood. Ml** C. M., Ml. Kisco, N. V. H M 
Wood, P.. BMton, .Ma«f. ABCFM 

Wood. Mr*. F.. Botlon. Mas*., ABCFM 
Wu«]. Rev. C. \\.. itwkey ABCFM 

Wnod. Mr*- C. W., Turkey ABCFM 

Wood, Rev. I. L.. Norwieti. Conn. NE 
Wood, lame*, Mt. Kiaco. N. Y. C 

Wood. 1. VV., New York. N. Y. C 

■Wood. Mix S. H-. Turkey ABCFM 
Woodman, Rrv. E. R., Japan PE 

Woodman, Mr*. E. R., Japan f E 

WoodruR, Rev. II. C. Brooklyn FSi^A 
WotMj*. Mr*., Hainilion. Ont. PC 

Wood*. M.n. C. R . India PC 

•Woods. Mrs. S. P., Mexico P 

Woodward. S. A.. Waihinfton. D. C. 

ABMU 
Wor>[]ward. S. W., Washinston. D. C 

AEStU 
*WoodwoRh, Rev. A D., Japan, FCMS 
Woody, Mra. M. C. Salem. N. C 

AFBFM 
Wooley, Mis* M. £., Wellnley. Ua». 

ABCFM 
WooUton. Mi»* S. H.. China M £ 

Worley. Rev. 1. H.. Chma M E 

Wcrrlev. Mrs. J. H., China ME 

Worrall. M U., H, R. !_. Arabia RCA 
Wcrthincton, Rev. G.. Omah*. Neb. PE 
Wright. >Ir*. C. D.. San Franci*co. CaL P 
Wrighl, Miss E. C. Wilmington. O 

AFBFM 
Wriglit. Mr*. G-. Ontario, Can. MCC 

Wrigfal. Rev. J. E., Lagrancc. Ky.. M £.<« 
•WriBhl. Miss M. P., TBrkey ABCFM 
Wright, Miss S. A.. Newt>uru, N. Y. T 

Wyati, Rev. J. M.. VVcii Point. Ui«. 

MES 
Wyckoff. Rev, C. E., Irvingion. N. J.. H D 
'Wyckoff, M.n.. J. T., Arabia RCA 

Wyley, Mr*. C R.. Vmcland. N. J. M f. 
Wylie, Mi»* M. K., Svrin K l" 

Wylie. Mr^. R. M.. BAllimoTc Md. T 

W'ynkooii. Rev, T. S., India BFBS 

VVynkoop. Mr*. T. S.. India BFBS 

W vni. Mrs. I. C, Oermantown, Pa. 

A B U U 
Yatnngiichi, Kev. M.. )hpta 5 

Yancey. Mr*. G. W.. t^xington, Ky. 

FCMS 
Yarnell. M.D.. D. E., New Vork. Y MCA 
Y«;!rwoDd, K. J., Mexico MES 

Yei-er, Rev. N. E., India ELCS 

Yei«er. Mr*. N. E., India ELGS 

Yeiilcy, Mr*. C. C, Hudson. N, Y, T 
YrrkcK. Kev. D. J.. Plainfield. N. J. „ 

A BUT 
Young. Mr*. C, Newton Centre, Mmst. 

ABUU 
Young. Rev. C. £-. floulion, Mc. ABMU 
Vtiung, Kev. J. J., New Vork ELCS 

Yotins. Rev. \V. M., Burma ABMU 

V^iioKmar. V. II.. Albnny. N. Y. RCA 
Zahfi.kie. G.. New Vork. N. Y. Ft 

Zahriskie. Mm. C. New York. N. V. C 
Zwcmer. Rev. J. F., (inind Rapida, Huh. 

R t ^ 




Ahhiitl. D.D., Lynwn. New Vock. N. V. 
Abcrdcpr, Kl. Ilcii., llic Earl of, ScotljiniJ 
AbfftCeen. ihe Coiintc»» ol, Scotland 

Adjm«. D.D., G. C-. San. Fnncitco, CaL 
Aleiamicr. Mrs, E. H.. Kirkvoud. Mo. 
Bflldirin, M.I>., H. K., 

New Brunswick, N. J. 
Baldwin. D.D., S. L., New Yorfc. N. Y. 
Italdwin, Mrs. S. L., New Vuck. H. Y. 

B«rTMl, B A., Krv. G. S., Norwich, Flnj. 
lUftowB. P.D.. J. H.. Oberlln, O. 

Bate*, LL-Gov. Jolin L.. Boslon. Mu«. 

BeaiKn. Mr«. P. L.. Wilke-lmre. P». 

Bishop. D.D.. G. S.j East Oranifr, N. J. 

Bishop, Mrs. TMbciU Dird, London 

Hradley. LL,D.. J. E.. Bosloa. Maw. 

Brninard. LL.U., Preu. K.. 

Middlebury. Vt. 
Brewer, Tuiilkc D, J., \V'a»hinBton 

Bmwn. U.U., C. R.. Oakland. Ca.1. 

nunrll. n.n.. n, J., New York. N. Y. 

Ilutler, Mrs. VVil!i»Tn. Newton Cemrc, Man. 
Cttimberlain, D.U., L. T.. 

Ntw York. N. Y. 
Oiartiri*. D.D., A. H.. Scotlanil 

Ch&ille, W. M., Indianapolis. Intl. 

Chcirter, Mm. S. IT.. Nashville. Tcnn. 

Chiven. Kcv. E. E.. Chicago. 111. 

CUrfc. Mr.. Byroti W.. New York. N. Y, 
Clarke. Mis* C. L., New York. N. Y. 

Cleveland, lion, Grovcr. PrinccTon. N .1, 
Clever. ]>.D., Chn»., lUhimorc. Md. 

Cohh. I)-n.. I,. H,. New York. N. Y, 

Cohb, D.D., UrniT E.. New York, N. Y. 
Colib. O.D.. Henry N., New York. N. Y. 
C..e. D,D.. Edward U., New York. N. Y, 
Conant, Thomas O.. New York, N. Y, 

Conkltn, John W., SprmBfteM. Mass. 

CrDilield, W. Liverpool. Eng. 

CuTion. The Rifhl Hon. Lord. 

Viceroy and Governor-General ol Ia<iia 
Cuit, Eko.. I.I-I>.. Koherl N,, London 

Osiy. d!d.. LL.D., G. E.. 

Ntw n.Avcn. Crnn. 
lie Jong, Rev. J. B.. Zccland. Midi. 

Denby. t^""'* ("ha*., ^Vashinl[ton 

Dcnnii, D.D.. J«mcs S., New Vi.Tk, N. Y. 
Denny, E*Q., T. -A.. London 

IJevms. Rev. John It.. New York. N. Y. 
Uickinson. D.D.. Chan. A.. Boston, Ma^9. 
rjf-dBe, IJ.n., D, Sliuirt, New York. N. Y. 
lluryre. Mis^ M. O.. Newark. N. J- 

Dwight. I>.U. LUn., Titnothy, 

N'W Haven. Conn. 
Edward*. Miss Louise. Ntw York, N. Y. 
E«ry, Hnn. J. J.. B:altIeboro, V(. 

RalM. I>anlrl. IJiVe Fc.re»i. HI. 

Farqiihar, Hear-Adniml. Wanhingmn 

Ferris. Rev. John Mason. New \ork 

Fi^k. n.I).. LI-.D.. F. \V.. Chicago, 111. 
Falls. Crforije P.. Herkimer, «. Y. 

Foster. M.D., Henrjf, 

Clifton RprinKB. N. V. 
Fomter, Mrs. Henry, Cliflon Spring*. N. Y. 
Fn», A._J.. Delroil. Mich. 

Oedge, Esq.. M.P.. Sidney, Lomlnn 

Gibson. M.A.. D D.. J. M.. I^ndon 

Gillespie. D.D.. J. H., 

New Brunswick. N. J. 
Coodwin, D.n., E. P., Cliicago, III. 

Gould. MiM Helen Miller, New York 

Gracey, D.D.. J. T.. RochcMer. N. Y. 

Gracey, Mrs. J. T,. Rodiest«T. N. Y. 

Gracey, Misa Frances Ida, 

Rochester, N. 



{Irani. Mrs, Emma C, Sjmmit, N. J. 

Guinness. M.U., II. Graitan, London 

Hamlin. D.D., LL.D.. Cyrus, 

Lexington. Mats. 
Harper, LUD., Pres. W, H., Chicsffo, III. 
Harris, LL.D.. Hon. W. T^ Washington 
Hawex. D.D., £,. Hartinril. Conn, 

Hepburn, M.D,. J. C, I-ji»i Orange. N. I. 
Hepburn, Mrs. J. C, East Orange, N. J. 
Hill. Rev, W. B., Poughkeepale, N. Y. 

Hills. Mils Sarah H., New York, N. Y. 

Hoflecker. Hon. J. H., Washington 

Ho!w«x, Chaplain W. O.. Waihingioii 

Howard. Gen. O. O.. New York, N. Y. 

HuTn|>hrey, Mm, I- M., New Haven, Conn. 
Hyde. D.D.. LL.D.. Prei. W. IX, 

Brunswick, Me. 
Hyde, D.D.. N. A.. Indluiapolis. Tnd. 

Ingcfsoir. D.D.. Edw. P.. New York, N. Y, 
Jackson. M.A.. S. M.. New York 

Jamtenoa. .Mrs. J. J., Richmond. Va. 

Janrway, M.D.. E. G.. New York, N. Y. 
Jenkins, M.A.. Rev. E, E,. 

Souihport, Eng, 

iohnson, D.D„ J. G.. Farminglon, Conn. 
>mp, ICm;.. C. R., Lewes, Eng. 

Kcmiaway, Sir John H., Bart., M.P., 

London 
Kerr, Mrs. H, P.. Richmond. Va. 

Kinnaird, The Rl. Hon. Lord. London 

Kiniiorts Kcv. H. A., New York. N. Y. 
Kittrcdge, ]).l>,, A. E.. New York, N. Y. 
Koncn,XLI»., Prcs. C, J., Holland. Mich. 



Lamplough, Eio.. W., 
I^ngdan, Rev- W. M., 
Ijsher, D.D.. G. W., 
Leverioo:. Joshna, 
Lore. Mrs. R. T., 

Mibie, Hamilton VV.. New Yot 

Mii;c.\rlhitr, D.D,, R. S.. New York. N. Y. 
Marlay. MJ>., H. S., Snn Franriieo. Cal. 
Mnhan, Capt. A. T,. New York. N. Y. 

McEtryde, D.D.. R. J,. Lexington. Va. 

McCalla, Capt. G. if., Washington 

McCarlec, M.D,. D. B.. 

San FnnclKo. Cal. 
McCartee, Mrs. D. B.. Sao Francisco, Cal. 
McCracken. LUD.. Chancellor H M., 

New York. N. Y. 
McKinley, Hon. Willtam, Presidcnl U. S. A. 
McMurrv, I'U.D,. Frank Morton. New York 
Meath. The Ri. Hon,, the Earl ol, Ireland 
Merrill. WiJbrd. Milwaukee. Wis. 

Mevcr. B.A.. Rev. F. B.. London 



London 

New York, N. Y. 

Cincinnati, O. 

Baltimore, Md. 

Summit, N. J. 

3fk. N. Y. 



i 



Millrr. CaiJt. Merrill, 
Moody. Mrs. U. L., 
Moody. W. R.. 
Morgan. Mr. R, C. 
MoTg^ui, Mrs. R. C. 
Morrif, Ivsq., Henry, 
Motile. Rev. H. C. 6.. 
Mount, Gov. Jamcff A. 
Moxom, D.D.. 
Muir. K.C 
Norwich. 
Ove 
Pi: 



Nrw York. N. Y. 

NorthEield, Mam. 

Northficld, Mas*. 
London 
London 
London 
Cambridge. Eng. 
Indiatia 




4i8 



MEUBEAS OF THE CONFERENCE 



Finder, Misi S. A., New York, N. Y. 

Fond, N. R, Rochester. N. Y. 

VawliDgs, Mq., Edward, I,oDdon 

Bickett. W. R., London 

Rockefeller, John D., New York, N. Y. 

Rockefeller, Mrs. John D„ 

New York, N. Y. 
Rockefeller, John D. Jr., New York. N. Y. 
Roosft, M.D., D. B. St. John, 

New York. N. Y. 
Siiler, T. H. P., PhiUdelphia. Fa. 

Sch«uffler, D.D., A. F., New YorlcTN. Y. 
Scbaufller, Mre. A. F., New York, N. Y. 
Scbell, Robert, New York, N. Y. 

Schieren, Hon. Chss. A.. New York, N. Y. 
Scharman, LL.D., Fres. J. G., Ithaca, N. Y. 
Scott, L.L.D., Fres. Austin, 

New Brunswick, N. J. 
Seelyc, LL.D., Fres. L. C, 

Northampton, Mass. 
Skidmore, Mrs. William Bond, 

New York, N. Y. 
Slocnm, LL.D., Fret. W., 

Colorado Springs, Colo. 
Smith, Charles Stewart, New York, N. Y. 
Smith, D.D., LL.D., George Adam, 

Scotland 
Smyth, D.D., N., New Haven, Conn. 

Souttar, Esq., M.P., Robinson, London 

Spelnun-MissLucrM., New York, N. Y. 
Spicer, Esq., M.P.. Albert, London 

Stiles, Robert, Richmond, Va. 

Stitt. D.D., W. C, New York, N. Y. 

Stone, Sumner B., New York, N. Y. 

Stone. Mrs. Sumner B., New York, N. Y. 
Storrs, D.D., LL.D., R. S., 

New York, N. Y. 



Strong, D.D., J. W., Northfield, Minn. 
Strong, D.D., A. H.. Rochester, N. Y. 

Strong, D.D., Josiah. New York, N. Y. 
Sweeny, Rev. £. T., Columbus, Ind. 

Tbylor, Mrs. J. Livingston, Qeveland. O. 
Tenney, D.D., H. uT, Obcrlin, O. 

Thayer, M.D., C. C, Qifton Springs. N. Y. 
Thayer, Mrs. C C, Oifton Springs, N. Y. 
Thompson, D.D., A. C, Boston, Mass. 

Tribou. Chaplain D. H., Wasbmgton 

Van Clief, Mrs. F. D., Jersey City, N. J. 
Van Patten, W. J., Burlington, \'t. 

Virgin. D.D., S. H., New York, N. Y. 

Voorfaees, Ralph Qinton, N. }. 

Wadhams, Commander A. V., 

New York, N. Y. 
Walker, D.D., W. F., Huntington. W. Va. 
Walker, D.D., Prof. W.. Hartford. Conn. 
Wallace. Gen. Lew. Crawfordsville, Ind. 

Wanamaker, Hon. John, Philadelphia, Fa. 
Washington, Booker T., Tuskegee, Ala. 
Watson, Rear-Admiral J. C, Washington 
Waugh, M.D., J. W.. Delaware, O. 

Webb-Peploe, Rev. H., London 

Williams, Rev. E. M., Chicago. IlL 

Williams, Mornay. New York, N. Y. 

Williams, Sir George, London 

White. M.D„ M. C., New Haven. Conn. 
Wbiton, Fh.D., John M., New York, N. Y. 
Wishard, L. D., Montclair, N. J. 

Wood. D.D., George W., Geneseo, N. Y. 
Wood, Miss Carolena M., Ut. Kisco, N. Y. 
Wood, Gen. Leonard, Havana. Cuba 

Woodward. Pres. F. C, Columbia, S. C 
Woodworth, Pres. F. G., Tougaloo, Hiss. 
Woolstoa, Miss Sarah H., Mt Hollv^ N. J. 
Worcester, Dean C, Waanington 




Statistical Summary 



PREFATORY NOTE 

There arc a number of variable terms and unsettled standards which should 
be fixed before .iny satisfactory and consistent attempt cait be made Lo formu- 
laic missionary staiisucs. The committee appomurU to serve the Coiiicrcm:* 
in the c-omptl.ition of siatislical returns agreed upon a simple and compre- 
hensive tabular form, including the essential features of missionary progress, 
and not tou elaborate in its attention to detail. This form was sent to every 
Society througlioiil the world, so far as known, which is engaged in foreign 
missionary operations. Replies were received from about ninety per cent. 
o( those addressed. The war in South Africa wil! account for a good propor- 
tion of the ten per cent, not heard from. An attempt was made abo lo reach 
mdividtial and iiulcpcndcnl missionaries unconnt-ctcd with any organized So- 
ciety, but with unsaiJsfacior>' results, as only a small proportion responded. 
The epilation of tliese replies might Hcem tu be a simple and easy matter, but 
considerable variety in the method of reporting, some misunderstanding of 
terms and limitations, a disposition to record income and other data inclusive 
of botli home and lurcign missions, as well as a lack of uniformity in several 
unexpected particulars, combined to introduce constantly recurring entangle- 
ments ant] perplexities. 

The limits of space forbid any extended discussion of the many points 
which arise, but the conclusions reached may be briefly slated. 

Among the (jucsiions which had to be considered and settled, at least tenta- 
tively, for the present purpose, were the following: 

I. What is the scope of (orcign missions? The expresuon "foreign mis- 
sions" is underslood to ajiply to any more or less organized effort to lead 
the native!^ of unevaiigetized lands to the acceptance of a pure and saving form 
of Christian truth, and to lift their daily living into conformity with it. The 
scene of this missionary activity is Iield to be outside the land in which it orig- 
inates, or, if it originates in so-called foreign lands, represents the efforts of 
foreign residents, or of already Christianized native churches, moved by 
the missionary impulse, to exlc^iid the Gospel uf Christ among unevargelited 
peoples. There may be a great variety in method, and a decided preference 
as to the instrumental agency cniijluycd. but only one governing purpose. 

TTtts dofmition, it will be ob.wrvcd, excludes all mission effort in the home 
land where the society is located. Work among the Indians or the Euro- 
pean and .\siatic iniinigranls of the United States aud Canada is not. there- 
fore, reckoned among the foreign missionary operations of the societies of 
those countries; yet if efforts are made by such societies among the Indians 
of South America, the mission can be classified as foreign, since it is so both 
geographically and because it is conducted among a pagan people. On the 
other hand, religious aid and missionary service rendered by British and 
Continental Societies to foreign residents in the colonies is not classed as for- 
eign missions, however distant may be th>e scene of operations from the 
home Kind. Work among the Protestant peoples of Europe by British or 
American Societies is not, for similar reasons, regarded as foreign missions. 
Geo graphically il may belong to foreign rather than home missions, but it 
is simply in the line of co-operation on the part of British and American 
Christians with the agencies of Christian evangflisra already active under the 
direction of local churches in the Protestant nations of Europe. 

As regards Papal Europe, the question is more difficult. It may be said 
that inasmuch as evangelical missions conducted by Societies of Great Britain 



4»o 



STATISTICAL SUMMARY 



and Uie United Slates among Oriental Christian churches in Western Asia 
and Egypt, and among Roman Catholics in Mexico. CeniraJ and South 
America, arc counted as foreign by almost common consent, therefore evan- 
gelical missions among the Roman Catholic or Greek Orthodox peoples of 
Europe should be so considered. This would introduce th-: XIcAll Mission, 
and numerous other societies organized to conduct evangelical work in Franc*, 
Belgium. Spain, Italy, Austria, and elsewhere, into the list of recogoizcd for- 
eign missionary agencies. The point is not important except for purposes of 
classification. Such missions lose nothing of dignity or usefulness if classed 
by themselves unrkr the caption of Evnngclical Misfions to Papal Europe. 
This seem^ to he far the more appropriate designation. leaving the term " for- 
eign missions" to be used in its ordinary and commonly inierpreted *ensc. 
3<i referring to countries outside the bounds of Christendom. A possible, 
though comessedly arbitrary, exception might be made in favor of thou 
foreign missionary societies which conduct work in Papal Europe as a long- 
cslahlishcd feature oi their operations. In the United States this would applf. 
among others, to the American Board, the American Baptist Missionary 
Union, and the Missionary Society of the Methodist Episcopal Church. 

2. What is a foreign missionary society? is another e-;sential point to be 
considered. No dil'ticulty arises concerning agencies organized exclusively to 
do the work of forcisn missions as outlined in thp previous paragraphs — ad- 
ministering funds given for such a purpose, sending out missionaries, initial- 
ing .ind conductins missionary operations, founding churches and institu- 
tions, and otherwise fulfilling the varied aims of mission effort. Nor does il 
occasion any embarrassment if home and foreign missions are both included 
under one administration, in ca^^c separate accounts are kept and distinctive 
data can be given. There are. however, certain societies, agencies, and insti- 
tutions whose service to foreign missions is undoubted, and yet is so panial. 
specialized, indirecl, or merely co-apcr.ntive. that Ihe tuR'>tion arises at once 
whether they may properly be placed in the list of distinctively foreign mis- 
sionarj' societies. 

The Bible Societies, the Tract and Literature Societies, the United Society 
of Christian Endeavor, the Epworth Leagues, and similar org.inizalions. 
philanthropic specialties like that of tlic Pundita Ramabai in India, with a con- 
siderable number of organizations, foreign missionary in title and purpose, 
but simply rendering financial or other aid to existing societies — demand recog- 
nition, and yet should Ihey be counted as strictly and technically foreign mis- 
sionary* socieries? It was chosen for the present purpose, lo differentiate and 
classify, naming three classes of societies as follows: 

Class I. Societies directly engaged in conducting foreign missions. 

Class IL Societies indirectly co-operating or aiding in foreign missions. 

Class HI. Societies or Institutions independently engaged in specialiied 
effort in various departments of foreign missions. 

Under these three cnplions can he arranged without confusion, and in full 
recognition cjf the special and stated service rendered by each, all active agen- 
cies working on behalf of foreign missions. 

3. ,^nothe^ question of moment is the relative place and scope in t&e 
schedule lo be assigned to Women's Societies. The classification which hai 
been made holds, of course, in their case, as with the larger and older organi- 
zations. The answer to this question should be such as to recognize historic 
tacts and ch.irtered limitations, and ycl in no way to lose sight of the equal 
honor and the indisputable value of their co-operalton. In most instaucci 
they are auxili.iries. but in others they are independent financially, and also ia 
their administration. It has seemed suitable to give to societies thus organ- 
ized and conducted a distinct place in the roll of foreign missionary agencies. 
The extent and value of their co-operation are thus made evident. 

4. A further inquiry arisen as to what is the prcci<te definition of terms used 
in the schedule of data. It may be said, in brief, that the caption " Date of 
Organization " should he understood to refer to the time of opening or orgar- 
i?ing the foreign work: the " Income from Home Sources" is that received 
by the society exclusively for foreign missions, from churches. endownientB. 
and conlnbutors in ihe home land, .ind the " Income on the Foreign Field" 
relates to funds received on the mission field and reported in receipts, or 
counted as part of appropriations by the treasury of the home society. In 





tenth column the " Total of Foreign Missionaries" rcprcscnls the sum of 
!«w preceding columns, m which that total is disiribuled under the different 
IGcations. It is imporuiiit here lo .ivoid duplicate entries, as, for example, 
placing ordained or lay missionaries under their respective captions, and in 
case ihey are also mediiral practitioitcrs entering llieni again in the column for 
physicians, or in the case of women physicians entering them as such, and 
aliO in the columns for married or unmarried women. In case such dupli- 
cate cntrieji occur ihrnugh a desire to give a full report of the three classes of 
clerical, lay, and medical missionaries, the double entry should not appear in 
the summary, but, as has been dane in llic following tables, should be cor- 
rected by reducing the total given in the tenth column. 

The inclusion of wives of missionaries as members of the foreign staff of 
Klltissionary societies is not regarded with favor by some sludenls of missions. 
fThe argument advanced against it is that it is not customary under other sim- 
ilar conditions. Church statistics at home do not include pastors' wives. 

But foreign missions involve a nnique and personal commitment on the 
part of both husband and wife, who unite in a work of peculiar consecration, 
and together cnlcr a sphere of lifelong effort wilb similar motives and con- 
victions. 

It seems fair and proper, then, that a column in missionary statistics 
should be assigned for recording the number of (hose who occupy ijtich a 
dignified status on the rolls of numerous societies at home. Not a teacher, 
colporteur, Biblc-woman. or effective helper among the natives, of even tlic 
humblest grade, is passed over in the muster-roll of missions. Is it. then, 
either nndigniBed or unsuitable to designate as missionaries, American, Brit- 
ish, or European wives who 5er\'c the mission cause as married women, bear- 
ing side by side wilh their husbands a notable share in the effective 5cr\'ice 
on the field? The column in which they are enumerated, moreover, stands 
by itself, and ita purpose is clearly specified, so that there need be no confusion 
or misunderstanding concerning its meaning. If it should be looked upon 
by anyone as an intrusion, and regarded as out of place, it can be ignored 
or eliminated in the lolnls. In view of these considerations, it has been 
deemed best to retain this specification In the list of data. 

In the column designated for " Organized Churches," only churches form- 
ally constituted, in harmony with some ecclesiastical system, are entered. In 
column at. calling for a report of " Native Contributions." the total gifts of 
native Christians for the support and extension of the Gospel and for Christian 
education and philanthropy should be recorded. This item differs from those 
assigned to column 3 — " Income from Home and Foreign Sources " — in that it 
is intended to represent the progress of native Christian bencvDlcncc as revealed 
in gifts for the propagation and establishment of Chrisiianily, the promotion 
of Christian education, and the practice of Christian philanthropy, while col- 
umn 3 is confined to funds recognized and counted by ih'z treasury of home 
Societies as having been received on the foreign field. " N.-itive Contribu- 
tions," therefore, includes what is reported in column 1, so far as the latter 
represents native gifts, and also much more indicative of an expanding benefi- 
cence in the native Christian communily. 

The term " Individual Communicants," in column 17, should have but one 
meaning in all the statistical returns of missions. It would be misleading, for 
example, to mnke the number of communicanls reported represent the num- 
ber of those who h.^ve part-iken of the communion during the year, in which 
case a single individual might be counted several times, a method not now in 
vogue, so far as known, in any mission in the world. It should be distin- 
guished from the baptized, since, though all communicants are baptized, not 
alt baptized arc communicants. Its manifirst application is to those individual 
converts who. on credible evidence, are admitted to participation in the com- 
munion of the Lord's Supper. The caption " Additions During the Last 
Year" refers to new conimtintcants received on confession of faith during 
the year just past, ami included in the total given in the preceding column. 

One more specification requires a word of explanation. Column 22, under 
the caption of " Native Christian Coiiimuiiity," would seem to be sufficiently 
clear. It is claimed, however, that this docs not stand for a fixe«l class, and 
so may lead to inaccuracy in the returns given by different societies. The 
substitution of the caption " Baptized Natives" is advocated as indicating a. 



I 



422 STATISrrCAL SUMMARY 

fixed and easily determinable class. This is clearly inie. especially in the cm 
of those churches in which liapliiin is freely administered; bui in many mis- 
sions baiJlism is noT administered to natives, except on credible confession ol 
belief, and good evidence o£ conversion, such as would be required for admii- 
sion to the communion. There exists. Ihereiore, in connection with many 
mission stations, a community of nominal Christians, adults as well as chil- 
dren, as yet unbaplizeri. They acknowledge themselves, either by birth or 
choice, to belong to the Christian ranks, but can not be numbered among 
those who have received the rite of baptism. The caption used includes not 
only communicants, but all such nominal adherents, baptized or unbaptizcd. 
old or young — all. in fact, enrolled or recognized as members of the native 
Christian community. It is a safe rule to estimate this body of communicants 
and non-comrttunicants to agRrcgatc on the average three times the nmnber 
of adult communicants reported. 

Educational, literary, medical, and philanthropic statistics present no 
points of serious difficulty, except that in the case of medical returns great 
care has been taken to distinguish the different classes of patients, and to 
differentiate individual patients from repealed trcaimenis of the same patient 
The number of separate individuals treated as patients differs much from the 
number of separate treatmcnls given. Ten individual f-aticnts may repreJeni 
from thirty to fifty individual treatments in case the same patient returns often 
to the dispensary. If this distinction is not observed, much confusion results. 
The schedule oi medical returns suggested is somewhat condensed in the 
medical summaries recorded in the following pages. It will be found in full 
form in the statistical volume soon to be issued by Dr. Dennis, giving in dab- 
orate detail the data upon which the summaries here recorded are based. 

It seems to be extremely desirable that some uniform system of reporting 
statistics should be adopted by all societies, in order lh.it the collation of data 
may thus be facilitated, and far more authoritative accuracy secured. The 
Committee have sought to contribute tentatively to the formulating of such 
a scheme by the attempt herein made to classify the main divisions of a sta- 
tistical outline as Evangelistic. Educational, Literary. Medical, Philanthropic, 
and Cultural, and aUu to lix the use and significance of specific terms chosen 
to differentiate dei-iils under each division, and finally to suggest for this 
terminology a schedule of orderly arrangement 

Whatever may be thought of the success of the attempt, the value and sug- 
gestivcness of the results here recorded can not be questioned. The variety 
and complexity of foreign missionary effort and the immense scope of its in- 
fluence are manifest An object-lesson in the practical unity of the co-operat- 
ing forces of our Lord's Kingdom is given in these summaries of a vast work. 
which represents fellowship in prayer to the same God, and brotherhood in 
toil for the same Master^ on the part of all, of whatever name, who arc truly 
called m this world-embracing and world-conquering service. The cumnla- 
tive impetus of missionary operations is here brought to our attention ai>c» 
as we stand at this rallying-point lor another decade and another century of 
effort Wc have reason to be gratefid as we review what God has done, and 
to be hopeful as we look forward to what He wil! yet accomplish. 

In the following pages the classified statistics of the income, staff, and 
church returns of missionary Societies are given only in summaries, as arc 
also the statistics of educational, literary, medical, and other phases of mission 
effort In these latter departments the classification by Societies is dropped 
and a geographical division adopted. 

The income reported is that which represents contributions or cxpetidi- 
turcs for foreign missions only. 

The following explanatory remarks giving more explicit Information con- 
cerning the rules observed in making up these final summaries should be care- 
fully read : 

I. The Summary of Wontan's Work represents alt the societies (indepen- 
dent and auxiliary) conducted by women, Of the number <I20) given. 31 
are included in the total (449) reported for the world; the remainitig 88 are 
auxiliary, and if added to the total for tlie world would make the complete hst 
of all societies (including not only principal and Independent organizations. 
but auxiliaries in primary and direct relationship) 537. The income and all 



A 




PREFATORY NOTE 



Other data o£ the Women's Societies arc included in the totals given for the 
world. 

a. The total income ffiven for the world ($19,126,120) docs not include any 
duplicate returns, as, for example, incomes in Classes 11 and III already re- 
ported in Qa$s I. or incomes of auxiliary organizations reported by princi- 
pal societies. This statement, in fact, applies to all the items reported in the 
World totals, no duplicate returns being included. From this same total in- 
come arc also excluded funds spent for missions in Europe among both 
Protestant and Papal nations, also the expenses of missions among tlie In- 
dians of the Uaminion of Canada conducted hy Canadian societies, the financial 
outlay of all societies for mission work or church aid on behalf of foreign resi- 
dents in the colonies, the contributions of home societies for the aid of partially 
independent missionary organizations in Asia, Ausiralasia, and the West In- 
dies when acknowledged in the returns of such societies, they having been 
already entered in the income of said home societies, and. finally, all govern- 
ment grants for educational work. 

3. The total given for "ordained missionaries " includes sonic who arc also 
physicians, and in a few instances these are also given in the column for phy- 
sicians, but wherever' this is known the duplication is eliminated in the column 
recording the total of foreign missionaries. The total given for this column 
(IS.460) does not correspond with the sum of the six preceding columns, be- 
cause some of the societies have simply reported the number of missionaries 
without classifyina them in the separate columns. 

4. The returns Tor " organized churches " are incomplete, as many societies 
have omitted them, apparently not understanding that the expression refers 
simply to individual church organizations (not necessarily including build- 
ings where religious worship is held) which have regular services, stated 
preaching, duly selected officials, a membership roll, and in connection with 
which the communion service is regularly held. As a rule, each church build- 
ing represents such an organization, but not every preaching-place, which may 
be only a school-house or a hired room. 

5. The " total of communicants " rcpre-wnts the number of individual 
church-members who are enrolled as pariiripants in the sacrament of the 
Lord's Supper, and is not intended to apply in general to baptiwd persons, or 
to those in nominal connection with the Christian as distinguished from the 
various non-Cliri^tian communities.. From this number (1,317,684) have been 
excluded all Church members in Protestant Europe in churches connected with 
the foreign missionary' societies of America or Great Britain, alt communi- 
cants reported anioDg the Indians of Canada by the Canadian societies, all 
reported for Alaska except by the Moravian Church, all Christian Indians of 
the United States, and all communicants among foreign residents in the 
colonies. The native communicant membership of South Africa, the West 
Indies, and Hawaii, even though belonging to wholly or largely self-support- 
ing churches, is however, included, as it represents the direct fruitage of 
foreign mission work for the last half-century. 

6. The column for those " added last year " docs not include all who were 
baptized, but only those confirmed, or newly admitted on confession of f.iilh 
to participate in the communion as members of the Church. If all societies 
had reported their returns, this number would be not less than loo.ixio, 

7. The " contributions of natives " ($1,841,757) represent rheir gifts toward 
Christian expansion, chiefly, of course, in their own home fields. If full re- 
turns were given, a much larger figure would appear. 

8. The " native Christian community " (4.414,236) reported represents the 
number of souls in nominal adherence to Christianity as a result of evangelical 
missions. They may be said to be within direct touch of Gospel agencies. 
The outer circle of those reached by the indirect influence of the Gospel can 
not be estimated. God, who watches over the destiny of every individual soul, 
alone knows. 





Sodcilcfl directly eaKa(«l 
in conducilfie lomga 

Untied Succa 

Canada 

Rncland 

^'utland 

Ireland 

Walw 

Denmark 

nnland 

FfABCt 

Cicrmaay 

Netherlands 

Norwar 

Sweden 

SfritierlBmt 

Auiitalasla and Oceania. .. 

Alia 

A(ri«a 

Weil Indies .'^ 







I3S» 

3* 

\l 
to 

«5 

■IT 

t66 



U7* 

64 

t 

•9 
'3 



>57S 



•T.TO 
l.tue 

I' 

4. JOT 
Totali tor Claaa ! — 'At in T<i.oyi 40^3 «ii »; ti«4 mo jhq 1^.607 «o»j| 6B.y>o 7^.<'s 



too6 

S9 
fc»07 

■30 

'I 

3 

;j 

"T 

37 



4. 1 to 

«S3 

tii 

3fi 
3> 
10 
'»i 
».5»S 
Ii 

t8l 

41 

aS) 

347 

•73 



IS* 



«Si«»3 

as.^ 

a.9E>Q 

3W 

443 

IS 

&,*** 

t.8a« 

»I7 
J' 

-3 

«.4«o 

S.469 




EVANGELISTIC 



425 



CLAS8B5 I., n., AF«D IH., ARRANCBO IN SUMMARIBS ACCOWMW TO NAUONS AND 
CONTPiBNTfl ConttaoeJ 



NATIONAl OH CONTI 
NENTAL DIVISIONS 



5<f 



as 

a c ■> 
SB 3 



FoKiiiCN Mi&siiOrtARiKS 



-3 ij' 



CLASS II 

ScKlctles indircctlyco-opcr- 
fetiA^ or a^difig in laretffD 

U n ited Sum . ■ , , . . . 

Canada ..,,.,,. 

ILaglaiid 

ScotUod 

Treland^... 

GermBny .,..--- ,,- 

TfcibcrUndi ., 

Ni^cwAjr 

Sweden 

Sniuerluid 

AentnlaalB and OccanU. . 
Asia 



Phyai- 









Is;? 

rt-J 



■£■5 

."is 

^ o 



Natitb Work us 



= £?; 



35= 



TduIi for ClusII 



$171,607 

101,03a 

00,401 

J, goo 

8,730 

«S,64S 
77.99) 



ti,ai7.73' M 11 



30 

37 

9» 

S3 



38; 

4> 



36 



■43 

> 

383 



Jfi 



3.a»6 



Lav ) * ■■ 
but: OKI 



NATIONAL OR 

CONTINENTAL 

DIVISIONS 



CtASS IL 

SwillW* Iad)r>eetly co- 

operwInB- pr B Wing i tt 

fofclirn mlulaoi. 

Vnlted SUtca 

CaniLda... .. 

En^Und 

£cotUnd 

Ire]ind 

Gennaa;y 

NetherlAnds 

Norway, 

Sweden. 

SwitierUnd 

Austrslul* and 

Oceania 

AaEa. 



TauIaforCluiII.. 145 



Stations 






Chukchbs 



Is 



OU 






503 



103 
45 



»5.Sfi« 






■D.n 
5" 



SlTHDAV-SCHOOLa 






s 


»-^ 


■=«c 






fl 


^^S 


in 


^= 



19a 



1,13a 



51 

or 







l<.»«S 



7Sia»3 



40 



7fi,3«R 



436 



STATISTICAL SUMUAUY 



CLASABS 



n., AND m., ARRANOBD IN SUMMARIES ACCORDfWI TO NATIONS AND 

CONTINENTS— -C^tlnued 



NATIONAL OR CONTI- 
MENTAL DIVISIONS 



^1 






FonEICK MiSSlOHAUKS 

iTiirsJ- 



^1 



^1 






Natiti Wo«kxu 



£"8 5 

m 

olx 

111 



CLASS III. 
Socictic* or Insiltutioni in- 

dtpcadcMlr eonf ed In 
■pccUUsed effort la ruiotu 

depftrtneau ol fordgn 
tnlMtons. 

United Sum 

Bngland 

ScotLaod 

IteUftd 

W*lM 

Germany 

Holland 

Norway 

Swedes 

Au*U*luia 

Asia 

Airtoi 



ToUli for Clan Itl loa 



4. "5 

■at, 440 

497 



•^1i 



Inr-aqi 



36 



^ 



to 

lit 
n 



Hoe 



KonOMS 



NATIONAL OR 
CONTINENTAL 

DIVISIONS 



Statiorb 



< 3 



CHcncHBa 



13 



2= 

H 



la 

1^ 



S9MDAT-1CIIO0U 



CLASS III. 

SoeicUct or laitituttons 
independently eoKSf cd 
in Kpeciallud eflort in 
variO'US dEpartcnenta of 
fore^Kn m^iaioai. 

United SiMci 

England 

Scotland 

Irelesd 

Wale* 

G«fmaQT 

Hdlaad 

Norway 

Sweden 

AuMnUlU 

Asia 

Africa 



8-S- 
3iX 









Narifra- 

CHxvnia 



ToialBfa«ClaMlII. 193 



U 



4 

110 



140 



93 



".••5 



4T4 
>«« 



MJ 



7«! «.o« 



t4 



4.6H 

•70 



tea 
>*5 



•e.s5i 



K^ 



f 




CLASS I.. 
CLASS II. 
CLASS III 

ToMb... 



' If thf niiinbcr fjlw(iincD> .lUTiliary inrictk"" "W). not fnclud^c! in t)ir l<!i<uW44n) of todetlaBlveB 
mboveuadcrC'laAifi 1., 11^ IIJ , be ^ded to thjt numticr, ilir grxafi torn! nf ;)!1 ihe inUsiottarf totimtm ol 
Dm world, bvth itideiieadeiil aad 4UXLlLa,n'. Till r«4tli ^)7. but all uthcr ilaU in Uic " CombbicdToMlaol 
C1»fr>I., [I .and llI.,"ici:idjiucivciiiboi'c. 

■ In redadncr tSc ioconic ni FuropaAn locfetk* to Vniled Suta currwDcr. the EnKllsh pouad slalinK 
has been cstimaied at *4 <jo, tlie Daniafa, Norwcslan, aad SwedUh crown at sS cenla , [he Dutch inria 
*i «i ceal*. Ihe Ccrmoii nurk at u cenu. the FinnMh mark at iq cmta, aa«9 iha Traach fnnc U ao ctDtt. 
IdJbo rnpeca have been rackoned a! three lo the diillai. 




AfttcA 
Aluka 
AuiiralulA 
Burma 
Canada wtd 

GreMlaod.... 
Ccntnl America... 
CcTlon 
Cbloa 
Formoia 
Indb.. . . 
Japan ... 
Korea... 



Ul. BOAROINQ AND mOtf SCHOOLS, AND SEAUNARIBS 



ca 



Alaika. 
Australasia 

Burcna 

Canada .... 
Central America,.. 

Cliioa... 
Pormoia 
India.... 
lapan... 
Kof«a ■■ 



78 




"X 


9,316 
in 






J' 


S' 


tf 


1.7TJ 


t,096 


■,S<n 


14 


III 


.!« 


4"7 


4» 


1.U4 


33 


].(9«ei 


iM 


3tSO0 


«<393 


JIO 




j8 


41,450 


■47 


9'3 


3.397 




St 


7* 


IS6 



Madagascar 

Mala^ala 

Mexico 

Qcranla 

PalMtlne 

Siam and I.ao« 

SouCti America 

Srri* 

Turhey 

Weatlndici 

Total*. . . . 



6 


S)D 


*4» 


t< 


1,77° 


«»7 


CO 


'9« 


T.QJI 


'1 




:s 


8 


»W 


•»j 


iff 


nan 


■ .Cos 


■ • 


4»3 


«s. 


«B 


t,S«S 


».697 


J 


76 


110 


9m 


48.851 


34. »W 



a.iiq 
■16 



H].nl 



IV. INDUSnUAL ntAININQ INSnTUTIONS AND CLA5se5 



Africa.. 
BanBa.. 
Canada. 



:it1aa 

lodU 

Japan 

Korea 

Kadacaacar. 




S6 


1.777 


S5< 


4.3;S 


3 


>M 


.1 


»;i> 


■ I 


♦9T 


775 


B 


«VS 


iiS 


J15 


7 


'i 


96 


•91 


46 


3.»7o 


i.nog 


4.»er 


IS 


173 


1S6 


3»? 


■ 


y 


■S 


ss 



Mexka. 

Oceania 

Palestine 

Persia 

Slam and Laoi. 
Soulb America. 



Tti 



urkcy . 



Total*.... 




EDUCATIONAL 



4»9 



V. MBMCAL AND NURSES' SCfHKH^ AND CLA55B5 



Location 






Number of PupiU 



Location 






Number of PupOa 



Africa 
Alaska 

CctIoh 
China. 
IndU.. 
Japan. 



919 
57 



3» 
134 

35 



•5« 

191 
as 



Korea 

MaUysia 

PeraU 

Srria 

Turkey 

Totals 



63 



370 



7 
5 

'7 
TO 



589 



VI. UNDEROARTENS 



Africa .. 

Burma .. 
Canada.. 
China... 
India ... 
Japan... 
UaUyila 



7 






15a 


b 






*S9 


1 








6 
10 






% 


*4 

> 






12 



Mexico 

Oceania 

Palestine 

Persia 

South America. 
Turkey. 



ToUls.... 



166 

59« 

«9 
i>35a 



4.Soa 



VU. BLBMBNTARY OR VILLAQB DAY SCHOCAA 



Totals 



Number of 
Institutions 



ii.74» 



Number of Pupils 



Males 



616,739 



Females I Toul 



Females I 
387.790 4 



SUMMARY 



Univenltles and Colleffes 

Theological and Train&g Schools 

Boarding and High Schools, and Seminaries 

Industrial Training Instltunons and Clasaes 

Uedleai and Nurses' Schools and Classes 

Kindergartens 

Elementary or Village Day Schools 

Totals. . . . 



33.139 
♦8.851 


9,27s 

3.5^ 

34. "W 


6,891 


9.486 


370, 


919 


9,asi' 


9,951* 


616,79a 


987,790 


7«fi.S73 


33».*>6 



35.414 

II,9M 

83.148 

'■'£ 

4.50a 
904.44a 

1.049,378 



* In the absence of definite infonnadon in the returns as to the lex of pupils in Undeicaitens it has 
been estimated that about one-half are boys. 




STATlSnCAI. SUMMARY 

m 

LITERARY 

STATBmCS OF BIBLE TRANSLATIONS AND GENERAL 
LITERATURE 

BI8LS TKANSU^TKWS 



tJggjKjg COXTtXENT 

' >•• 

Cm 

I tkc Unttnl Sum 
,u)d McxJca. 

;!' 

continent 
■cootwent'"'"" 

IBwnpK 

ItMfllu Kmpin 

$Mta „. 

XnUCAN CONTINENT 




LocUkm 



AUSTRALASIA AND OCEANIA 
ASIATIC CONTINENT: 

DomM 

Ceflon 

ChlDK 

Fomio«> 

GeorirU 

IndU 

lodo^Unft 

JfP" 

Hahnik 

PersU 

Turkitb Enplre 

Toul 



II. BIBLE AND TltACT SOCIBTieS 

I The nihie Societies of Christondom, chiefly the Amerfcan, the Britisli^w 
•Mt Forcufti. and Ute National Society of Scotland, have many agencies in th ^^ 
iM«t^ tuition Held, and circulate annually, in co-o^ralion with foreigK-^^ 
nittioas. *n ininiensc number of the Holy Scriptures, either entire or in por — " 
tioas. The distribution reported for Great Britain, the European Contincntr — 
m4 Chrxilrndoni in general is not included, since it can not be classed a^^ 
Mf to imnt! ti» foreign missions among uncvangclizcd races. A* nearly as car* 
W «Mritamcd. the number of Bibles thus rirculalcd each year is 91.761. th^ 
aasibcr ni Totanients ^^.741. and the number of scp;iratc portions 2.^16,964* 
Mftkius « irand total of 2.S35A(^- The number of translations given (437^ 
inchHlrs thirteen which were made by missionaries in India in the carlief 
y*r\ ixi the century, and never having been revised, were allowed later to g<^ 
\'«t ol j»ru»l. a» other and more useful versions eventually superseded ihem^ 
nW'T earlier vcrxtons represent missionary toil, and were useful in their day^ 
tmH should not be lost sight of in a statcmt-nl of missionary achicvcment*- 
W thi« imiwirtant department. The number ol translations now in use ti» 
nUtkK^n tictd'' tuny l»c staled to be at least 407. but many of them are onl^" 
•• *vi i^ifually completed. The author is greatly indebted to the secreurie* 
ti»h and I-oreign Bible Society, to Dr. R. N. Cust, and others, for 
i;ve infurinatinn on this subject, full .icknowlcdgmcat of which will. 
W HU4* in the maiistical volume to he issued later. 

« TM An\encnn Tract Society, since its organization, has aided in the 
, n on the foreign field of 4.996 separate book* and tracts in 153 di(- 

i». ixvlUioiw Tract Society of Londnn, chiefly through its Committees 
•HiA amiatra Jm»ci«iics m foreign fields, has circulated its publications in 239 

Itw BwoMAn Continent ladude* only rcnloo* which arc Eaitsionan in tbeJr 
>>1u<^l wtlh a dlsUncuceiv muslotuiry ptirpoM in view. Thtnr arc a DDBker 
, 1 »liu|ilr t»ecau«r they Hi not teem w fnlttH these condlitorv ABtonr thtf 
%n (he (.>IU>wifi(f t D*niih. 3. Dutch; j. Ktiglbh; 4 Ficmith- 5 Preneb- 




,«i fc Of««k; «. Ficbrew: ij. Irijli; ii/iiafian: tV LitTn; lirMiiu; iV"nJ^' 



f- t u«niih. 3. I>utclt; 5. 
, _ Icbrew; u. Irijli; 11. lulian; ti. utin; ti. Mae 

tfc PonufUMs; If. Rutsian; iB. SpaaUh: kj. Swedtib; >o. Wriih. 



v thtf 

rcfidi,- 

. No«- I 




langfuagcs. dialects, and characters. Of this n^imbcr T75 arc idcntififttl With 
loreiRH misBinns. Its most rerent statement reports a total circiil:ition in 
(oreiifri mission fields, through its nwn or afhlJated agencies, of 12.000,1x0 
books and tracts.' In this special service a large share should be credited to 
the important co-operating Tract Societies of India. China, Japan, Korea, 
South Africa, etc. In addition, the Christian Literature Society of India. 
through its various branches, circulates annually 2,312.849 books and tracts; 
the Society lor the Diffusion of Christian and General Knowledge among the 
Chinese, 181,249. The grand total of volumes and tracts thus distrifeuted by 
all these various agencies amounts to an annual circulation of 14,494,098. 



Ul. M15S0N PUBUSHHSa H(X:3E5 ANt> PtUNTINO PREASES 





tl 

a 

3 

Z 


Annual I*nies 


Locatton 


s 

B 

a 


Annual Imdm 


Iiocalion 


Capies 


Pfcgl* 


Cop tea 


Pact! 




3" 

■3 
4' 


4".34o 

6S.I00 

•0.450 

S74.»I7 
■.*1 0.335 

44».*6«' 

J.OM) 


JOO.OOC 
I.OOO 

107.149,739 

<77-7»S.5*» 
Jf.975.7~ 
S.'S7."« 


MsUfvla 


10 


i.4ja,4oa 

«.S47 
646,011 




A/»Wi 


(1,87 1.356 
■55.300 
















C1J.T16 
7."44.j6o 




S^atn and Laos 

South Ancilc* 


CWb« 






TotaJ* 


'*» 


WiS6t.777 


3S«.9^.3W 

















IV. PERIODICAL UTERATURE (MAaAZ]NE5 AND PAP£RS> 



Location 

AStia. 

Aluka 

Burma 

Canada and Greenland 

Ceylon 

China 

Fornoaa ,,,, 

IndU 

Japan 

Korea 

Hadaitaacar , 



Numl>er Circulation 



<7 
3» 

t 
146 
T9 

i 

5 



6,tyt 

•7.»7o 

ij),7i6 
«4.4»T 

3.7SO 



LocatJoa 

Malayiu 

Mexico 

Oceania 

PalwUnt 

Penia 

Siam 

South America .. 

Sytla 

Turkey 

W»t India 

Totalt 



Niunber 



S« 



Circulation 



A 


i.ooa 


40,030 

S.OOo 
6,000 


■5 


1,40a 

37" 

■ 1,0)0 

5rl30 



I.JOO 



* Among the more prominent ROdeiies included I 
Trict Society, ate Uie foilowlag. with their 

Centini Chiaa RcJlfflont Truct Society. 

Hanlcow 1,470,699 

CblDFM T'act SiKiriy. Shanelui ah^jto 

North Chtna Tract Socleiy, PeWlng.. .. 4ao,«oo 
North Fuhkien Rcllsiou* Trart So- 
ciety. Foochow.... tifiOoo 

Canian ReliKicui Tract Society 77.*«fi 

C^lcuia Chrj*tian Tract and Book 

Soeiet* 1,358,604 

North IndU Tract Society, A)1ihabad. st9,<|6) 
Ptmiab Rcligioui Book Society, La> 

bore 359-4°o 



n the total of ij.ooiwicA, reported by the Religious 
r«pectlrelMi>e«; 

Bonbar Tract and Book Society. Bom- 

ba y - a4S>4So 

Gujarat Tract Society, Sural 89.150 

OrlHa Tract Society. Cuitack 6a,]oo 

Madr«i Religious Tract and Book So- 
ciety, Madras i,99i,9l5 

Malayalam Tract Society, Trlchur 37.000 

Bansalare Tract and Book Society, 

„ B»gi"lo«. ................... ... 364.SJ6 

South TnTaneore Tract Society. Nag- 

ercirfl 47S.^<o 

South African Tract Society 5>j«» 

Japaa Booli and Tract Society 903,713 




433 



STATISTICAL SUMMARY 



IV 

MEDICAL 

STATISTICS <» HOSPITALS, DISPENSARIES, AND PATIENTS 

TREATED ANNUALLY 

L HOSPTTALS AND DISPCNSARIES 



LocaUon 



^4 



flo 



^.1 



TSSS 



"is 



Atricm 

Aluka 

Arabia 

Bun&a 

Canada and Labnu) or 

Ceylon 

China 

Pormoaa 

India, 

teS-:::::::::::::::::::::;::::::: 

MadagaicT 

MaUysia 

Mexico 

Oceania 

Palestine 

PertU 

Siam and Laoi 

Sooth America 

Srria 

Turkey 

Proportionate eitlmaie for g6 1 
boapltua and 147 dispenaariea > 
not reporting * ) 

Totala 



ia4 

106 



103 

4 
4 
9 
8 

lO 

*4a 

3 
950 
16 
»3 
9 
5 



753 



753 



4t909 

191 

346 
393 

6^ 

701 
i.3>3 

3*9 
395 

997 

1,167 
■ -033 

73.74' 

19.964 



93.705 



*77.794 



«.I58.349 
■.579.651 



44>.«39 
•5.6»« 



I.7B0.4S* 
17J34 

53.090 

34.47* 

101(017 
a6^ 
4»04» 
oi.Su 
80,903 

5>383.9)4 
i,a6},9Ci6 

«.647Ao 



' Tlie following Hotpitalt and Diapenwriei inclodad in the 355 and 7SI mentioned above failed to report 
•Utiatla: 



Hospitals 

Africa as 

Abska a 

Burma 1 

Canada and Lab rador 6 

Ceylon s 

China M 

Formosa i 

India 33 

Japan » 

Korea 3 

Madacascar 



DUpenaaries 

46 



Hoapitala 

Malayaia i 

Mexico I 

Oceania 

Palestine 1 

Persia' i 

Slam and Laos i 

Soutb America s 

Syria i 

Tiirkey a 

Totala,... 96 



I>lq>eiuaiks 



»47 



^ Ivllaurltius 

UiAi 

tiurm« 

LaomU , 

Ceylon 

Cbinn 

taaih 

JApsn , 

Korrt 

MftdSEAaau- 



LooiUoD 




Africa 

Buinu 

Home fur Unulnttd Cbildrrii. .. 

C»n»6A 

Ccyloa 

China ...- 

Hooks for Unuiotcd (.hildren 
IndU 

Homes for UnUlntcd Children. . 



■ ReramtreccivnllTnin ncarlralldf ihe9e}Miai)tlab,a«yhinu.«ii>l btniMa ladicale that oot cl i,iC6 
Imiaiu abutii i^a> are (..'hrUttaos. 

Ul. SCHOOLS AND H0Me5 FOR THE BLIND AND FOR DBAP MUTBS 



LocatlO'a 


Number 


PuplU 


Location 


Number 


Pupils 




t 

I 


lit 


Japsa. 
Sjrrla. 




3 

4 

30 












Tfltals.... 


son 



IV. Temperance Societies, Bands, and Home* have been organized al 
many mission stations tliroiigliuiit the world. The sum tnlal of these, with 
the membership, it has been impossible to asc<^rtain- The World's Woman's 
Christian Temperance Union has a^iliated national branches in 26 foreign 
mi^sinn coimtries. 

The ATiglo-lndian Temperance Association in India has affiliated with it 
281 temperance .locielics with a very large membership. 

V. Rescue Work is represented in the foreign field by Opium ReluRcs, 
Homes for Converu, Widows, Homeless Women, and Rescued Slaves. The 
number of these, so far as identified, i"; 134. 

VI. Miscellaneous Guilds and Societies have been established, for the pro- 
motion of purity, priton reform, .ibolishmrnt of foot-binding, and work (or 
soldiers, sailors, and prisoners. Of these .•societies there are laSon the foreign 
mission field. 



434 STATISTICAL SUMMARY 

VI 

CULTURAL 

STATISTICS OF SOCIETIES AND ASSOCIATI(»4S FOR 
GENERAL IMPROVEMENT 

The cultural aspects of mission work include the reproduction abroad erf 
many well-known agencies at home. The United Society of Christian En- 
deavor has 3,111 senior and 460 junior societies in foreign mission fields. The 
Methodist Church (North) is represented by 443 chapters of the Epwonh 
League, with a membership of 16,755. The Methodist Church (South) has 
45 chapters, with 2,035 members. The Brotherhood of St. Andrew, organized 
in connection with the Protestant Episcopal Church, supports its representa- 
tive engaged in special service under the Bishop of Tokyo, and the Order of 
the Daughters of the King has its own missionary stationed at Shanghai. 

Among undenominational agencies may be mentioned the International 
Committee of the Young Men s Christian Association and the International 
Committee of the Young Women's Christian Association, both represented 
by organizations in the foreign fields, rendering valuable service in the interest 
of religion, morals, and culture. The World's Student Christian Federation 
and the Student Volunteer Movement in Mission Lands should also be noted. 
Children's Scripture Unions, Boys' Brigades, Gleaners' Unions, and Sowers' 
Bands are teaching the lessons of the kingdom to the young. More com- 
plete details concerning these and other organizations will be printed in the 
statistical volume soon to be published. There are various brotherhoods and 
sisterhoods, especially those represented by deaconesses, doing admirable 
philanthropic work in many lands. In addition, native Bible women and 
zenana visitors are rendering special service in nearly all mission fields. 
Councils, conventions, summer schools, assemblies, free libraries, reading- 
rooms, literary societies, improvement associations, and lecture courses are 
all serving a useful purpose in increasing numbers and with cumulative in- 
fluence. 



Vn. NATIVB 0RaANlZATI0N5 FOR BXTBNSION OP KNOWLBIMn AND YIB 

PURTHBRANCB OP NATIONAL. SOUAL. MORAL, AND 

RBUaiOUS REFORM 

(In lympathT witb Chiiitlni monlkty, although not in every ionance uader Chriitlao oootnd) 

Africa a China j Japan » Oceania i 

Burma i India 3a Korea i — 

Total H 



VUI. MI55I0NARY TRAININa INSTITimONS AND AOBNCIES IN CHRISTIAN LANDS 

(Mot including Theological Schools and Seminaries) 

Australia 4 Germany 14 Sweden ■ Wett Indiei 1 

Canada 3 Holland 3 Swiuerlaod 9 — 

Englind »6 Norway 1 United States si Total.... I? 

France i Scotland 7 Wales i 



IX. MISSION 5TEAMERS AND SHIPS USED IN EVANaEUSTIC MEDICAL, AND 
OTHER DEPARTMENTS OP MISSION SERVICE IN THE PORBCm FIELD 

Africa S4 Canada t Ind la 7 Siam 1 

Alaska 4 Central America., i Japan 3 ■— 

Austrmlaafa » China 8 Oceania 14 Total.,.. 67 



Missionafy Literature of the Nineteenth 

Century 



CompiUd by REV. HARLAN p. BEACH 

From Lbb Prcpircd by the following 
Specialists) 

REV. M. A. ADRlANl,I>ulch and French UtcntuK. nurkcd . . a 

lREV.A.KOLMODIN, Swedish Literature, marfced ko 

LpROF. F. H. KRUGER, Freacb Literature, marked Mr 

[rev. V. SORENSEN, Danish LHerature, marked / 

PROFESSOR DR. G. WARNEOC, Germ»Q Llteratuter marked . w 

PROFESSOR G. E. DAY, D.D., Engliih and Continenta! Litenhire 

REV. J. S. DENNIS, D.D., English Uterature. 



This QiblioEraphy is by no m«an< exhauitivc, conuinlnn 34 it doei onl<r a little raort than 
t.soocnuics. It 1*. raiBKr. a USt a\ liierALurc 'vclfcied Irom * imvt of onaicrla] as bcitiK Ln «>iiie 
tort (cpresenLative of tbc mlstlonary ILtrrary producilunii iif the cliuinK century, for olivious 
reuons otott of tlie books arc dlstlncIlvFly- laisalonaiy in chamcirr, and prc|%ir€rd ai the Biblioz- 
rapfayh lor a ProtOtanl Canrcrcnce Rejinrt, there Is n>iturally very little material bcarirlf upon 
Caiboltc mtaslona. Only n lew o( many excellent mlMionftry ptrtoJic^li src elTca, and mote at 
thnc^rc gcneraHnihclr scope. Had the intrtntic value ot the literatures been conaidcfcd. a 
larim^Her prap<>nion of Engliib putiltcatlon. trould have been )n«crte\l, wbile the continental 
portion vruuld have becik creally incrc4t«tt. Ax the report t<i pul>lit)hed In RnglUh., however, 

fiubli'Catloni In thut Un[{iiJ.fje cun&iitute itie buU ol the HibtloB'^pliy< only carefully selected 
isu of works In the Continental mngueA hcine printed. 

For the canvcnicnte ol purchatcn the pubUiher, date of publication, and price arc (Ircn la 
mo^l entrin. 

Tite fnllovtrinE ll» of addretaet and abbreviation* ol firia lumei are printed here in order to 
rconomlie space In the Hibli-iKr^pby U<icir. Dold-laced type indicate* (he pan of the llrm 
name which appear* as the iiblirrrijtloTi In the list. An aMerUk <•) h js bcrn prefiied to certain 

Eublikber'a namo 10 show that the Arm ti no {vngrr in existence, nr that nmliinj; more is known 
y the Gctnpiler than an ImprrfHTct address In nio«i case* where a publlihcr bat hut one entry 
In the BlbJuoKraphy ihc ftill name and address arc Ktvcn In that place and noi la the list 
below. Abbreviations for ccrtatD cities arc used as follows : 



B.— Boston, Mass. 

Chic -Chicaeo, 111. 
Cop — CopetiiiftKcn. Denmark. 
E.— Edinburgh. Scotland. 
GDi. — GUlcrslob, Germany. 
U— Londun. Eng. 

Alexander ft Shephcard, a? Chancvry Laoc. 

f.cindan, Kn£. 
•Allen, (ilasficiw. ScotUnd. 
AlleN, W IL, & Cu,, Adam St.. SLcand, Lon- 

iJoTii. Ene. 
Alttnson, H. R., y* Paiernottet Row, London, 

Eng. 
•Alinan, London. 
Amcrion Baptist Missionary Uolon, Trenaoi 

Temple, Bolt on 
Ancrican Baptlu Publleailon Society, ]«» 

Cbesilltit St.. Phlladelrhl*. Pa. 
Atsericui Board olCommUtioncrtfor Foreign 

Missions. ■« Rracnn St., tloiton. Mj«t. 
Aflseri can Sunday Sclmol Union, iiMChcitnut 

St.. Pbiladelphla. Pa. 
American Tract Society, ijo Nassau St.. New 

York. 
•Andrews, S, C, Abq Arbor. Micb. 



Lpi.— LelpiiiF, Germany. 
N. V.-New VoTk_ 
Pir — ParU, France. 
Phll.-Pltiladelphia, Pa, 
Stut.— Stuttgart, Cemany. 



Apptrton, D,, ft Co., 9* Fifth Are.. New Voet 
Armatrone, A. C., A Son, 51 East iMb St_ 

New Vork. 
Arnold. E,. j7 Bedford St., London. Bn|t. 
'Aylutt, London, Eng. 



Baker ft Taylor, s East itih St., New Vork. 

Bancroft Co.. 711 Market St.. San Francises. 
(^al 

BaptiM Bonk Concern, l..eultvllle, Ky. 

Baptist Mltslonnrv 5*ciety. London. Enff. 

Baptist Tract and Btwk ^•cjcty, j6 Gray's 
Inn Road, London. F.ng. 

Barbec ft Smith. Naibvlllc. Tena. 

Barmen Miss. Ccsellscbalt, Gnadau, Oar- 
many. 

Barns, C. R.. Pub, Co., lAii Wasliiagtos Av«^ 
St. LeuJs. Mo. 



Seller, SluttKart. nermaBy. 

*Bcl] it Daldjr. London, Ens. 

Bell.G.. & Sons, York St.. Coveoi G»rd«n<t. 

Lumlon. Ens-i aotl C6 Fifth Ave, New 

Vork, 
'Beniicu, Lnndnn, Ebz. 
B«nl«y. S<^r MacmllUfi. 
BcTKcr-Lcvrault, Rue de« Beaux-Ani j. Pirti, 

B«ncltcn, Fr.. CopenhAsco. Dcnaiark. 
Bcrteluniinn, C, Gflterslub, Getouuir. 
Black, A.,& Co., 4 SoboS(]u«r«. London, Bne- 
BtodtieASon 49 0h) Ballpy. London. Kns. 
Blackwood, Wm.. ft Sons Geonce S(., Edin- 

bursh. Scotland. 
Bobn. S?c Bcll,C..ft SoBi. 
Bontwyr* ci Cic. p:irli. Fnuue. 
Hrlgt*. W., Toronlo. Ontario, 
BrIM, C F. Lpirtcn. Hollnnd. 
BrlnkrrhoH, R . ,; E. »cl St , N'pw York. 
Rurn» & Oatci. li Orchard St^ London, Bnn. 
BttMy. J. H. dc. AmHcrdun. HolUnd. 



CambHder Unhrrnhy Ptetn, Ave Maria 

Lanr. l»n<1on. Enif. 
■Cvtci, Robert, A Broi.. '.go Droadway, New 

Vorlt. 
C««ecll & Co., Ludgalc Hill. London. Eng., 

and 7 W. iSth St., New York. 
ChMVben. W.ftR.,i39Hich Si., Edinbunrh. 

Scotland. 
ChAPoian* Hall, it Hcnrlctu Sc, London. 

Ebr. 
Chatio A Windui. m St. Martin's Lane, 

London. Eng. 
Cbriiitlan AllUnctr PabUihinc Co.. Nyack, 

N. V 
ChriuUn Literature Sodrty. Mjidr.-is, Tndla. 
ClirUUan Literature Society for Indls, Lon- 
don. Ens. 
Cliurch Mbuonjiry Society. Salisbury Sijuare, 

London, EnK 
CUrrndrn PrcntOtford. Rng. See Fmwde, H. 
Clarlc, T. A T.. George St.. Bdinourich. Scoi- 

l.ind. 
CInrke. James dt Co., 13 Fleet Su. London, 

Eiii;. 
Conrrefi-atlanal Sunday School & PubllthlnK 

Soriety, n Bcacufi St.. Boston, Mais. Same 

an Pilcriin PrcH. 
Coflliable. A.. & Co.. m Whitehall Gardens. 

London, En(. 
Corilii-ll. W. G . 76 Trcmooi St . Do«ton, Mass. 
Cmnaiun ft Cufts. ita W. ^ih St.. Ctnctn- 

naii, Ohio, 
•Crockef & HrewTRer. Boston, Mass. 
Cfowell, T. v., & Co.. 4"* E. i|lh St.. New 

York. 
CMinberlsnd Preshytrnnn Pnbli.shing Hoa*e, 

Nashville. Tenn. 

*Dalton, London, En|r> 
Belchert. ErUncen and T.elpite. Germanv. 
•Hodd, M. W.. New Vork 
DMld, Mead &. Co.. 14a Fitih Ave., .Vcw Vurk. 
•Dodslcv. .1 . Luntlort, Eii|j. 
Dannrrl l.riitrn, HnlUnd. 
DttrflitiK tt Fr.inkr. LclpilR, Germany. 
lieUKlas, DatHd. 10 Cuile St.. Ediabunrh, 
Scotland. 

Bkton &. Mains, tfp rifth Ave.. New Vork. 
eilloli. Andrew. 17 Pilace'i St.. CdlnbtiTffli, 

Scntbnd. 
Eivelhurn, Slultsart, Gefnany. 

Faher, W , & Co.. Berlin, C.ermaojf. 
•rannhaw, D.. Philailclphia. Pa. 
•Fic-M & Tuer, Lordon. Eng. 
Plscta bit Cher, rarit, France. 
•l-'itrKe.aid. Nrw Vork. 

Poreit!'! Mlaainn Board. Souitiern Bnptlit 
Convention, Richmond, Va. 




lUBLlOCRAPUY 




Postertandi • St iftelscDs fOrlt;. StocVbotm, 

Sweden. 
Frowde. H., 91 Fifth Are., New York, and 

Amen Comer. London. Rng. 
Funk * WaKnslIs 3* Lafayette Place, New 

Vork. 



Oardncr, Alexander, *tf hternaaier Square. 

London, Eng. 
Osrdner. Dvton A Co.. 3 PatemoMef BuUd- 

tnr*. toadoii.Bnff> 
0«inndl,jMM«, ig Goorgo IV. BrMge, Bdin- 

*GiIp«n. London, Enj;. 

GIna & Co . gTrctnuni Place. BoHOB,Ma>i. 

*<laodrlrh. C . Burlincton. Vt. 

"li'juld. Bolton, Maw. 

"Orsefl. B. L.. London. Eng. 

'GroombrUfie, Bdiabursb. Scotland. 



Hanck. A., Berlin, Germany. 

Hamilton, Edinburgh, Scotland. 

tlBruer * Brothers. FrankHn Square. New 

York, and «< AlScmirle St.. London. Eat 
Natchards, 187 Piccadilly. London, Eng. 
Hondltr Bros.. 14 Uisbop«cate Su, wiUtoui. 

London, Enff. 
*Meylin. London. Eng. 
Mtrt. Ferdinand, Breslau Gemany. 
•nttchcock. Circinnaii, O, 
Hoddcr & Sioiughton, »j Patemouer Bo«. 

London. Eng. 
HMiTh. U. de, Amsierdan, Holland. 
Houibton, MiSin A Co., Park St., Bmuo, 

Mass. 
HoulMMfl A Sons, 7 Patemoeier Bulkllfi<s, 



London, Eng. 
"'OKK * D< 
Hunt A Eaton, isc Filth Ave.. New York. 



nojrt, FoKK A Oonbain, Portland. Me. 



Hunt A BLockett. 1 j Great UadlKiroucb Si.. 
London, Eng. 



lane*, A. D., A Co.. ji Bedford St.. Strand;, 

London, Eng. 
Ubister A Co.. ij Tavistock St., London. Ebe. 

•Jackeon, P., London. Eng, 

Jarrold A Sons. i« Harwlck Lane, Londoo, 

Eng. 
*Jahnsianc. Edinburgb, Scotland. 

Kelly. C. H , *£ PatcmoMcr Row. London, 

Eng. 
Kcninii en ZcMin, V'trrcht, Holland. 
Kotrham. W. H,. 7 W. iVth St., New York. 
King. P. S , ASon, • Great Smith St.. Loodw. 

KoberJRasel, Swltterland. 
Krtueman. A. C, Haarlent, Holland. 

Lang, Georee, Lrlptir, Germany. 

Lecoflrc, W., Ku« Botutpartc, 90, Parte, 

France. 
•Le Plongeon, Brooklyn. N. V. 
Llppincoii, J. B., Co.. r<4 Filbert St.. Ptitladel- 

6bia, Pa., and 6 Henririta St.. London. 
:ng. 
Loridon Mlnlonarr Society. London. Ene. 
London Society lor Promoting Chrlstunhy 

amoriff the Jews, London. Eng. 
Loogmans, Green A Co.. -j/t raicrnonter Rom, 

London, Eog., and ^ Fifth Are., Nr«< 

York 
L4ithrr»p Publishing Co.. 9s Pearl St.. Bonon. 

Mass. 
Low. Santpson. Manion A Co.. Fener l.ane, 

Loiidoji. £ng. 
Lna4c & Co., 46 Great Russell Sl, London. 

Eng. 





BIBLIOGRAPHY 



*»37 



McClure, A. C, & Co., ChkaKD, III. 

•MMklnuMh Edinburgh, Scotland. 

MacallUn A Co.. Si. Manias St., T.ondon. 
Bac.. Bud Tbe MtcmllUa Compaair. New 
York. 

XafaMi dcs mlHiotu feraaftfUquea, PvU, 
Pnnce. 

*MallaUni. London. Eiw. 

Manball Brnthcn, 5A nternoun- Row, Lon- 
don, Eng. 

*Maaon. London. Ban. 

MMbodiH ttook Coanrn. CtnclanAtl. Ohio. 

M«tboi)i>l PublioJiins Houk, Tok^o, JapAn. 

Mathnrn A C'x, ^fi P.wws Si., London, £n|[. 

W«Truci», farii. France. 

Mijine, Piri«. Frjincc, 

Ml»i'>n»'BachhanCIuns, Bawl, SvHiierUnd. 

MisiiMniliJui. Ucrlin, Ocrnuny. 

Morsan A ^>LotI. u Piteiuoaier BulIdLBffi. 
I,onj)iin, Rig. 

MorienljTwrf. Bremen, Germ*iiy. 

Murray, John, suA Albemarle St., London, 
Baf. 

FfaamaRO, T.. I.«ipi[E. Germany. 
Nvbon, T., A Sonn. « PairmLmer Ra\r, Lon- 
don, £nc , utd New York. 
NUbci, JuMt, A Co., II Bcmen Si., London. 

Ollphani, Anderson ft Perrier, St. Mary'a St., 

Ediiiburzh Scotland. 
Op«a Court PubUahlng Co., Dearborn St.. 

Chi«iro.IU. 
Opitt A Co. CUitrow, Gcmunr. 
Ouood, J. R., A Co.. »i TremoniSl., Ramon, 

Mau. 

•PftrtDcr, London, £ne. 

PaitridKC, S. W.. ft Co., 9 Pawmoner Row. 

Londoa, Bng. 
fmrni, Keyan, Trench. TrUbnei, Charlnc Crou 

KO«d, London, Bn|[. 
•PMrtPabllshlnc Co., PhnadelphU, Pa. 
PerthPv P. A., Goth.i. GermanT. 
PUgM- Publiihink' Itouie, Kcadins, Pa. 
Pact. J., A Co.. iia St. and «th Ave., New 

VorW. 
Prt«brtefian Board uf Publication, 1334 

Choinut St., Philadelphia. Pa. 
Praibytcrian Coaimittre of Publication, 

Hlihmond, Va. 
Preabylerian Mlttfton PrcKK. SliariKhal, Chtna. 
Putnam, G. P.. Sons, jj Went ^jd St., New 

York, and 14 Bcdlord Si., London, £ng. 



Raad, Avery ft Co., 117 FrankUa St., Boston. 
MaH. 

Randolph, A. D. P., ft Co.. 10 E. uttt St., 

New Vorlt. 
Reformed Church PublUhinc House, o»7 Arch 

St.. PMIadcLphU, Pa. 
ReliskMn Tract Society. s6 Patcrnoater Row, 

London, Ene. 
Rcvell. F. H . Co.. tjS Filth Ave.. New Yark. 
'Rldgeway, London, Ene. 
RIvtagtotn. u King St., London F.nB. 
RouUedf e. G.. ft Sons, Lndnte Hilt London, 

Eng., and 119 We»t jjd St., New York. 

•Sauadera, London. Bng, 

Scribner, Clurle^ Sons. i;j FUlh Ave., New 

Votk. 
Bc«ley ft Co., 3a Qrcat RuMcll St., Loodoo, 

Enff. 
Shaw, John F.. ft Co.. ti Paicmoctcr Row, 

London, Eng. 
Sbaldon ft Ca. jja Broadwajr, New York. 
MapUn. Marshall. Hamilton. Kent ft Co.. 

4 Stationer's Hall Court, London, Eng. 



Saiith, Elder ft Co.. Waterloo Place. London. 

Enjr. 
Snaw, John, ft CO;. b Ivy Lane. PatcmoHer 

Row, London. Bar. 

Society (or PrumirtioK Cbriitian Knowledge, 
North umber land Ave.. LAndtMi, Eng. 

Saimenichrin. Swan A Co., 6 While Han St., 
I^ondon. Eng. 

Splirer. nj»eU Swtuetland 

5tantor(], Edward. 16 Cockipur St.. London, 
Bog. 

StOClC.E , 61 PaicrrHtcr Raw. London, Eng. 

Stud«n[ Volunirer Miwlooary Union, ji War- 
wick Lane, London, Eng. 

Stodeni Voliutie«r Movencni for Foreign 
MlMtons, J Wut Miih St.. New York. 

SttBday Acbool Aaaodailon, London. Bag. 

Sunday School Union, sj Ludgalc HUl, Loo- 
don, Eng. 



•Tarlor. Rom C, New York. 

Tbacker. W., A Co., Creed l.ane, London. 

P.HK. 

Thooias. L W.. Calcutta, India. 
* rick nor. Boston. Mass. 
TImas Office, London. Enf . 
Trubner. See Paul, Trench, Trilbner. 



Llnllat4buchh»ndlunK. Gnadau. G<rrmany. 
Un^te.l Hreihrrn Puhlishlng Houitc, .Main St., 

Dayton, Ohio 

United Presbyterian Church, Edinburgh, 
Scotbod. 

Ualted Society of CbrliUan Eadearor. Bos- 
ton, MaM. 

UnlvamUsi PabllUiing Mausc, yi Weat St., 
BoMrin, Moke. 

Uawln, T. Plshcr, n Patcmoxter Baltdlng, 
LoodoQ. Eng. 



Valhagen ft Kla&lng, Blelerdd and Leipdg, 

German V. 
VcrelnsbucblUindltmE. Calw and .*ltutigart, 

Ccrnuiny. 



Ward. Lock A Co., Salhhiinr Sgnarr London, 

Eng.. and i«_Ract tub St , New York. 
Warna & Co., Bcdlord Sc, Stmnd, Lonloo, 

Eng. 
Waraeck, M.. Berlin, Germany, 
"Werihcim, London, Bng. 
Weslcj-an Conference (-Rice, London, Eng. 
We.i.iryan Mclbodlsi Book Room, t Castle 

St., London, Eng. 
*W«stley, London, fins. 
Waatmlnster Prm, Philadelphia. Pa. See 

Presb. Bd. o( Pub. 
Whtttaker, Tbonu, 3 Bible Heme New 

York. 
Whlniogham. W. B.. ft Co.. London, Bag. 
"Wlghtman, (>,. London. Eng. 
Wilt en Zoon, Rnitrnlam. HolUnil. 
WllllaMa ft Norgate, 14 Henrietta St., Lon 

doti, Eng. 
*Wll«on. ]^.. PI 
Wattara. J. B.. Gronin^en. HolLind. 
Wuman'i B-jatd ol ForciK" Mbaion* of the 

ttdornici) Cbiircb. i^ RaKt icd St., New 

York. 
Woman"* Foreign Miwionary Society of the 

Presbyterian Church, Philadelphia. Pa. 
Wuman'» Presbyterian Board 01 Missions of 

the Notthwett, ChicaKO. III. 
'Woottner, T,. 16 I^tcrnaater Row, London, 

Eng. 



I., Philadelphia. Pa. 



Young. E. ft I. B., Co.. 7 Wen isth St., New 
York. 



43« 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



I WORKS NOT SPECIFICALLY MISSIONARY 



I BNCYCLOPEOIC 

CbAMlMrt'f encyclopedia. (New cd. i gto- 

trit\it:lc^l n.'tlttei especially kcknI) i« *- L, 
tMic ea. Ids. Phit, Llp.'U-'gj oo. f j 

ChUhoTn a. a. «il. Loaipnui'i saittteer at 

\hc w<itl<l L.'qj Long. 4>** 
BBCjrcl«pcdl« BrilatiHlca. Kd. q 14 r. fArtl- 

cle« on relicfoni eipKJallv good) L'ls-'ti 

Btack ea, j«t N. Y.V'Sg Scr. u. 

niU. ti 

a aeOORAPHICAL, INCLUDINO 
ATLASES 

D'Otmt a. J. D. Poriuipiew ralHioni, ili*- 
coTcriet and ann«x»tloQ> and million* In 
Alia atul Africa i-'^i Alien 

HIrt P. Oeoffraptilichen Blldenatein if~. 
BrctliQ Hlrt u-iS^- 

J»taiictAn K. Phjralcal, hbtorical, political. 
and -lr«crlptlTB cracniplrr Kd. j Rev, hy 
A. H. Keane u^ Sua. im. 

Mill n. R. ft 60 Dtbara. International itog- 
raphf N. Y.'co Ap. Ij.jo 



Ridna J. J. E. Earth and iu labaUtaau 

tfl ». y. V 'as Ap e*. ts 

Roral at*rraH>lcal SMiety, Hinuwmv- 

elrr* ;ih ed. l-'m b- 
Scottcl A. ft 15 othmrs, G«oCTaph)vhca 

Handbuch Ed. 3 Bielefeld "i-j Vel. 
Steafsrd'a coopendium ol seoBraphjr and 

tnrel New cd. ■■ r. L. 91 Stan. ca. 

iji. 
SlWcr A. Hand.atlaa Gotba. hrt. frji. 
Tines Atlas. L.'gg Times us. 

j BTHNOORAPHICAL 
Kmm a. H. ETttnoloRT Cam. Bac-'u 
Cajnb. I'nlv. Pr 10a, 64. 

Ratt«l F. AnthfoposeoRniphlc 1 v. StBL 

■gi. Eciflcl. ist. Ger- iSM. 
Rstic) P. HiMMpr of manUod Ed. br B. B. 

Tylor j V. if.V.'^vt Macm |i« 

Tylor B. B. Pilmlilvc cuhnrc Ed. }. ■ v, 
L.'^i Murr >)>. 



II GENERAL MISSIONARY WORKS 



1 ENCVCLOPGOIAS 
MlM B. n. Rd. Bncrclonvdla ol mlaalunt 

ar. N. V.'^i Funk fu 
l.«cr*lx n, Dlctlonnalre des Millions Catho- 

liqucs 1 V, Par. 64 Migne. 14U. 
NaweoBib M. Bncydopedia at mlMlons 

N. Y.M Scrlb, «) 

■ ATLAS1S AND HAPS 

Aaarlcaa B«ard •! canntasloBars (ar for> 
clan mlaaliKiia. Maps af It* mlssloni B. 
A. H. C. F. M. IOC. 

vAflaa drr Rhclnlachan Hlaaloa. Sd. « 

Himen'gi Mimnniliam 1 jiiM, 

Church nlialonary atlas. £d, j L.'ofi 

C. M. S. >ia. 
waraadanasiiH P. R. Neuer MlMtpnaatUs 

Calw.'96 VeTcInsl>ucbb. >>9M. 
wHaltaunn K. MiMlonilurte dei Brde. 

Bd, a GDI.'qj Hen. iM. 
wMallaaBn K. Miisions-Wandkarte der 

Btde L'pt.'gii Lang. jM, ; 00 linen, 

6M. 
wMls«l*nBstlas dar Briidar|va«la«. Herrn- 

hut Germanr'QS jM. MisMon-viTwaliuni; 
«Nlllaad B. Zendinnkaart van O-^i «n 

Went Indli! Uuecht'ft Brcjjer 10 Un 

Bobkrl HinnSnk 
VabI J. MlK«l'>ntatUi med FarkUrinff > t. 

Ccipcnhaitea Denaark'8j-'3£ DanaEe Hit- 

■JooieUkab 

a THBORIBS AND neTHODR 

Asdvraon R. FnretKn Miasion«r iheir rela- 
tion* »nd claims Ed. 3 B. 'ja Cong. 

Pub. $!-}» 

wBusa B. VHe Christliche Misii«n Lei- 
den'76 Brill, t.tfl H. 

wCbfUtlUb T. Der Mlnionvberuf de«evatt> 
KellMhen DeuUchUnds nacb Idee und Cc- 
actiicbte auL'76 Bert. t.4oM. 

Cost R. N. Bmn on tbe prevailing n»etbods 
ol Ilia «vanff4U»iti>n of tbe non^brlMlaa 
world L. <n Lui. ja. 

Out R. N. Goapel mcMagc L.'g6 L»t. 

7«. 

CkMt R* N. Notes on iBtsslanary sabjeds 
L.-la Stock 



uNenrdcfibarg J. C ProerercnerHandlrid- 

init l>i] Iti^t bespreken der Zendfnga wciess- 

ctup Koiterdam' 7SI WijL f.i.aj 
Navtas J. N. Method* □( miisinoarr work 

Shanghai'84 Pre«l>yieri«n Previ 
SlaUr T. B. Phlloaophy of misalona WU 

CUrke IS. U. 

Storrew B. Protcatsnt mlsaioQi Ut psfu 

Undi L.'83 Sao. ja. 6d. 
LInderhlH B. B. Principles and metlvadt a( 

inusiL-.nary labor L. «6 Alex. 
wWameck Q. Dat POrtferrecni der Hbaku 
im Urg^nlsmua dci theolo^tMjira V im m a - 
>chift Her.'97 Warn. 50M. 

wWameck O. ETangelbche Misawnskhre, 

cin uiiMionsihcocetitcner Venuch Kd.a(r. 
Gollia'g7-'c") Perl. igM. 

•vWarneck O. Die gcKcnieitigen Bolehuo- 
uen iwlsctacn der moderneo Mbston oM 
KuUur GUi.'t9 Bert. ^seM. 

Wamadc O, Modern inbalons and CShOK 
E.ti Cen. 4>~6d. N.Y.'SS Kct. »t jo 

WUtaard L. D, New proiframiBe of mUmMB 
N.Y.'qj Bev. soc, 

4 DEPARTMENT5 OP WORK 

Bishop. Mc(tlr.al miuions B.'gS 

CtaambcrUln W. L Education In India 
N. V.'(w MactR. jjc 

nOirbtllab T. Die kmlichea Mbsloccs 
Got'Bsj Bert. i-soM. 

Cost R. N. Lists of Bibtr translations actu- 
ally accomplished L.'go 

Dowkairtt a. O. Murdered MiiUons N. V. 

'q4 Medical Missiun Recortl ajc 
Ellis H. W. Our Ea»tem sicicn and thdr 

mlnionary helpers N. V.'83 Ran. |t 
Qnecy Mrs. J. T. Woman'a nedtcal work 

In (ore! gn ^a nils N. Y.'Si Bat. 

K»rr J. a. Medical miaaJons PblL'M 

Pre*, n. JJC. 
Low* J. P. Medical ml**ions Ed. > U'lt 

Unwln ji. N. Y. "91 Rev. $1.^0 
PhmiM Mrs. J. L. ft WlaUc W. J. 

Dr. J ['. Phillips, ralnlonaryio tb« cfaiMica 

e( India L.'gS S. S. U. js.Gd. 

SCnrsrtJ. Luvedale; South Africa B.'« 
Ell. yt. 




TcHord J. W(KB«B In tb« mlastoa Odd 

L.'g$ Ket. M. 
Tbaajoa W. B. Rrminlucncrs of iDcriical 

aInlotiArr work Ed. » L.'gt Hod. 

3». 6d. 
WmlBM W. J. The ncdlcal mlHlon PhiL 

'9I W«MTctn«rr toe. 
wW*nnck O. Chrtstluie Klbler, cine OU- 

koniftbcn Hd. ] lUnBCti UiMlonftb«ua 

WlllluDMn J. R. IT«&l[ns of tbe nation* 
N. Y.sn S. V. M. P. M. <oc 

S MISaiONARV PROBLEMS 

CMlMOMr C K. Self-iujrport, iUnUriKnt In 
Iha Busdn K&irn Mlaaion '40- 'Su b.'Si 
und. |i. 10 

-C«rp«nt*r C. M. Sludie* In miMiou ecofiomlci 
I'hJ '£A Am. lUp. Put>. Sue. |i 

nClirictlleb. Der Indobrii- Opiumbandel und 
leitM Wirkttngea Eln« Frrleiuiudic New 
ed. (ilt-VS Ocrt. (Out ol print) 

CUc(« n. n. T. En^Und'a Rrcatcil natlotui 
■.in L.'ga Slock, ih. bd. 

CroUJ. The inlntonAry problem Tpronto 
■b4 Brigs* 7«- 

Ellbiwoad P. F. {^uesUons A phues o( 
modern uilMiars N. V.'^fl Dodder. ja 

CUIa W. wuJ AndcrMB K. Memoir •}! Mr«. 
M. M. Ellis: with an iairmluctory #/mj> »m 

•on B 'jj 
xHekKMyerC. Bouvrsboflcn tot de rrccllnr 

dec rccbu puatue Tin InUndkcbe Cbristcnen 

Amstenlain Uumt 
Malabiri B. M. Indian problem BotnbAjr'o* 

Tnrrwr P. S. Itfltid opium policy L.'jd 

Low 6s, 
urWanMck O. Procetunti«clic Beletichiurtg 

Aft rOmiuhrn AneriSe auf die evanx. 

)tclicrtnilsti<in % v. Gui.'Sj Bcft. 

6 4oM, 
wWwiMCk a. Die S(ellun( dcr evans. 

MI«klo«t sur SklBTeflfr&g^ ReacUcbUlch ft 

Uiearetl*ch crHncrt GlU.'tq Bcft. 

Wkcdcr W. H. Sel(-<upportinff churche* and 
how lo pUni tltem (irlnneli, Ia-''i9 

Better Way I'ulilJkliinK Co. f. 

« APOLOOETICS 

Ccnpbcll J. Mariiline dinovcry and Cbrls- 
lUii iriMions L.'ta Sno. ija. 

Cowcn B. R. Miracle of the 14U1 century: do 
■DWtonfl paf r Cln.'«i ( r.tn». ijc. 

I J. R. Cbrtotian miMioni arul aocul 
N. Y.».«V »■»■« Rf»- ♦•-*<• 



Oallawajr C B. Modern Mbalons, tbeir eri* 
deniiai value N'a»hville 96 Barbeeti 

sHaafB«r J. Ondcfzoelc nnar het nui ricr 
ZeaOeliiiKeii ea Zend inKsgenootsc hap pen 
AiciictLUim't 1 i. van tier iJcyen 2ooa 

dHartboom S. E. Otidc urieven en niRiwe 
bcwhici) ten aAniien van dc Bvangellacbe 
ZendidK HrfArleia'&4 Kruaef.i-so 

Hoaphrey S. J. Eschol. N. V.'fl) Rev. 

Iwrach J. Tnitb tt Cbrfatianlty £. 

a<rk n d. 
jMCttlmodlB A. Miitlonea tavotn kultunaaWt 

Stockhtrlni Fustcr 
Lrarto T. EIv volutnc or, the contHtnitlon* 

Q( our (ordK'n relniom to icicrtce and hnman 

well b^n( B.'Si A. B. C. F. M. $■.}» 
UbIbs J. Great valoe aiw) «u«ec« of f ordirn 

■tetooa N. Y.'U Baker T}e. 



Mackenxto W. D. Chrinianlty and tbc prog- 
rni of luan N.Y.'gt K«t. fi.«] 

Maxwell E. B. The biibop'i convcnion 

N. Y. a Hunt fi.jo 
dNeardanburg J. C. GeMhledenfa tegenover 

krilletc kolter(l«m'64 Wljl. f.1.70 
•Poalaln N. L'oeuvre Jcs miMiuna ^vangA- 

(uaeAaupoini de vuc de ti divinii^ du Chri«- 

ttanitme Centre, Swlticrland'67 Bon- 

nani tfr. 
j5Jr«ii««n V. Vor Tlda MiMlonalorrentaio- 

Ser og Mt.ujtin&mu.Italer Cof>.'f5 

tsWanieck 0. Zur Abwebr und Vertilndl- 
(Cun)f Cui.'v Bert. o.teM. 

Wamn W. These for those, our Indebted- 
ness to forelj[n mistlons Portland, Ue.'76 
iloyi $1.5^ 

Vaitag R. .Suece«a □( Clirittian miuicnu 
L,'g>i Hod. sa. 

7 SERMONS. ESSAYS. AND LECTURES 

Behrends A. J. P. World lor Chrht N. 
V.'vO Eat. tfUL. 

Cany W. Reprint of tbc l(K|uify Into the 
obliKallont ot CbrtstUna lu um raeana tur 
the eonvendon ul tbe hcatbro \..'q» 
Bap MiM. Soc. ed. 

Dibble S. Voice rrom kIumI ; or ThoB|[hts 
.n TDnsiom N, Y '48 A. T. S. «c«. 

Kirov e^taamoaaen A. C. L. Htiiiona Fore- 

drac Cop.'W 
Lyall A. C Aaiatlc Miidlet. rellrloui and 

■ocial 3 T. L *g>-99 Murr. 1:11. 
Martfai C Aponolie ft nodem atisalons 

%-. V.^18 Rer. %t 
M'ullar P. M. On mis&lont, a lecture N.Y. 

'7i Scr, |i 
Pierce W. The Dominion of CbrlK L.'95 

Allena. js. Cd. 
Ralluw H, Oalm* ot mlHlona upon the 

Church ot EagUnd [..'46 
Seelya J. H. Christian miMlona N. V.-yj 

Dotid }t 
SemervUle A. I.ecture« on mluioaa A 

crangclism E';4 Hamilton A*. 

Tliobura J. M. Chnstlett naiioaa N.V.'vj 

HULltfl 

Thobum J. M. Mitslonary addroaea N.Y. 

Thoanpaoin A. C. Kareign miadoni, their 
place in the naitoraie. In prayer, and In con- 
ference N. Y,'4a Scr, |i.;s 

WaUti W. P. Christian mlutont L.'6a 
ildt. U. 

8 OENBRAL MISSIONARY PERIODICALS 

wAllircfnelna MiMloBs.Zeltschrftt. G. War- 
ret';, fj. Ittrim Warn. r.j^M. a yr. 

Cbnrch MUalonary Intclllrcocer. E. Stock. 
Ed. L.V C Ms, n. M, d yr. 

wDle EvarqreUachM MiMlonen. J.Richtcr, 
VA. (.11:. Bert. 3M. a yr. 

a-E vang. M Ui iMM IHlKl i la. R. Siciner, Ed. 

Baod'^;- MiM.-Bachh. jM. a yr. 
ftiOeMMclitm and Bllder aas der Mlsjleo. 

Dr. Frie*. F.d- Halle. Duchb..Waniaen- 
tuus o jjM. a yr.. one is*ue 
Joartial das Mi»»lona Bvangri llquea. Par 

'a6 Bonheure 

nLtdiAtralen op den nicker der Werrclil. 

R,licr.l..ni J M Brcille 

aDe Macedonler Tydwbrttt. (Sutpcnded at 

present) Leiden 
aMededeelingra van wtgt bet Nadarinad- 

•eke Z«ndcllnc-Oe«]ootJcbaB. Ronerdaa 

■37- Wiji. 




« 
i i. e. 

nl tcr mm^mmn nmdSun 
B C P. M- 
Wmry A. 

L •« S. V Vi 

BI4 ■ B. & 
1 'tA 1_'«9 C M.S.U. 

I. R Mor;. mU. X. y. Rev.fi 

F. F. Tfar rnat n my xt t Tf. T. 

(MiMit MIM a riMlMMw Is wmidM 

L.'vj C U. S. It. 
artact MlM g MiMlMuries«.«(»fc L. 

'Sf t M. S. II. 
OMdM A. J. Huly Sptrlt In alMliiiii N. 

V.Qi Rn. Ii.ss 1~ Hod. jk «d. 
Oracvr L. ft. GiM: tuadbook of oAmiooArr 

mlvrauuaa Cia.'«j Craiu. toe. 
»0f »■ ftawiMMiii A. C. U Oiri««lurr 

LcvsBdilCb i 4<l i^c Axrbunilredc. I>IV 

<McaM'K^'B9 
iflf !• g.— — ■— I A. C. L. On oc f ra av 

■iMIOl OdCRK'M 

KmmJ. Die Uimi-n uf d«r lUaiel . tti 
MlMM(Hfca«nett«clMB Haad-und Mil(«buch 
Ed. « Calir.-97 VcrdntbtKtib. ]M- 

IfUM J. K. HUtory of tUverr and aerf- 
dual L.'oj BUck N.Y. Macn. $i.to 

JelnwtMi J. Miuionarr polnu and pictures 
N. y.V K". yx. L.'gi R. T. S. i«. 



^artoitt 
K.T.V W«rt»^^^* 

Cfcfcriaa view of God aitf tke miU 

l»ia« la^tf—tT— i Ed. 1 E. 
'« EBRMLid. 

OrrJ. Jbcteoad faoor* Ik Ac Hadr e< tka 
«ariT p r aK i qi aC CkrtNbafey L.'m 

Dl rtliJniiii but 1 fin 

E. T. S. K V. mtr. U 

lanM A. T. Dirtee cMeswiac ol 
X. r.'«( Eak. •i-is 

R. ^ a fh tra . SgpanMtBf*! la Qffr 
uaaitr E-V 
SckHMtC Sodai tawJtt of aartr OriWlM- 
Ur Bd. • t-li lab^ }«. ftd. 

Sbntr T. E. Icdoeacc of tbr '^"H'1 

rcUcioo >n Ummt I- R- T. S. N. V. 

Rn. 

Strew E.B. la Uada afar B.*ot A. B 

fltra^K B. C UtaakM Mwiea of aMar Uads. 
B.-», A-B C. F. M-|i.s3 

wWanMCfc O. Die mianoo ia dcr Sctnte. 
Ed. S 0«t.*M Bart. >.wM. (wMfe 

Hdlmaaa'* mwioa b^k b-wC ) 

Wdlt A. R. Mtetoiurv 
L'n Soc. Cfc. End. jjc. 

iwWcnMT N. t'a h«dnlncama «««■ KMiw 
). A Lindblax5s fiSrUf 

wZdlM p. fl. Die <Tan(ellaclie Kircbe alt 
wclufobcmde UlciiC Bremen 'ga Hm^ 
gen. 0.411U 



naanal 



B'W 



III NON-CHRISTIAN RELIGIONS 



I aeNERAL WORKS DISCUSSINO MORE 

THAN ONE REUOKm 
Bamrwa J. H. OirintiBniir.ihc world rdlEinn 

Bsmwa J. It., Ed. a T. World'i parlUoieat 
u( reliiciini Chic. '93 Pari, Pub. Co. ^ja 

BarthA. Rellcloaaof tadU B.'8> Ho- 
ls 

Barry T. S. ChtinUniij' and HuddhUie 
I..0 d, S. P. C. K, 

Bcttaaya. T. Grcji tndUn rellKion* N-V. 
'r» Ward $1.15 (.l'»n til Wol{d'^r*ii|iiua»^ 

DettaayQ. T. Mitlianiiii«dinL«ii and oilier 
rfliK'o'x of ihe Mediterranean N V.'^a 
W»rJ $in [Pun of WorWi rHiRionii) 

Battaoya. T. World'* retlciooa N.V.'^i 

thr. Ul. Co. fs 
Blvdaa B. W. CbrUtUnltr. Iilaot, ami llic 

NetE'orace L.'U WliilUnic 74. £d. 
Carpenter W. B. Permanent elements of 

icTiKlon Ed. 3 L.'g) Hacm. u. 
Clarke J. F. Tea great rtligioof New ed. 

B.-86 Ho. $a 
Cokbold a. A. Rrilfflon In Japao L.'«4 

S-P.C.K. ia.6d. 




Cvat R. N. Cumcnon featnm In all fonHof 

re!it:io<.i» t>e]ic( t-.'<9] l.ua. ca. 

Ooda n. Motummed. Buddha, aod Cbtix 

RA.j L.'9] Hod. 3*.6d. 
Deostaa R. K, ConfHciaaiaBi um) Taoim 

L"o S.PCK, n. U. 
Do B«i*e H. C Dragon, haacc. and ilcctM 

N.V.'87 Arms, fc 
Edklu J. Rell^lafu in ChinA, and praarcti 

of )t> Cbriulan convcrtioo Ed. • L.'n 

Trll;>- 7», 6d. 
eiliflwood P. P. OrlcDUl reli^oni aad 

Chrivuaniiy N. Y.'^i Scr, $1.75 

tvPalkc R. Buddha, Mobammed, Cbrlstoi 
J V. Gai.'>«7-'aa Bert. j.«dM. 

PUke C. P. Peculiarltic* in the crcedi of Ui« 
Mvbjkuimcdan ami itic Hindu which Mand in 
tb« waf oI cunverslou to the Cbriatlan laiih 
L.V RIt. ta. ed 

Perlooff J. a. R. Short ttudlea in the adenc* 
at comparative rcUflocu L.*97 Q\»r- 
iich jSv 

Qrant 0. M. Reliffioa* oi the world la retv 
iK/ii 10 Christianity N.Y. '9s Ran. ?«^ 

arltfta W. e. ReliKioiu of Japan X. V.'qj 
Scr. $1 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 



441 



d 



Hopktaa B. W. RcUrioos ot lortU B.'m 

iflnn. la 
Kdlasr S. H. Hafulboalc ot c«n)par»Uvc 

rrll^n Phll.'m Wcatm. P. 7se, 

K«llon S. n. Liirht of AiU and ttM Llfbt 

f>r ihc Worlil N. V.'Bj Macni. •) 
Kennedy J. Christianity and the rdi^tons of 

Iii'iij MifMporc'74 
LccgeJ. RrllKionsoI China L.'So Hod. 

w 
Matbuon O. Dluinctire mctti|;cs 0/ the old 

rclti^iiinn N. V.'yj Rao. |i.7s 
Mab- W, A other*. Non-Cbristian relliti(»u 

ol the worlJ L. R. T. S. N- V-'i** 

Rev. fi 
Mailer F. «, «d. Sacred book* of thf East 

by variOMS Oricnul acholar* Two *eri«; 

M V. Oxfurd'To-'aT Clac. Pr. Reprint 

ot Kint Serin N. V. Set. $j «a. 
Miiner F. M. Six «T*t«iu o( Indian philow' 

|.liv S, V.'w Long. Is 
R^vlUe A> Native rcliginn* of Mexico and 

Peru N. V.'e^ Scr. $1.50 
HolUMm J. Hinduism and lu rdaikiitft to 

Chnutanity New ed. B.'^j Ollpb. 

ii.6d, 
Soott A. Buddlam and Chriailaaicy B-V 

Douji. 7». fid. 
S()«rb«iB C. O. ChrlniaQliyand tbcrellffloni 

i>( Cbitu L.'v7 R. T. S. 
Stepbeiu W, R, W. CfariKUnily and UUn 

L.'j7 Bent. j«. 
Tbomtoa 0. M. P.:ml. Jalna, and Sikh: or 

Some minor reliiriuiu aectn in India L.'v^ 

R. T. S rt. 
Tlel* C P. Element* of the acicnec ol religion 

N.Y.'q- Scr. 91 
WUIiaau M. Morolar^ Brabmaniimand Hln- 

(tulun Ed. « enl. N'.V.'iji Macm. tts" 
Wortabct J. Ruearchn into the relLKlonii ol 

SyrU t.-'6o NIv 7*. M. 
a WODHISM 
AtldaiMB J. L. I'rinee Slddartha B.'^j 

CoQS-l>''S 

Baal S. Buddhbam In China L.'84 S.P. 

C, K, :i.i4. 
CopleMsn R. S. nuddhiim. primitive and 

S recent In Ma^Adtu and in Ccyico L. and 
:.V V Lung. $5 
DavldJ T. W. Rti]r»>Buddhlsm. being a 
iltctch oi the life and tcacbinf 1 of Gautama, 
theBuJdha L,*v4 S. P. C. K. jt.6d. 
Davids T. W.Rby*7 ,Buddhi(.in. U« hi«tory 

and literature N.V'.'^ti Put. fi'Sf 
CdkluJ. Cbineae Buddhlim B.'So Ho. 

>4-S0 

Hardy R. S. Manual ul Buddbiara Bd. > 

L 'ao William )t*. 
Olden b«rv H. Buddhu: hli life, doctrine and 

(jr.lcr L.'6] Willlaiiu iBs. 

Salnt-Hllaire J. B. Buddha and hit religion 
L.'ws Ro. 51. 

TltoambJ. H. Short chapter* in Buddhiun, 
patt and present L.'S; R, T, S. ja. 

Waddell L. A. Quddbiim of Tibet L.'m 
Allen 3)«. ^1. 

Warren H. C. Buddhhm in trantlatiom 
U.'qA Gitin $1.10 

WUItama M. Moalar* Ruddhitin In Iti^ con- 
nection witb Brabinani«Di and Hinduism and 
la h« contrast with Cbri*tianicy S.V.'i) 
Micm. ts -vs 

3 CONFUaANt5M 
Alraaadar O. O. Confuciiu.tliecreaiieacber 
L.V Paul tit. 



PabarB. Mind of Heaclui N.Y.'Si Ho. 

Fabar B. SyMenudcal digm of the doctrines 

of Confucfuf L.'7; TrUb. laa. fid. 

Jcnnlnga W. Confudaa Aiultcu U'sj 
Ro. 3%. 

Johnson S. Oriental rellfioni and tbeir rela- 
tion to unirerial religion; Cbloa B.'jt 

L«a« J. Teats of Confudanlioi (Sacred 
boolMof the Ea»l, FoU. III.. XVI.. XXVII.. 
XXVin.) Oaford. Clar. Pr, N. Y. 

Frow. Iia.jo 

4 HiNDinsn 

Bow R. C. Brahinolsm ; or, Hlitory of re> 

formed Klnduiam N, V.'84 Funk 61, 
artttoB J. pleading with V'edantUU l-'Bi 
a-KandiBMin. Der Kampf der Celtter la 

iFxlirn Slut.'ST BcErer i.idM. 
Johnaon S, Orlrnuil rellglont and their re- 

Utinn CO universal religion: India B. 71 

Ho »s 
MacOooaJd K. S. Hrahmani of the Veda* 

I-.'gf. Chr. Lit Soc. (or India 

MKchall J. M, HinduUm. (laai and present 

I. 'an R. T. S 4»- 

Mullloa J. Rellgicua aapecM ot Hindu pht- 
JLiaopby L.'Ow Sm. ija. 

Wllklns W. J. Hindu mytbologr Cal- 

cutu'Bj Tha.ioi, tkl. 
WllUna W. J. Modern HlndttJsm L.'B; 

Utiw. I As. 

WUIIanu M. Monler- Hlnduiun L.V 
S. P. C. K.aa6d. N. V. Vo. 

WIIIIaiBt M. Mooter- Indian wlidom Bd. 4 
L.'>)3 Liu. hH. 

9 JAINISn 
B«M R. C Jalnltoi and Iti founder Bom* 

bay'bb 
JacoM H. Gaina Sutras (Sacred books of the 

Bast) V. XXII. Oxford, Oar. Pr. N. 

V. Trow.lu.ts 
Thooas B. lalnlsm; or. The early faith of 

Asolca L,'7j Trflb, jt, od. 

6 MOHAMMEDANISM 
Araald J. M. Iklani;^ lu bliiorr, cturacier, 

and relation la ChniUaoity £d. j L.'r* 

Long. 4s. 
Arnold T. W. Preaching of T^^am Wcii- 

aiinMcr'./. Ct>n»l. u*. 

Attarhary A. P. Tilaro In Africa N. V.'tg 

Put. $1.3} 

HaiDoa C. R> Islam as a mlsalonary rellgloa 

L."8o- S. P. C. K. »«. 
HBcbas T. P. DIcliunarr of Islam L.'Bs 

Allm 41*. 

J««sap H. H, MobammedaniBisslotury prot>- 
lem P!iila.'79 Pre*. Bd. 7sC. 

Kedle S. W. MohatsTaedand Mobammedait- 
Ism critically considered L.'Sg Riv. 

Male W. Caliphate ; Its rise, decUne and fall 
L "oi R- T. S. tm. «d. N.V. Rer. 

»4.» 

MulrW. Corin N.V.'79 PotL ti.a$ 

Molr W. Life of Mahoiaei fran original 

sources L-'t? Sta. 14S. 
MolrW. Mohammedan controvenr and 

other Indian articles £.'97 Clarii ji. ed. 

PaliDerE.H.Tr. TheOur'&n (Sacred books 

of the East. vols. VI.. JX.) Qaford, Ciar. 



Pr. 11%. N.V. Frow. tj.tj 
Pools S. L„ Studies in a mosque 
Allen lis. 



U\ 



44« 



UIBLIOCR-^PMY 



SateO. Koran L '77 Warneas. 

Sen C. F^Uh of IilAm Ed. a «nl. L.*«6 

Smith tt.B. MohBinnied and Mohammrdiui- 

inn N.Y.'js Har. Ji-jo 
Stobart J. W. H. InUm and iu founder 

I. -77 S, P. C. K. K. 6d, 

Wherry E. M. Comprehcntlvc cotnc^'nury 
u(i lUc Our'iiD. 4 T. B,'aj-S6 Hi>. V. 

7 pARseeisn, or zuRUASTitiAmsn 

D«rracatet«r J. and mu* L. H. Tr.. ZetMl. 

AvCkU (Sabred books o( the EasLvob. tV.. 

XXUI.. XXXI.) OiforO. CUT. Pr. N. 

V Hraw. $q.jo 
Hcivelac(|tie A. L-'Avena, Zoroutre ri le 

Ma/diUtne t X. Par.'7S-*o Mabon- 

(icuvc lofr. 
Johnson S, OHcnial rellKtoRv and thrlr rela- 
tions 10 unjvenal retiitioii: Perala B.'Sj 

Ho ti 
Karafca D. P. Minary of the Partla ■ v. 

h.'it Macm. .?6t. 

8 Htinmve ReuaioNs 

Briaton D.C1. Rdliclontol priiaitivc peo(>les 
N V,'97 Put. $1.50 



Jevoiu P. B. Introduction to the bbtorr at 

reliffion L.'i96 Meth. ia> 6d. N.Y.V 

Macm. Si. 50 
LyaU A. Natural tdiBion in India L.'gi 

i& John St., Bedford Row, Uaivct^ir 

PrcM I a, 
lUvnii A. Lei rcligtont des peuplu coo 

dviUs^ Pu.'Bj Piftcli. izfr. 
SchnltM P. Feiichiirn; contribntim lo ui> 

t'ifopoloET and the biMory of rcUston K. 

V, •! Lafayette Place, 'Is Uaatwldt 

PutiUihing Co. ^x. 

9 TAOISM 

Carol P. ed. Taoteh-kinft CUc'pl 

Ofcn Court $3 
ChalneraJ. Spcculntlona an mctaphyaln of 

ihc'"Oid Philnopbcr." Lau T«e L.'W 

Tnib. 4». 6d. 
JuUco S. Le Livre de ta Voie el de la Vena 

Par.*j9 

Lenc J. Tt.. Sacred book* of China Tcsuot 
TTwaiB Oxturd. CUr. Hr. N V. Krow 
95. sj (Sacred hontu of the Ea«, (crka. 
vola XXXIX,. XI..} 

vno Strau* P. Lao-uc*a Tao Te King '70 



IV HISTORIES OF MI5SI0NS 



t GENERAL niSSION HISTORIES 

(Isclttdlns work of more than one society 

or field I 

Barclay P. Suivcy of foreign nUaaioni 

K 'ij7 lilickw. 3*. 6d. 
BlUs E. n. Concitc history of idnloni N. 

V.\} Rev. ;je. 
Brown W. Hixtory of ihe prnpaguKon of 

chrlttisnltv amone the heathen tince the 

ReformaUon Ed.] jv. £.'$« Blackw. 

jfia. 
Cfart«tlleb T. Protestant foreign miuioni 

B.'iu Conp, 7jC. 
Dancvtt Mr*. U. H. ed. Hisiorkal skctcbet 

of woauin'i cib^liiii.Hrv societies in America 

and Encland New r^. Boston, Ma%s.'S] 

Mn. L. H. Daegcti. yS; Bunker Hill St. ric 
OantiU J. S. Foreign mlMluns alter a cca- 

lury N. V.'in Rer. f ..jo 
aDttcombrnx S. Hl>t«ire del miuiooa ^van- 

(jiMikiLict Ed. a Pir.'dj Mcy. 4ir, 
tuDlctcl R. W. Miwonssmndrn 6 p«n« 

Lpi.'S^-'Qt Rkhicr Round in i v. iiK. 
itwElunaa B. J. lltustrerad MISHton»hbiorka 

btocklioln'i^'cii 3 pu. 

EWa K. W. Deaaurk and her m)MJo«u 
L.'f) Seel. 38. 6d. 

wDI* evangctUchcn /liMloflcii In d«a 

deutscben Kolunleen und Scbutatfebieten 

3 rd Ufrlan, *,Tcrinjii>''i>7 Misslim-v 

buch-handlung o.BoM. 
APlanarana L. Gaa c btedenladerCbrtatclyke 

Zendlng • v. Leideji I>on. 
Qracey J. T. Manual of modern mJMloni 

N.V.'?) Rev.ii.s) 
Qrahan J. A. Mlulonary eapuulcm vlnce 

the Reformation N. V-'v) Rev. Ii.ij 
wOroaatl W, Die MUuon und die cvanjiel- 

iKbe Kirche <ni 17 Jahrfaundert (ioTba. 

'ot Pert. (soW. 
warnndamaon P. R. Dr. Buiklurdt* ECtelne 

Mtuiani-Uibliaibek Ed. * 4 v. ElletefeLd 

'jf>-'ti Vp; »<jM. 

wOnindemann P. R. Di( Entwickelung der 
erati^- Misiiu.i Ini lettien Jahrictint CrS- 
*U) ;5uppl. vol. ta above work Ed. 3) 
Bielefeld Velj.AoM. 



TiiGnndert H. Die eranffcltoctae Mltataa.ibn 
UlJitler. VmkerundArbeiLeD Ed. 3 SUO. 
'q4 Verclnsbuchli. 3M. 

DHardeland. Geschlehie der Latberitcheii 
MiHion nach den Vonricen de* Prof. Pliit 
i V. Lt>i.'4s Deich. s joM. 

Harvay 0. W. Story of the Baptln minion* 
in (offiKn Unds St. L.'S? Barni 

Hajjell J. Fram pole to pole L.'?* N'a 

S« 
History ol the American RU»leas to Um 

beatlien. U'orccwcr, Maa».'«o Spooner 
A H.>»Und 

HodderE. Conqtiettsof thecroM 3V. L,V 

Holden W. C Brtel hiitory of Methbdwa 
>ind Mcihodi«t niutona in Soatit Africa 
L.'jj Wcsl. Conf. lai. Ad. 

Johnstoa J. Century of Chriatian prtur ua 
K.V."9a Re», jje. 

tfKaOnr C. A. E. CeKhlcbte der Cfariulic^ 
miulon unier dea Ueldcn a r. OfiL'n- 
'bk> licit. 4M. 

iKalkar C^ H. Den Chriaiclige MImwb 
IbUndt flednlogecne 1.. IL Cop'rt 

HCalkar C. H. Ktrkrns Vlrk<K>mocd iblsaitt 

Muliimcd.treme indtll KonataAUaofwJa 

EroMng Cop, '64 
King an 111 J. Muuion* xnd mlailoaarhi, 

apouollfj Jesuit and ProtcsiaoC Bd. *- 

L,'s4 Long. toa. 6d. 

MClellgren K. a Huodn ar pa Vbldsmi^ 
U<julUict Siockholm Palai()uiata (drlag 

Leavana P. P. Planting of the IdBCAoa 
K.V.'go Ran. 4«. 



Laooard D. L. Hundred yean of 
N.V.'k l"unk |i.^ 

L«ODard D. L. MUtlonary anoaja of ifae iqlli 
crntury ClcTcland. O.'tj P. U. Banun 

(ijDgatmp T. Nordtoh mlMk>nihKndbef 

Cnp.'gi) Med Buppleiscnt Nordtal mla»laa- 
crer Cop.'qj-'^? 

Lovatt R. Primer of modern Britlab calMfaMt 
N.V.'gi Re». 4CC. 





filBLlOGKAI'riY 



443 



ncKamrw J. HUluiy ut the lorcwn tniaitoiiK 
of ihc SeccsaJon and United l^esbyterlan 
Ctiufch E.'67 llainilion to. M. 

nmOatr Q.P. ApoMlcft ol lactJLxi-Al Lurope 
L. Jiid N.V '.g Macm. 4». Od. fi.7S 

niadewQ. P. Hl«torr of Cliristl&n mlnlont 
during ihc miiJdlc ag«s L.'«3 Mum. 

flatlMMaO. Growth o( tbctplrilof Cbrls- 
lianity frotn tbc firtt century to the dawn of 
Ihe Lutheran era a v. E. 77 Oarkai*. 

a>nirM. Drr Draiscbc Protcsiantltmus und 
die Heideiiiolwlon Im 10 jBhrhunden Glrs- 
»e(i. Gcrmanjr'^ Rtckenche Iluchhand- 
Xitag (.»dM. 

nobtar W. Hlnan' ■>' We^leron mission* in 
all paru vf tile world Ed. ; L.'ti 

Stock. 6s. 

Plerjon A. T. MiiacLe* oT miMluiu i«l. ad. 
Hn<l 3d Krics N. Y.'qi-'^s Ptiok $■ ea. 

Ptcnoa A. T. New Acu o( ih« ApoaUc* 

Scuddcr rir*. W. W. Nincicea ccoturlci of 

iitiHtioni ^>. V. 1^ Kev. Ji 
SbMIi Q> Short hUtory o! trhrUilan misaioni 

Ed. 4 E.'qj H»mltton i». e>d \. V. 

Scr-li 
South T. Medieval Missions E.'So 

CUrk 4*. M. 
Smith T. and Cboulu J. O. Origin and 

hittory oi cniHioDx lid,^ j v. B.'*j Can. 

Stavfffuon W. P, Dawn of modem mlssiont 
I„"a7 Sim ja. 6d. 

Thosipaoil A. C. ProtesUDl oimloiu N 

V.".i* Scr. |i,-t 
ThovMoa R. W. «nd Jolnuon A. n. 

Britbh fofcien inli»ion& L.'vg Blackic 
Todd E. S. ClifUtUn mLuioiu in ibc igth 
century N. V.'^o Hum 7sc. 

Tockcr H. C. Under Hli t»aaei L.'jt 

S, P. C. K. sH. 
Tndter H. W, Engliih church In other Und* 

L.'97 Long. 35.60. 
<Vabl J. L^csebiw 1 den evangetl»kc MU- 

aiDiixhlstUTie Cop. '97 
wWaroadt Q. Abriu eincr Gcachkhte der 

i<ri.<ic«tdiiliM;licn MiuioiMU E<i. b B«r. 

'<» Wikrii. 1.50M. 
wWanwck 0. MlEslonsstnndcn 

I Die Miskiuo im Lichte der BLbel Ed. 4 

II Die Mission In Dildcrn aus ihrcr Cc- 
■diichte: <il Afnl(a und die Sillier Ed. 4 
'vf (j] A»ieaun<l Amejika, hv Dr. Qninde- 
maan Ed. > GUu'qi Rcit j ^M 

Wamcck 0. Outline of tbc hlnory ol Prot- 

e(t.iiii mu»iuii« U.'S4 Gem. ja. fiil. 
Wlrffinan A. T. History of the Enellsh 

cdurch and people in South AfriCA L.& N, 

V.'fty Long. 3s. 6d. ti.ij 
YouQZ R- Llebi in lands ot darkness L. 

'8, N. V. Cais- |i iTliK and follow- 

inK volume «>vcr all mittion 6cl<j!i) 
VuuflS R> Modern mlwioni^, ilielt iruK ntid 

trluaipha New cd. N. Y.'S.i Cass |> 

L. St. 
ofZahn. Der Acker lat die W>eU G([I.*SS 

Ben. i.kM. 

a niSSIONS IN A SINQLB FIELD 

Beach K.P. Cruss in the Uad of tiie Ttidenl 
N V "ji Rev.joe. 

Btttcber e. L. St^rr of the churcli la Ccrpt 
* t . L.'q7 Sm. tOs. 

CaltlccDtt A. Church In the West Indies 
L. fi S. PC. K.¥«.M. N.V. Vo. 



•iCIasAlcale acta vao DraxUte. Kroaitk vaa 

hci Hisiorifccb Gcnootscbap L'lrectit'rs 
CuatR. N. Africa redlTiva L.'gi Stock 

3» 
PUcklncer 0. F. and rtakM W. MUiioai 

atnon^ the Shcrbro aad Mcndi tribe* 

D»;tHjn-f5 U. B. P. 

oHarttioom S. B. De Erangelische Zcndligi 
op 0'>»t Java Haarlem'6) KruM. 

f.i.ii 

lagtaaia E. 0. Sierra Leone after • hundred 
ye.>r» L.'^ Seel. As. 

Janjx P. lava's ZendlnKsreld bcschouwd 
AmMcrUam'&j Hoo. f.i-jo 

Kwe J. W. Chrlnlanitr In India L.'m 

Sm. lbs. 

ivKolnitidlTi A. GalU och Evangelhua 

SiocKluilm Foster. TsBre. 

Malan C. H. South African tnlMlons L.'yt 
Nil. 3a. eo. 

Mejrlan A. Hlstolre de rfvanfftflltatian de« 
Lapons Pari». France, 'fi} SoclM dea 
^ule% ilu diinanche, ifr.j 

rionod nme. W. Cinauante ann4ca de ta vie 
d'un pcuple, ou le* ilei Sandwich iransfor- 
ia6<>. par le Chritttanlsoic Toulouse, 

France. 'tj Soci£l4 dcs livres reUginuc 
ifr. 

rialrbcad W.A Parker A. P. Ninety jears 

of missionary work in China Sbananal'ai 

Pre*. MiM, Pr. 
OabomeO. India and ttsmluions Phil. '84 
Pett«eJ. H. Chapter on mission hLUorj in 

niuJern Japan Ukayama, Japan, 'qj 
RIchter. Evangellsche Mlsiion In NyaNa- 

Lande Der. Mluloanhaua j.soM. 
bRIttarH. OrdsslgJahre protest. Hbalonln 

Japan Ber,'^ Haa. iM- 

Rlttsr H. Hiitoiy of Protesunt MiMiOD* In 

JupAti Tokyo*^ Meth. Pub. 
Scddall H. Miuli^narr History at Sierra 

Lcofic L.'t* HaL 3*, 6d. 
Sharrbig H. A. Hliiury of Protesuni Mi»> 

sion^ tn India, 1706 to lUi Ed. i. L.'&4 

R. T. .S. ft., V, V, Rev |) 40 
Sherrlfis 1*1. A. Indian Church during the 

great KetieLliun Ed. * L.'jg hu. js. 
Smltli Q. Con<rers!on of India I-'n 

Mur. 9S. N. V.'m litw. ti.yi 
Sfomnv B. India and Christian missions 

L.';.) Snow. »t, 6A. 
TcnnentJ. B. Chrisiianlcy in Ceylon under 

Ihe Portu([ue»e, Dulch. British, and Amcrl- 

can miulons h.'sd. Muf. 1 «>. 
TUdall W. 81. Clair- Conversion of Armenia 

la Ihc Chrlsiian faith L.'qd R. T. S. 

js. M. N.V.'qt Rer. fi.ta 
TiKker C Southern Crow, and the southern 

cruM M : or the Eospel in New Zcalaud L. 

"SS N»«. js. id. 

3 HISTORIES OP SINOLB BOARDS, 1113. 
SIUNS, OR INSTITimONS 

Allan W. O. B. and ricCltiT* E. Two hun- 
dred yean i tlic hiUtirv of t lie Society lor 
PramoTini; t'hrUtun KnowImlKC i^-tSgl 
L. S, P. C. K. IM. ed. N.Y.V Young 

Amcrlcaii Daptlst MUalonary Ifnlao. Haod- 
t)<j>jk '«^'$j U '91 |i 

American Board of CommUalonera for Fotb 
cign Mluloo4. Commemorative voiiuae. 

Jih anniversary of the Board fi.'li A. 
C. P. M. jot 
Anderaoa R. Histofr of the mjMlens of tbt 
American Board ol^CommlMioners for For> 
tl^n MiMbos la India B.'74 Coof, 
li.so 



u: 






BIBLIOCK.\PHY 



^ R. HtMon ol tte miialniM ot tbc 

ABerfoB Bmrd of Cn m a rifi o ocra for For- 
«fto Mii^n* 10 ibr Or^cnul chnrcbes 1 v 
87t« Cmk. h 

<L R. r>l« rranc.-Lnth. Mi»- 
laUsUaotcii Lpi.'r« Na«. f-joM 

Baker P. Womm'i ForrteB Miailaovr 

Sootir M Mctbodift EpikcofKl Cbvefa 

VS. Iluat 
n«wtT J. PcnU . Bji*t«m miMioo PUL 

V Pro- B<L Pull. •(.>} 
Back W. Tbc Frlead*; wbo tbcy 4R uid 

wlut tbrv bare done l—'va 

8BrtlM»ad P. Ln Xtffrn OwuiBbk. on tea 
riagt nmnlfacs aiuida de Ix Mivtoa 
Romanjc tJttwnny, SwiueTLuKl'97 

BndK. ifr. 

^Oirtaw O. £. Dca Svciisla atlaitoacn I 
OU'AIrila J pu. Stockhotntr Foa- 
ifT ilir.7(0(T 

Blxby L. S. Oatllnp Huory of tbc (oretni 
nUMiuM o( U»e M. E- Church SyrmcuKr 76 



MUrill In Soutli AlrlCB. 

Brief (uMorr from ku c->mmrnc«iDmt to 

i>7« L-'76 
DuMpap W. C. niocne of Mxcknule Ri««r 

L '88 S. P. C. K. rt. 
Bnwdkaat S. Narr>tir» ot tbc introducttoo 

ril LbriUianitir mane Uw Bartons uibe ol 

Her hiuuux I. , '6 5 

Bracket 1- P. Story of tbc K«rcn Mljsion In 
B j««in. litfi,^ Phil. 'i}i Am. Uap. 

Put". Six. wf- 

Brawaa Q. Hiuory of tbc Brlikh and Por- 
cii;ii Bible Sodetr it. I^'sg Br. For. 

Uift Soc iM. 

Brace a W. H. K. Journals of tbc Ms- 
iJtonalaad atteUm, iSBS^i L.'p* S. P. C 
K- ««. U. 

Boayaa C. E. Picture Book; or10auMl mc> 
ctM ot tbc Society for tbc Propagatioo of iba 
Goapel L.'gb 

wBarfebudt O. Die mlMloa dcr BrUer- 
KCmeine In MUttiontatunden Pt. t GrAn- 
Und ti. AUika i.uM. Pt. ■ Surlname 
Lcipcic;, Gcrmaay'97 A. Jaoaacn i.jdM. 

Chmdiar J. S. The AaisricantBoard In IndU 
i.ncl C eyion B.'97 A. B. C K. M. 

ChapUoA.C. OurGold Mine; Stor^r of the 
.'\rr.irrl(-..in BnpiUi inlwUooa In Inilu B- 
't'j Cor J: »i 

Cbarcb MUftknary Sodaty In i837-«7- I" 

•S7 C. M. S. 

Clarke R. Punjab and SlndhmlMlons of the 
Ch'jrch M'lMionarT Society from iSjf to iS!^ 
L-es C. M.S. Thbd. 

Cooks H. J. Mildouty: or, Tlie ilory ot the 

tir^i deaeoncai institution £d. ■ I>.'<)j 

Stock 3». M. 
Crnaodyk J. Hct NrderUndtcb 7.rndeIin£Ke- 

norrt«ch»p ln«iji» wlllenenwerkrn ceKBCtM 

R04ierd.M&'69 Wijt (.i.j; 

iHaBinH N. Den nardiikc Santhalailnion . 
iS6t-i^j Cop. "a* 

Daapard O. P. Hope deferred. no< lott. In 
con.-imUon with the Pata^onUn Mlulonary 
S<xt>ty Ed. 1 L.^ NU. ja. 

Dickie W. Ml^iicmn nf the Un.ird Pre^tw- 

terian Cbufth. Story of ihe mission In Old 

Calabar E.'w U. P. C. 6d. 
DoncnQ. Hlstalre de la SoH«i^ Mbltque de 

P..r * Pari*. rrance*6g SociA< bib* 

li'jur dP Pari* 6 it. 

Downle D. Lone iXU : 
missioD Phil. 9] 



hluoTT of the TehiBu 
Am. Bapt. Pub. Soc. 



Ess ra B«BBtorlal AMca Mtatai of the 
Ctmrch Mlaslooary 5ockrty. 1837-vi. 

L. 3. CM 5 t<l. 
Fe«vce J. P. History «l the Trmn^uebai- Uit- 

»on Traaqnebar'*! 
*rtmgtt X p. Dea Trxakcbanfct MtetOM 

Hiuortc Cop.'^j 

FBcklBKcr D. K. Our mlsaioaafr work 

Dayloa, O 'Cg U. B. P. 90c 
ftx W. Brtef ■orrcy of the Wcdeyaa mb- 

■tou oe the woccfB coa«t a/ Africa L.'it 

AylMl ioa,4d. 
Oaaaali W. HiMorr of Amcrksn BaptiM 

HiMuui* B.'to Gould ytc. 
Q<4enkfe*afc«nsi«eT«atcrrelcienheld \-Btt 

km kawlia (l|ai <! ^*ff *" >an bet Nedcr- 

Un djctw ZcodallntnD»«tactaapL k-jiu:- 

diic\j M Wijt £ 7.onen 

Oedenkachritt van bet 38*|artc lw»ta«it der 
NedertaadMbe Zaodkitmiwltlin g» 

vaMgt *» ftttifdiM. RMUrdamT) 
Ow4a« A. Our India mbdoo PWL'U 

.Andrew Gordon li.jo 
Qrcca A. Pre^bytcrUn Miasions N.T.'a 
Oreco P. M. ChriMian UiaaJons and Usuiri. 

ul kkctcbcs of MlwIfliiarT aocktica anoaa 

the Diwlplcs of Cbritt St. U, U&'S« 

J. Buraafi-jo 

OnMdIar. 0«tcbichte der BaweiuU-Mlaika 

In Nordtransvaal BcrUn'oy HiiB. 

Bucbb. iM. 
HalMed T. D. History of tbe Society for 

ProcDoting Cbristlajiily unoac the jem, 

from tt* to 1866 L/M 

I I H an d— a. Umschan auf dcra CeMeie der 

er I.uih. Mlulon Leipiic, G«muiv 
Lcipiieer Miuiono.4oM. 

Hendlaad B. Bnrf skrcche* of C. K. S. Mb- 
■ton* L.'9o-'9> Nit. -,%. 6d. 

aiartri I- Deo NofdtskeSatttbalmi•s■oaU•■ 
^o^wk frcm«nie! » r. Cop *Sv'?« 

Historical aketcbef of the mU^lons (■ndcr 
Ibe care ol the Board of Parairn Mb* 
slons ol tb« Praabytarlan Cbara af the 
V. S. A. Phil/97 W. F. M S. of 

Prr*. Ch, 

Hole C. Hiuory of ibe Church MluioaaTT 
Society to A. D. iSm i-'9i C H. S. 
S" 

HoloMi J. HIstoHeal iketcbes of tbe MlwlnM 

of tbe United BrcUircn Dub.'it Ed. ■ 
L.'a7 MalUlicu 7a. fid. 

Heme C 5. Stnry of tbc London MbaionaiT 

.S ciety. iT^yitii &d.a L.'^y L.M.S. 

yt. ftd 
Huaptarcya D. Hlatorlcal account of the 

S<>c>ety (or U>e Propacaiioa of the Gospel 

to the year iv^ L.'jo 

Hunter R. Hiwory of mistlooa of Fret 
Church of Scotland In India and Atrtcs 
L'tj NeLji. 6d. 

India mlMlnns «l tbe Fr«e Cborch ol Sort- 
land. E. PressQi 

Jeffrey 8. Indian minion of tbe Irish Pres- 
byien^n Church L.'qo Nis. 

Jobn 1. a. Handbook of Metfaodist mimtaa* 

\aili. Barb. 

itrJottsac T. Hisiolre dela otiscloa frutUse 

au Le«».-utO 1 e. Par 'n 
Jousae T. La mlwon au Timblae Par. 'la 

Kiich Afr 50 

Jubilee Memorial. Bdiaburg Medical MU- 
(•itin E.'i>j Scott 

fKatkarC- H. DeadanskemiMioolOaUadlts 

Cop. 70 

iKalkarC. H. Detdannke mlaalonwclslBb 1 
dc l"<rste )0 Aar. Cop "71 



I 



J 




ivKarsten H. Die G«iKhlcfate der Ev^ag 
Luib. MtHlon in LripiJK vim threr Enuteh' 
ung Mt >u( d)e Gtgcnwan dargntdU j 
pCK. Gt*tro«r'q)-*iM Op. toM. 

wKanscfa H. and Hahn P. FanfiLg Bildcr 
aui <lcTCoMner>ch«n KuNtnlMiun Berlin. 
Gereoanr'os Go«inerKh«n MlMloa *yi. 

King J. Ten decaden. AumralUn centenary 
»iorr ol the Lofldoo Mlnionuy Society 
L.'^j Snow M. 

K«lB»odbi A. Ea Bllck pa utTCcklingeD af 
Evaoft- FoaterUndt-StlUelKDi Mmoasar- 
bete iBqj^ StockhttlmV Fo«ier. 

vKratzMUtala B. Kurue GeKhkhte dcr 

Berliner Mtniun iii Sild-unil OlUfrika Ed. 4 
Her.''>i Miu. Bucliti. j.toM. 

mKmyt B. P. OescbleidefiU viin het Neder- 
UnoKh Zendclinjffenoatccluip CircminiieQ 
'94 W.ilters 

wKabok K. Die Arbeicuillten der Buler 
MniiLoa in ludien, ChJctA, Goldktitie und 
Kamerua EA. 1 Ba!^r<)6 Mi^k. Uuclih. 
0.60M. 

Laflto Mr*. Q. H. ReWew at 15 vesn d( the 

Wonuui'i Prc». Board of Miuloni at the 

NorihwcM Cblc.V 
Laory P. A. Misiorv of LuLherun mtuiocis 

Rcadtng. Pa 'im Pil|reT fi- jj. 
LIvlnntQala n>U«len at th» Ptm Churdi 

ol Scotland In Nymua land. (iias«.'qt 
fLaCstmpT. V'ormtuion jdicUdg. Cop. 

Lovctt R. HUlory of the London MlMionary 
Society i7V5-)B9S • V. L.'w Frow, 

JlS 

McParlana S. Among the CantUtMls of New 

Guineii L.'Sl Snow i». PbiL'Sg 

Pre*. Bd 751- 
McFarlana S. Story of tJte Ufa Mistfon 

L'73 Nl..<*. 
MscOowan J. Christ or Confudua: which? 

or. The •lory of the Amay mission I-.'t^ 

L. M S. ji.i 
M'Lareii Mrs. D. Sior>' ol our Maacburu 

mission K-V U. P. C. 
MaT»bataa J. C. Life and limei of Care;y, 

Mkrshiaan, nrxi Wand : embracing the bi>- 

(ory uf ilie Seramporc miuion 1 i. L.'m 

Long, i^. 
Mmthmoa D. Our Mission In Cbliu Bd. ^ 

L ''i> Prcxbyierun Church oi England 

()ffii;r 
Mamortfll voIuibb of the llrat fifty yean of 

tk« American Uoan) ol CaauDlMlooan 

for Foreign MU»lona. U.'Ci A. ti. C. 

F, M 
lAayera J. B. Centenary celebration of the 

li.i|.iuiL Miulonary Society L.'aj Gap. 

Miu. Sdc. js. &d. 
Meyer* J. B. Centenary rolumc of Che Bap. 

iitt Miuionary Society i-}vii<it L. ^ 

Ua)). Mbv Soc. li. 

JHlaaloaary JnMlee. Account of ihc toth 
aualnriary ot ibc American BaptUt Mi>- 
uonary Union ai Philadelphia, May, 1S64 
N. V.'ft) Am. Ba(>t. Mi». Un B. 

Morsbead A. E., M. A. Hlitory of the Unl- 
versliy'a mUsluri to Central Alrica. iSj9-^> 
L.'v7 Unlvertliin' Misilos 

Matt J. R. World* Student Cbriailan Feder- 
anon N. Y.'oS S. V. .M. F. M. 

Moule A. E. Stor)' of the CheU KlaLUg Miv 
Bioti L.'?^ Seel. ■*. ImL 

Newton J. lliitorical kknchei of the India 
miutons 'it the Presbytcrtan Cburcb In tb« 
U. S. AlUbabad '66 



wNoctrett L. Die Gouocrscbe MMon unicr 

den Khnli. Bd. > a v, 

Vol. t Hildrr aunden MiMinn-tlcbcn. ■S)'4 

Vol. * Die arbelt In drn lahrcn iS^^-fi? 

Haile, Germany'?4-87 Muhliaann 6M. 
(Hdbam ff. W. Student's Christian move- 

mrrit In Tirr.-ii Britain L.'gQ BritLib 

College Cbristlan L'nlon 
wOcUrtag A. EnwcbunirigCKhlcbte dor 

evang. Afi&sionsgeKcllsEha(t xu Basel <out 

of print) Bate-I'ds MIsk. Buchh, 16M. 
Owen J. Hlnorr of the origin ard first ten 

years of the Briilih and Foreign Bibk 

Scxiety i v. L.'ifl 

Pana J. Orina: ■ hlstofy of the General 

Bapciti Mission in that proTlnce l^\t> 
Phil. Am. S. S. 60c. 
Pettitt a. Tinnrvelly nlMlon of the Church 
Miwionary Society L.'si Seel. 7s. 

tvpfat«ahaaar J. Die Mlaalooen der Jeiuiteii 
in Paraguay. 3 T. in 1 Gflt.'«t.9j Bcft. 

M.SoH. 

Pttctaer P. W. Fifty fe^rt in Amoy Pfalt. 

V;4 Mcf. Ol.Ji J5 
tvPlatb K. H. B. Gosrner'sScgcnspuren in 

Ncrdmdien. Bine gctcblcbtllche und ml^ 

«iwiitbeoreli»cbe-Rei*ebescLreibung Ber. 

'q6 Gu«x. MtM. 1.80M. 
cPfliiftani Oroen van. Het Ncdrrlandiche 

Zendinggcnooiicbap Utrccht'w Ken. 

f.o.So 

Rankin W. Hanaboak and Incidents ol for- 
eign mi»ioos of the Presbyterian Church 
oAhc I'. 5. A. Newark, N. J .*« Shurt* 

Relchelt Q. T. Die Himalaya Mttalon der 
Brii iter lie mrine CiXd/i Berl- t-juM. 

R«ld S. M. asd Qracey J. T. MUslona and 
ninwkonarv sociriy af Ihc Meltaodist Bpjseo- 
tul Cliurcli 1 V. N. V Vji Hunt 

Ravlaw of the Friends* Poreign Mlwloa 
AaMclatlOB In Madagajcar. AnianianarLvo 

'**!) 

cfRhoden V, Grwhicluc der Rheln. MIib.- 

GcMilM:haft Ed. j Barmen, Gemany'U 

Missiooshaui 4M. 
Robaon O. Storv of our Jamaica mbalon 

E'^, U.P.C. 
RolMon J, Story of the RajpuCAna Million 

K \, U. P. C. 
tvRoBor. DatmluionswerkderevangcUtchen 

B^JergCDicinc Ed. i Goadau'Si 
Roentgen P. tf. A. Kurt arenidil van de 

ecscniedenis m Inrii^fating der Rvangellsche 

Bruedcrkerk Nyi(erk'6j Cj|!eiil>4ili I.i. 
Rowley H. Twcntvycarj in Central Africa 

Ed. 1 L.'&5 Card. j*. 6d. 
Rugg H. W. Our wond and work for ml» 

iTans B.*q4 UniTCf. Pub. Ho. ti 

•iSalllena R. An pays de.i tfntbrea hlsiolre 
de la tireml^re miitlan Chrdtlennc an Congo 
Pai.'S9 P>Kh. afr. sue. 

Samnel P. Wrsleyao mlwtani In Jatnalca and 
Ifiinddra* L.'so Part, ica. 

San^ater Mra. M. B. Reformed Dutch Mia- 

e.ii.ii'. Hrf Vh H 

SamAler-MLtaionen ander lednlng af Bor^ 
reaen och ^krcfartid. SiockliuTiD^B 

nvSctmBldcr H. O. MlvJorHarbclt der H>«- 

dergemeine <n Aufiralien Gnadau'Sj 

L'nitlisbuchb. i.7iM. 
tvScbullze A. Diemitsionnrelder der erneu- 

crten ftrO Icrklrche Bethlehem, Pa.'ijo jM, 
dtf«t Scmlnarle van Walacua. L'trecbl'li 

Kem. 
Slowan W. J. Mbsioni of the United Pres- 

bytcrlan Church £.'94 U.P.C 



446 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



a«lth a. Fifty ynnnl fArelgn niUmloB* of 

the Frr« Cborch af Sf'ocUnil Bd. i| B. 
'•o 

jMlth ft. p. MlNi4marT«k«[cn«^ htiiarr «( 
Uw irerk of the American Bapt. Ud. New 
ed. B.'lj Cor. 

Society (or tbc Propsffttion of the Qoipel 

In lorelKH p«rU. CUMil'ieO dlcrtl ot ihe 

rrtards ul tbt Eui.iety. iTul-lB^j ^--'^i S. P. 

G. i5». nei 
Society lor the Pnipogstloa of U* Oospol. 

Hiiiorkal tUcctchck L.'d4>ui 
3oaunerfch H, E. I>en Norskc ZutumiMlon : 
de tai^\e M> ut i( Nonke MlMlwiMUkkb 
virkHiiihcd CtinuianU'65 

Siock B. HittDr>- of the Ctiurcli MUAioiury 

Soclnr ] T. U'w C. M. S. iSk. 
Mock B. Japan'and Ihe Jafnn Miuion L. 

'97 C. M. S, It. 
Mode B. One humlrcd yean, the thort [»»• 

lory 0/ the Church Minionary Soclriy L. 

'v8 C. M. S. >■. 
Statk e. Story of the Puh-Kicn MImIoh 

Bd. i L.V> C. M. S. II. Od 
Stock S. a. Story ot Uganda, and the Vic 

lorla Nyanta minion I-.'qi C. M. S. 

it.M. N V. RcT. |i.»s 
Strickland W. P. History of the mlaalon* o( 

Ui« McLitixiUt BplKopaL Church CIn.'so 
wStursbcrg J. Gedrnkhllrtcr au* der jce- 

Khichie der Walfen- und Minionunacait, 

NeuklrchcQ Neuklrchen'98 Miks. Buctah. 

iM. 
Taylor, M. O. (QuIimeu'P Story of ihe China 

mland Mlulon jv. L,'g3 Mor. N. V. 

Rev. Si.y> per voL 
TboBpoon A. C Moravian minions N.V, 

'b Scr. t» 



Thomwin B. 

Cln.'ju-'jt 



Our Oriental id 
Mrth, Bk Con. |i 



"T^ 



Ttlterlagtaa Mrs. S. B. Century of BaptlMi 
mlsHons Phil.*«i Am Bap. Pub. Sob 

It.is 

Tracy J. History of the American Board 9t\ 
(.on ml Ml on era for Fureirn MliaitMn Bd. ti 

N. W 

Tncker C. Aheokuta ; origin and pre 
of the Voruba Misuoa j Ed. 
Nil (S. M. 

Tapper H. A. Decade of (oreiga miBriofn,j 
iS3 ■-tS<ri Continuation ot a work entilledi] 
"Foreign utiuloai of So. DaptUt conve.. 
tton " Richmond, Vtt-'^t For. Mint. B.; 
So. Bap Coot, fj-jo 

Tapper H. A. Foreign mUtioni of tbeScatlH' 
ern Daptm ConvcntlOD PblL'Sa An.i 
Bap. Puti- Soc tj-y, 

«Vahl J, Lappcm« og dto Upilcc MlMhtaij 
Cup.*» 

WaMBolor T. «n Ra<t J. M. On* Zendlngw] 
werk in Abrainil! Zvrolle'^ t.a.ii 

Walker S. A. Church of BngUnd mission In j 
Si{'i(4 l-c^ne l-.'47 Se«l. its, 

wWangemann. Getchlcfacc rtcr Berliner Mlar,| 
ilonkgcncJtKhalt und Hirer Arbeil In' 
Stldafrika 4 V. Der/rj^'yi HlauJ 

Uuchh. iM. 

WatJOii A, American Mi«lon in Egypt 
Pittsburc. Pa '«> United Prekbj-ieriaii 

Board of PubltcatioQSj.jo 

Wboolar M. 5. First dccmde of ihe Woman's 
Fur*ign Mikiionary Society of the McibodtR 
F-plsc^pal Church N. V.-Si Hunt. $i.ft 

Wllsoo 5. a. Penda. western alition PhiL 

'06 Wettm. Pr. $i.jj 



V MISSIONARY CONFERENCES AND REPORTS 



1 LN CHUISTIAN 1.AND3 

wBranan. VcrhAndlungen dcr neunten koot- 

IncnLaLrn Misslonskoniereni lu Bremen am 

ss-, •6. und )S. Mai, 1B97 Brr.'g? Warn. 

i.ioM . 

«Bulten en MnncntandKhe Berlchteti «n 
brlcven bclrekkelyk dc laak dos Bvan- 
gellums, maaadelj'ks verxunden In. hct 
yaar, 1801, AiD»t. Wepprlaian 

Caotcrbury and York. Reports of the Board 
ul M l^i>ns OD the miulun field L. 'lu 
S PC. K. N. V. Vo. I3 

Chicago. E. M. Wherry, ed, Mtuiann ;it 
hnniEacKll^ihriMd N, V.'gj A. T, S. fi 

Chicago. E. M. Wherry, cd. Woman in mls- 
si^jiLs N. V."^ A. T, S. |i 

fCopSRhacva. Det f jerde Lutherske Mlialons- 
modei Kjobenham, 180] Cop. '41 

DarllBgtoQ ConlereiiiGe of the Sodeiy ai 
Fricmlii. Report of Ihe prnceeding^ on 
ffirrijjn inia<<ionti ln|iB«5i-'i)rt l^'<rr i«. 6d, 

LIvarpool. Conference an mualoru L.'&o 
Nil. j», W, 

London. J. Johnston, ed. Report ot ihe cen- 
tenary conference on the Protestant mlaolofls 
of the world s V. L.'88 N. Y. Re*. t» 

Mlldnay Park. General conrecenre on for- 
eign mlt«9Dni, held In Mtldmay Park. Loo- 
don, iS;b L.'t^ Shaw. ]>. «d. 

nOAmy I^rk. General conference on mod- 
cm mission* proceedings In 18S6. L.'U, 
Shasr. 

New York. Report! of the conferences of the 
ofBcrrn and reprcscnLiliires of the foreign 
mission boards and socleilcs N. V., i}fi 
riflto Are-'flj.'w W. H, Grant 



•Saxony, Jabrbuch dcr Slclisfscbcn Mtuionv 
konfcrcni fUr du J;ihr, iSy? Lps.'vr 
Wallmann i.^jM. 

3potUawaode 0. A. Official report of tttc 
mJsitnnary conference of the Anfllcan 
Communion L.'^ S. P. C. K. 

ihrKotmadin A., ed. KCrhiindllnsarna rid detl 
feinte Nordiska-I.iithcnka MtssionvmKtet] 
Sinckhalni den jiSjg Aug.iSo? Foster, ikn 

5tocUlDlm. Kina Konlerensen i Stockholi 
ilcn4-S AUrs. it^. Stuckholni E. J.Ek- 
man tSrljig 

S IM MISSION LANDS 

Allahabad. General missionary conference 

report. tSjf}} l-'n Seel. 
A— Mlsalon ot the American Baptbt 

MlMkraary Union: Jubilee conference held 

in Nowgoag. it66 Calcutta's; 

Bangalora. Missionary conference of Son lb 

India and Ceylon. Report'n 
Beogal. ProcecdinKsof a general cooference 

of Bengal PrClI'^sta^t mlMlttnarics at Calcutta 

in i8ss CakutLi'ij 
BoBbay. Repon ot decennial conference. 

•SQ>-iSqi * V, Di>rofi*y, Indla'^ Edu- 

cAilonaf SodCty's Steam Prcsi it 

«Dep«>k. Verslagen der Coafettntlcn u 

Dcpok 

Lahore. Minloaary Cofifercnce at Lahore 

l.odUlu'63 
^(«llora. Lone Star jubilee, ihc «itb aanl- 
venary of the American Baptist TelHgu 
mitiion Madras'3/j 

Osaka. GcnemL conference ot the Prmesiaiji 

nti*'»ionaTLe^ ot Japan. Yolcobama'fl] 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 



447 



Staashal. Rcrordt or the Kmcrat confer- 
ence of tnc Pro'.w.ant nluionarln of China. 
beldat ShaniiNai. Ma]rio-*4, 1877 Sluuiclul 
Tict. Mill. Pr.^B 

Shanglia). Record* of vhe enteral roafer- 
ence o( ihe Pr<ii<«Uoi minlonaries of China 
held n Shan^hAi, Hay T-m, iSgo ShanKai 
fVe». .Mi«». Pr.'oo 

Sbantnng. Recordi of the firat ShantuuK 
miMionnry conference «i Ch'itig-chow Fu, 
i8q3 Sharghal'i)4 

ShaatUBg- Records of the aec^tiil ShAntUfiK 
miCBUondcy conference at Wci-liitrn, iBi>8 
Shanifluii rn 

5oiith tttdim and Ceylon mUflonary cod- 
terence. Mjdc^i'iu 

South India ralaslonary canfaroncii at Oot>- 
canniKd. N;adri« ■,j 

3 STUDENT CONFERENCES 
Cleveland. Student tnlwionArv Aiipeah te- 
pon o( (d iniernaiional convenilon, Oeve- 
bn<t. iM N. V.'w S. V. M. F. M. |i.s« 



DotroH. The student BtiMlonuT cnierprfsc 
Ed. by M. W. Moorhead B.'w |i 

ElMdKb. Siiiileou' Confefeoce Report. iBgS 

Halle. Studenimbiind tHr Mluioti: Berktit 
lib. 1I. tM Stadenten^Konl ereni In Hillca. S. 
lis>\it\i 

UvcfToo'- Mskc Jeius Kin*. Report of the 
intcrnaUonaL uudcnts' mTniooa'^ confer- 
ence at Liverpool L-'q6 S. V. M. U. 
N. Y. Kev.fi.so 

Londoa. Student* aAd ibe iDlMionarf prob- 
lem AddrcKMsdellTcredat tbe inter nation nl 
itudent ratwtonar^ conlereace, London, 
]»n. >-*i, igoo L. 00 S. V. M. V. 

Upaala Meddelsndrn fntn Sludeni-mlMlons 
fuicaingen i UpaaU {Arganf ESSg-itgfl) 

Utrccbt. Student en -Zend el log cetelfcap Ge- 
denkbock ran hei halve ecuw(ee«i der 
VereeoLglne 4 en sjune. iS^S le Utrecht CD 

toZeUt UU'ecl!t'g& 



VI TOURS IN MISSION LANDS 



AAatrap N. En MiH|ontciw|ijcnoeiii Ztilu- 
land. Swati-lnnd og Ton(;a-Iand og rigeC 
llmcara t.'farlaiianla'rjT 

Balabridga W, F. Alone '^c line at the front 
Phil 'flj Am. Bapi. Pwh. Soc. $1 to 

aCacbet P< Ren jaar op reli in dienu der 
Zendunir AfDMcrdan), Holland Worm- 
ier 

Cheater 5. H, Lighti and ihadom of mi*- 
mon worit in ibe mr Eatt Richmond. Va.'m 
Pre«. C>>ai. Put>. 7jc. 

Cobb H. N. Far hence N.Y.'w W, B. 
K M. Ref. Ch. Goc. 

Ellla W. Three viiiiu to Maxlaffascar iB^ )-i;6 
L. w Murr. i6». 

Ofvol C. Reiiie nach OKtirdien Q>ier Piillsilna 
und ACByp en vnn iS^o-jj * t. Lpi. 

'w-'56 Diir. 1S.80M. 

Qrundcinaiin P. R. Mitsionatudlen und Krii- 

Ikeii I Vet bin dune '"it elneKeiftcoAch Indlen 

(;«; ■« Beit. 3,&iM. 
Haccloa O. DetikKhrlft ttber die iB^-S^ 

abKClialiene Cicnrritl-vtsltaihin der Her- 

mannsb. M. in Atrlka. Ed.j Herrautntw- 

bufffgQ StlMhuchh. 
Knox M. V. B. Winirr In Ini^ia and Malayiln 

S. V.'gi Hunt, ti M 
Latrvbe C. J. Joumnl of a Tnlt to South 

AlhvA Ed 1 L.'ji Seel. n*. 
LawrefKe B. A. Modern loj&siont to tbe BA>t 

N, V.'<,5 Rev 9i »s 
Mable H. C. In brichte«t A»i> R.'gi Cor. 



Marcli O. Murnlng li)chc iti iamny\a.tida B.'qi 

C'<fiK.|(.5" 
Maoon 0. B. Round tbe round world on a 

churL-li ini»ii>n N. Y-'gj Rev. Iljo 
Mlllanl E. C. What hath God wramrhi? Lon- 
don, ji Old Bailer'gi B. Marlborough 

A Co. 4>. 
Mott J. R. Strategic points La the Trorld's 

c-<nque«l N. \ 137 Rev, $t. 
Newnano H. S. Daya of grace In India 

t.. Si Pari. js. 
^Rapport tiir la d^t^fntlon a MadanKarde 

MM, A. Boegocr et 'Cemioad. Juillei, 1898- 

Fevrier, ttqij Par.'^ 
RoMCll J. Tour in Oylon and India at the 

requeit of the Bapt. Mi». Soc. L.'ja 

Hovil. 7S. ed. 
TcSchrdber. Fflnf Monate in Sfldafrika 

ilarmen'it Mmjanshaus iM. 
SImpaon A. B. Lareerouilookson miutonary 

]an>l!i N. V.'ga Chr. All. Pub. fs. 
5tacy T. H. In the path of light around the 

wi>rld N. V.'^s Rtr. |a 
Thornpaon R. W. My trip In the "John 

William*'" I.. L. M, S. m. 6d, 
Twing Mrs. Twicearound Che world. N. Y. 

tuWanromann T. Eln Rciaejahrin Sfldafrlka 

Bcr. '■» Mivibuctih. iM. 
ttWangcmann T. Ein iweiie« Reitejabr In 

till !.irrlkJ> Der.'S6 Mlubiicfah. 1 jdM. 

(SM) 
Wlsraoi T. E- Tour to the miwlfini of (he 

Cnufch Missionary Society In 1S86-67 L,"8j 



VI] MISSION FIELDS 



I AFRICA AND MADAGASCAR 

(I) Africa 

AmoC P. 5. Bihc and Garcnfrncue. L. 
'qj N. V. Rev, 7«;. 

Araot P. S. GarenEanic : or seven ve&rs' 

pl'<nc«r inlsaionAry work In Central Africa 

N. Y. So Kev.ft.is 
Aabc R. P. Chrookle* of t'ltanda L.'<>4 

i«. M- N. Y. Ran. 
Aahe R. P. Two kings of Uganda L.'m 

I.0W ]<: ed, 

Bwber AL A. S. Oablele or VtlU<e life in 
Ibe Voniba Country L.'j? NI1. n. 



Barth H. Trvvcln in Konh and Central 
AffitA L.'^ Ward »». 

Beecbam J. Account of Aabantee and tbe 
guld L-i^^u L.'^i Maaon ja M. 

Bent J. T. Ruined cUIci of MaabonaUnd 

I., cj Long j&. M. 
Bnrtiey W. H. Life on ibe Congo L.'«7 

R T. S. c». «l. N. V. Rev. 60c. 

Bentley W. H. Pioneering on the Congo 
3 V. N. V. tijon Rev. g;. 

n>I)ildcr au«dcni Gebici der noriM. MlMlon»- 
ftesellicbdft aut der Sklavcniill<Le in Went- 
alrika SP^*' Bremen, {ieifnaoy Mi^ 
Bioiia-GescllKchaK ea. 0.A0M, 




448 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



wBohner H. Im lande dci PetlKfacs. Bin 

Lct>«ii«t>ltd all Sptcgcl Adikanbcttcn Volks- 
l«b«iM Utuergo MlMbuchh. aM. 

itOti aOu n P. H. Aus (Icm HercroUode 
Ii:ic[nen'i>(!> MiMioniluui o^joM. 

British Africa. N. Y.1900 Funk tj-jo 
BrtKlerIck ni» and Sayc« A. H. Mumy'* 

HjriJtKKA ri.r Ek'jpt L.'gH Murr. 

Brace a. W. H. K. Mcmoln ul Muhou- 
UiLil I. \{ Arn. ins. 6d. 

BryC0 J. Imprcuiunsof Suuih Africa NY. 
'■iT Cent. Is-ja 

Bachaiwn J. Shire HlrhUndi E. '8s 
HUrkw, a^t. 

wBochner. Acht Mooue In Sfld«frika Gut. 
'■n Ben. I 60M. 

CmUerarooa H. C«Bn« and Caffre MlMlons 
L.'.s« Kis. 4».6d. 

Campbell J. loumcr to Latuko» in South 
Alrica l,.'^s ft. T. S. I». «d. 

Cariyle J, E. Soutb Africa and Ut mlulan 
fieldi L.'tS Ni>. 3a. 

aCmami\M B. Lea BummiUm ou aj aan^es au 
Sud dc I'Arrictua P4r.'&i tStf. sit. 

Co alli e. Baauios. or *j yean in Soutb 
Afrlcft t.'6i Nil. 6a. 

A^hrtotol P. "Au Sud dc l'Afrl<)ue " Par. 
'g? Uej-g. jl(. so 

Cofflard P. On the tbrethold of Central 

Alnca L.'tt Hod. tjR. 
tfiCoitlard P. Sur 1e Haul Zambtxc E4. 1 

Par,".i8 Berg. aff. 
Crtep W. BcchUAUa of Soutti Alrin L '96 

S.P.C. K. 6d. 

Dortns P. MarscndlmmcrunB la Deaucb- 

OkufrlkA Bcr.iQoo Wirn. 
DmniinoBd H. Tropical Africa K. Y.'oi 

.Ser. |i 

jDtjkatra M. Dulateraia en lictil In West 
Airi(3 l.elden'W Donn. (. o.)o 

Elllfl A. B. Ew6«pc«lctas pc^^plc of the Slave 

Lo;ti.i ul Wcsl Africa L. yo Chap. to^Od. 
EHIa A. B. T«l)i-«pealrinK people* of Ibc Gold 

Coati L.'e? Chap. lot. 6d. 
Bills A. B. Yoraba-apeaking |>eap1es of the 

.Slave Coa«i of West Africa L.'m Chap. 

loa. 66. 
Bbntlla W. A. Among the wild Niconi 

N, V.-<» Rcv.|...s 
Preeoiao T. B. journal of two visltt to 

ihr KinKdi^m uf Ajbhamee Ed. > L.'^^ 

Ma-ton 3». 
Frcr* B. Eaitern Africa; Field (or mlaaionarr 

Ijbdur L.'74 Murr. yt. 
Qobat 5. Journal of a three v<*r«' residence 

in Abyulnia l-'» SecL. 74, 6d. 
Qlbaon A. O. S. F.ighi year* in KaffraHa 

L '<ti Gar. 3« ftd. 

Ormrt L. Zulu-land, or. life among ibe Zulu- 
kjilii* l_'frs TrBb.7%M. 

rOrove*Rs»naa»«n A. C L. Uganda 
Oden»e'g4 

Qtilniieaa nra. H. O. New world of Central 
Africa L.'oo Hod. 6s. N. Y. Rer. 
|i 

OaliUMtt Mr*. H. a. On IheCongo N. V. 
'•-.I Kev- joc. 

Hall n. J, Through my spectacles In Uganda 
I \.-i C. M.S. .i.frj. 

Heawood B. Elementary geography of 
Atrii-u L.'«7 Mana. tt.id. 

Holub B. Seven yean In Soutb Africa > T. 
L'ti Low (Mt, 



Itere E. C Tanganyika L.'^a Stan 

Hastaca W. Dark Africa and tke way oa 

L.'<)>. Low IK. 
nutcktBaoB E. VlciorU Nvaoi^ a field for 

mivMonitryciiieTprlM L. ;« Muf. aa. fid. 
laenberr C. W. and KraplJ. U Jaumalaln 

Shoa arul other parts uf AttyMlnla l..'«j 

Seel. t!t. 
^hiuUn J. Miuionarv land»cap«a In the 

Dark Lonlinent N. V.'^a Ran. It.*} 
JohortoD J. Kcalliy v%. roonace En South 

Central Africa U'n Hod. jia. K. V. 

Rev. Is- 
Jehiutoa tt. H. Briilab Central Afrfca L.'« 

Met- jo«. net 
Kaane A. K. Africa 1 v. L.'qA Slaa. iia- 
Kerr R. Pioneering in Morocco. L.'<« 

Altcnt. 3a. 6d. 

nKkbercr. Benchien van den predlkaai 
Klchcrer aangaande itjoc lendlag tot dc 
Heidenen AiiiilcrdAiu'i>s Allort 

KtUgbt a W. n. Brooe-. Memonca of Ma- 

khb[U'Un>l L.'u^ Am. lua. 6d. 
Klelland T. iCuIuUnd Bergcn'n 

Krapf J. L. Reiaen In Oiiafrika Bud*4 
Kob. iM. 

Krapf J. L. Travels, exploraiioaa. and atu- 
aionary labor* during an 18 years' realdence 
in liastern Africa. B.'6o Ticknor ti*i 

Lanalng 0. Egypt's princes : NarratlTC of 
raitsiujtary labor in the Valley of the XUc 
N. Y.'il4 Cart. |i.so 

L«tlncr B, W. Europe in Africa la iht 
nineteenth century Ctaic.'^s McQ. $j.jo 

Uvltigotona D, Missionary iravela and re- 
leardiLvi in Suuib Africa N. Y.'jB Hat. 

Is 

Uvhi^tone D. Last juurnala fn Central 
Afnra. from iMj to his death N. T.'n 

Har. Js- 
Lagard P. D, Rite of our East African Ra»- 

pire 1 V. E. and L.'qj BUckw. oa 
Lloyd E. Three Kreat African chtefi. Khtnl, 

Srbrlr. and Raihocng L.'gs Un«r. ^4d. 

Macdonald D. Afrlir^na; or, the bean of 
hcaibrn Africa i v. K-'B] Sim. aia. 

nafidonald J. Light In Africa L.V 

HlKl. 6s. 

nacdonald J. R. L. Soldiering and nirvcrlag 
in Briil&h Eaai Africa, iS^i-'^^ U.'«t 

Arn. lAa. 

nacfcenzla J. Austral Africa: loalag tl or 
nilincit? L.'97 Low jm. 

rUdcnzt* J. Daydawn In dark placci L. 
'it Casa 3s. 6d. 

Mackenile J. Ten yean North of the Oraage 
Kivcr E.'7i Hamillon 7*. ftd. 

IHargoliottai M. Abytalala; iu paat. prateat. 
and prutublc future L.'M UadalMit 

Maaoa <L M. Zululaixd, a niaBioo lonr la 
South Africa L.'M N'U. jo. iSd. 

ipMaranakjr A. Dcutache Arbeit am Njaan 
Ber.V MInbuchh. %M. 

vMervfiaky A. Brinnctungen ana deta Hi^ 
sionilcbcn In SUdafrlka, iSsq-iHi Bide- 
(cld'M Vcl. -M. 

Merenaky A, Erinnerungen aua de«B Us. 
uanslfben In SOdMiafrlka (Transvaatl. itM^ 
iSli llcrlin, Germany'Sa Buchhand- 

lung dci Qcft. evang. Mlu.-Gct. 7M. 

Marrlnaa. Pauagcs of mlationarr life, the 
Kafir, the Hottentot, and Ibe Irooticr lamo 
L.'u Bell ja. 6d. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



449 



Moltat R. MiwlonBrr ubon luid Kcaca In 

Soutb AfricA L.'i* Soowji. 
riym J. n. Cooee for Chrlu L.*«| 

P«ri IS, 6d, N. Y. Re». jjc- 
Nofeto P. P. RcdcmpuvQ ol AlrlM t t. 

N. Y.V> R" »4 
■Mpp J> ErkboiMC In HialcrUndc ron 

Anfn Pcqucru BvaKn'^ Mlitlont- 

h»us tM. 
I^P«ra an tba Lkpor Tnrtfle In Africa. 

L- Office ot AtK>h|[inc* I'roieciicn Sodeir 
■ipaol C Die mbktion In uB*(Ten Kol(Mt<««n 

Pt. I. Tofto n. K&meruii Lpt.'m RkHter 

i«P— • H, Ett boBk ka nlHloniutlonen 

OscArsbvrd Upsala'^g 
PMlfMd B. C Prnenl-dAj' Efvpt N. Y. 

'in Cent $> ja 
Peten C New Mghi upon d&rk Afrk& L. 

'■ji Wird. i6*. 
Plctarlal Africa. Ha bcraca, nils»l<MMriea, 

and muiyra, N, V.'^ Rev. $j.^ 
Portal O. Briilah mia>loa lo UkumU In tSgs 

U'»4 Am. »i*. 
Pnicn S. T. Arab and ttie AfrlcAn L-'gi 

Seel. c*. 

Pnrvto W. P. ud Blsxa L. V. Soutti Africa 

L.'yA Cbap. s*. 
RIveM A. W. U Ten year*' chnrcb work In 

Haul L.V Ja-e*. 
to w— ga C. H. HauuUnd L.V Low 

*s. tid- and t4%. 
ivRod^ K. 0. Om de ili[r.«ti,lande aum- 

aurne ocb mlsticMi tar bete t bUad dcm 

StucUiolm Poller. mOrc. 
Rqomt. Kamerun, Land, Leuic und Misdon 

Ed 8 fUael'M MfM^uchh. o.mM. 
Rowl«y H. Alrka unveiled L.'76 S. P. 

C K^,a. N. V. Poii.ti 
Sbaw B. MccDortali of Soutti Africa L.'^i 

Mi-ion it. fid. 
5inttb Q. P. Uganda, ita atorr and It* claim 

I-.-li C. M.S. 

Stanley H. M. Concro. aad tbe faundinc ot 
the Free State L '85 Low 41A. 

SUaler H. K. In darked Africa 1 r. N. 
V-V S<f. ti-V 

Stanley. TbToaj;h the dark cootlnem L.'on 

IjlW JO ftd. 

5tMv«aa d. W. E^pt In itgB L.*s)i 

Blackw. 6a. 

Stem H. A. WaAderinffi amonc [he PaUsha* 
m Abywunia L.'tit Werinclm ijil. 

Stone R. M. In Africa'* form and jnoflc 

Ctaic.'49 Rer. |i 
AtfStroailierT C Minnca och bllder fran 

Guldkusten Siockholm Foatcr. ikr. 

iottre. 
Turlnr R. Africa illustralcd N. Y.'ijs 

Tarlor 
Tnier W. CbristUn adventurt* In Soutli 

Africa L.'C7 JackMo te. M. N. Y. 

Kat. 
Taylor W. FlamLnr toreb lo darken Africa 

N. Y.'oa T»i-l»r 
«Th~C. n. Au Zambfeie Genive, Swltier- 

Un<S'<fi H. Robert 

Thonu T. M. Eleven rcanln Central Soutb 

AlriLii L.'t3 Snow. t>- fid. 
Tboratnn O. M. Africa walilns L.'oS 

SVM U.»«.6d. N.Y.'gB S.V.M,F.M: 

Tlmbukta end ths Niger L. Ward «. 
Trttton i. RiM And procrca* of tbe work 00 

tbc Coneo Rivcf L-t* fiapt. Miiu. 

Soc 



Tncker b. Unnda and ilie war tUtber 

L.-g. C. U.S. 
Tj^er J. Forty yean aiBOBX the ZbIui B.V 

Conf. tt.as 
Vincent P. Aoual Africa N. Y.'u Ap. 

«s- 
Walker 8. A. MImIoa* in Wetiera Afric* 
amoRf tbc SooMoa, Bullomi, cu. L-'^s 
Long, us 

wWanieDUDn T. Sudafrlka tind telBe Be- 

wohner Bcriln, Oermany'Si J. A. 

Woblfcisuiti 4M. 
Ward H. and Bldwell O, O. Fiveyeanwlth 

the Conap cannitialt L.'^n Chat. 14s. 

N. V. R, Bonner Son* tj. 
Wliataly n. 1- Among the buU In Bcypt 

L 'jt Seel SI. 

Wtantaly A. L. Racfcd tlfe In Eirypl, and 
more about ra||ed life in Effypt L.'jo 
Seel. }t. fid. 

Wlddtconbe J. 7oune«R yean In lUxuto 

Untl. i87&-'oa London, Eng.'gi Cburcb 

Priminc Co. 4*. fid. 
Wlddlconbe J. la the Lcauto: sketcli of 

Afntan miuion Ule L.'^j S. P. C K. 

3^6d. 
WUnet A. Story of ibe Espaniion of Soatb 

Africa L.'9) \Jnw. 5s. 
WUaen C T. and Pallda R. W. Uganda 

and tbc Eityptian Soudan L.'8> Low 

WUeon J. L. Wcslcrn Africa: Its hbtory, 
condlijoa, and prospecia N. Y.'jfi Har. 

Vonns B. D. Nyaaaa: Journal of adventure* 

wttir»i explorittg Lake Nraaaa and eatabllab- 
lii|t Che »e1tlemeni ol LlTlnK»tanU L.'7r 
MufT. T\. fid. 

Yonns R. Tropble* trooi African beatheniaB 
L,'^ Hod, ]s. fid, 

(at Madayacar 

Dorcbrrevlnk C. O. Kortfattet Orertifft 

over Madaigaikai' deU Folk og Miulon 

CbrMlanla'Ss 
BrlRfi B. Ten yeara' review of tnlMion work 

in MadABiicar, iSto-iIMo ABtaaanarlvo'to 
Campben B. M. Madaira>car Chic'tft 

W P. as. N Y. Rev. 30c. 
Conalna W. B. MadaraKar of co-ilar L. 

■gs R. T. S. as, PT Y. Rev. |i 

Dahle L. Madaffaskar o^; deu B«boere 

C (1 r lit I* n ia , ' 76-J7 

oDIIkatra H. Het EvBaKcIie op Madagaacar 

Lcti]en*SI Donn. f.i.ij 
EIIU W. Klitory of Madagatear 1 v. L. 

*38 jackaon ija. 
EIIIb W. Madagascar reridled L.'fif 

Murr ifia. 

eiUi W. Martyr cburcb of Ma<liKaec*r L. 

*7o Snow. It. fid. 
wEpiiier. Thrlnm*aa( und Frendenemte aad 

>fada|;'ikar GUt.'^t Ben, t.75M. 
^Bicande B. Netif mois a Madagaacar Par. 

'qi Flwh. jfr. 

aBacande Mna. E. A Mada^atcar— H(er ct 

Aujourd'hul Kar.'g* Fisch. »fr. 
>Eynard S. Madai;a«car il1u«rfi Par.'M 
Preenan J, J. ft Jetans D. Narrative of the 

Crtecuiioo of the Cbrisitans la Madafaacar 
'40 Snow. fia. 
Ln Viliiliri Cde. Hiaiolredr Madagaacar. 
•ca habiiants el we% mlnlonairea Par.'lj 
Lecoflre i«fr. 
LttUa H. W. Uadasaacar. iu history and 
pcnple L.*t4 Blackw. tat. fid. 



4So 



BIBLtOGRAPEIV 



•triadlfaacar et 1e protesunttame IranfaUe 

Par.'g? MiM. Evuiff. i(r. 
IHattliewi T. T. Nine yt*n' work ia M*il- 

igmKsr L.'SS 
MoIImw J. TiTClT« monihs In Midifsicar 

L.'js NU. 7«. 6a. 
Profit G. M&^*|t«Kkr: Itt mlKsIerw «n(t 

it* (DKrtjm L.'Si Snow. n. 6d- 
Rovtvir 1- SiikaUTerae oc deres Uod 

Scavatigtr'M 
Salllcas R. Nos droits sur Madan*car ei no« 

Ktiefs contrc les Uwu cxAmlnM Impanlftlc- 

Bicnt Pmr.'lj *ti. 
SImw O. a. Mkdaffuou- and Fnac« N. 

Y.Hj A. T. S.I1.SQ 
Shaw O. A. Maduucar of to-dAf L.'a6 

R. T. S. 6d. 
Bftres J. Great African LtUnd L,'n 

TrBb. lis. 

SlbrM J. Madaffaacar before ibc Cooqunt 

L '{A Unw, iCa. 
Sibree J. MadacaKAT uid lu people: notes 

ol a lour yean rcaldcncc L.';u R. T. S. 

6a. M. 
Smith H. Amonrr the Mcoabc ; 11 month* In 

.MiJaRiKar L'ot. S. P. C. K- IS. M. 
5tendlBS H. P. Children of Madafawsr 

L "8; R T. S, »». 6d. 
TowBMed W.J. Madaeaocar: Its raiialon- 

ariex and nurtyrs L.'a^ P»n. it. M. 

N. V. Rev.jsc. 
WalM A. W. WKI NtlMn^niMl P. Mada- 

(aakara SydtMtkutt StJiv^ni^er'S? 

a AMERICAN CONTINENT 
(I) Norlh Ataertcm 

vBalerloln O. R> Im Urwsldc. Bet den rotrn 
Indianerm Bd. j Drearten, GernuBr'M 
UnKelenk. iM. 

Doorlas M. Acron Grcenbmd'a Ice Belds 
LV NcL. J*. 

e«lt« M Hitlory of the Indian MUsion* on 

the Pacifit Coasi PhiL'Sv Am. S. S.ft.is 
Bndo H. Deachpilon o( GreeBland Bd. 3 

X.'^s Altioan lit. 
tpen(cr H, M, BldruK til H^ns EgtAat og 

den grOnlandske MI«^ons Hlnoric ijit-tjCo 

Copenbavn'TQ 

wPrttKbol a. GcKhlchte dcr Chflstlicbm 
Ulaslanenunterden Indtanern Nordamerilcaa 
Im n nnd t8. Jahrhundert. Neh«t ciner 
H each re i buns dcr RcUclon dcr Indljtner 
NBrnb 'jn now (iOt fieri. 1 jaM, 

Qojpd In the far West. Ten years' work 

auioa^- Lhc T&lcasliCMn Indians L.'Gq 
HflariHon J. T. BrKinnrni nl (he MoniTlan 

Dilsaion In Alaska Betfalehctn, Pa.'ijo 
IMlBrtii A. Aki^ and the Klaodike N. 

V Vl Ap.|.,7s 
JackwHl S. Alanka and mluion* on the North. 

pjtilic Coast N. V. '3o Oodd. It.so 
Jacktva S. Edacation In Alaska, 1804-05 

Wasfalnftion. D. C.'q6 V. S. Bureau td 

R4I11 cation 
Jacfcaoa S. Riie and progreM o[ the Presbr- 

terian Church in Alaska Wash. '86 
Kmpp P. end Chllde R. L. Thiinkets of S, 

E, Alaska Chlcq? Stoneft jo 



W. Twcnir yrarn on the Saskatcbr- 
wmn, N. W. Canada L.'^ Stock 5s, 

Nbna O. W. How Marcus Whitman aaved 
Ore^n Chtc.'os Star PubUsblnji Co. 
♦« 50 

Pas« J. Amid Greenland snow* K. V.V 
Kev. 7SC- 




wRomw H. Die Indianer und ihr Fretind 

David Zelsberffer C<lt.'go Dert. i.joM. 
Swtaeford A. P. Alaska, iu btstorr. climate. 

and natural (esourcvs N. Y.'gg Ra»d. 

McNally A C*. |i 
(V«hl J. AUaka Cop.> 
Wblppl* Bp. LlKbu and shadows ot a loer ' 

EpTscopaie N Y.« Macia. tj 
Wlllartf Mrs. E. S. Klndashon-<t Wife; U^ 

AU!^lc>n Mory N. V.'qi Rev. ((.$> 
Wfllard Mra. E. S. Life lo Alaska PUL . 

'8t Prrv Bd t5c 

Yoitns G. R. On the Indlao trail N. Y.'v^ 
Rev. |i 

Vonns B. R. Stories from Indian wl g w a wi 1 
and Nortbcm campGres L.*gj KtL 

j».6d. 

(j> rUKlca aad Central America 

Baocroft H. 11. Central Aoieriea jr. 
a^n t'rtD.'ti '9; Biinc. t^.yt ea. 

Bancroft H. H. Resnurces and devtioiMBeaf 
of Mexico San Pran '<M Banc.l^.jo 

B«lt T- Naturalist In NicaraKua N. T.*|| 
Scr.|] 

Briffhani W. T. Guatemala, the Uod of ItA 

iJjetMl N. y.'B? Scr. ti 

Batter W. Mexico in transition N. T.V 

Huntfa 
Crwwa ". GospcL In Central America 1. 

'5a Bennet-t 7* 6d. 

Q'.\'3z A. R. British Honduras L.tt 

Low. 7a. 6d. 

Hale 5. Hercedca Lontavine, K*.'m 

Bap. Bk. Con. $t 

Haven Our next door AeitbbM- : a wtnur 

in Mexico N. V.*7S Har. $3.90 
Johnson H. n. Atynit Mexico, pavtandpR^ 

cnt Phil. 87 Pres. Bd. t*.so 
La Plonreon A D. Sacred mysteries ol tke 

»»v.i anrt (glebes Brooklyn'M Lc 

PlonKCon ti.yi 

Lammts C. P. Awakening of a Naitea: 
Meikoof ro-day N. V.'oS Uar.fo^a 

RMnUn M. Twenty years amonR the Mezl- 
cans Cin 'ti ntih. Bk.Con |i S5 

Ronero M. Geoiffraphical and siaibtkal 

noies on Mexico N. Y.'^S Poi. fa 

(i\ Tt« We*t Indtea 

Acute, J. de. Natural and moral history of 

the Weit Indies iv. Londoa, En^.'So 

Habtuyl Socirly 
Brttlsb W«st Inttea. N Y. looo Funk. 
Coka, T. History of the West Indies, wlthu 

account of tbe mlwlons ]▼. Liverpool 

i3oi-it ](S. 
Oavajr, R. Cuba : paal aod present N. V. 

•^ Scr. I] 

m^on Dcwitx. In DEnisch Westindkn Ed t 

NlrKky, Gcrnany'vg MUatooschule dcr 

Brll.icrifeinemi; 
Dinwiddle W. Puerto Rico : its eondltiou 

and possibilities N. V.'og Har fs.jo 
PUke. West Indi» N. Y.V Put. tt.50 
Proade J. A. Ennlish In tbe West Indlci , 

L.'88 Lone. «s. 6d. 
Herlvel J. W. Hayt) and the Gospel UV j 

Slock IS. M. 
Hill R. T. Cuba and Porto Rko N. V.*tk 

Cent, tl 
KlOffsler C. AtUst: ChrtKnustntlMWea 

Indies L.'S« Mscm. js. 6d. 
MolstM- W. W<^i Indies, ensUved and free 

I. 'Si. WnnlwCT 5s. 



4 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



451 



PltenaB.R. Weal Indies N.Y. Rct. 

Kotfway J. Wc«t Indiei and tb« Sf^niiti 

M.iin N, Y.'ofi Put ti.rs 
St. John 5. Hiyil. or The BUck RcpabHc 

L.'tg Sm- »». td. 

(4) South AmcHca 
AnAoil L. Journcr in Urxill B.'M Os. 

Bates n. W. NaturnIlM on ibc river Amnion 
) », N. Y.'So Fin. ijc 

BariMi T. H. Mlssloiurr latmrs amnnit In- 
(ltan\oI BrUUhCulKoa L.'j? Stuw 7s. 

Bntt W, H. Lcffcndsand myih«at the Indi- 
ana (j( Bri(l»^ Guiana L 'An G«r. tis. 
«d. 

BrtCt W. H. Mlwion wof k ainonK the Indian 
tribes in tbc furcsU of GuUiu L.*!) 
S, P. C. K. J.. 

C. R> Hlvtarrof SooiUi Amertca. Irotn 

iW diKOvery 10 the prwent time, L.'qg 
Son. N. V. Macm. i«». ftd. 

Com T. Adventure* in Paugnnia. K. V. 
'80 Dodd. ti.*s 

f^rd I. N. Tropical Amerini N. Y.'«i 
Scr.li 

OafeMMM L. E. ft MilUrd E. C. South 
Amerka, the ncK'^icj conUncni N. V. 

Hmtllmok ol Par«jtiui]r. Waihinnton '44 

Rur, ol Am Rcpuli. 
tiandbook of Unirnay. WAihlnrton'gj 

Har. ul Aeh. Rct>ub, 
HodwHI, W. H. NaiurallM In La Plata Ed. 3 

fan Thiinn B. P. Among the IndlAiu ol 
GuUns I. '«j Paol. iBs. 

n«iidiafli C R. Peru L,'9i> Low. ji.M. 

narklun C. R. St Kcane A. H. ScMith Amer- 
tt-j L V> St.Tn, 

Manh J. W. Nikrrallve of I^ie origin and 
otogmm ot the South AmcTican mlMlun 
LMidon. Bnf[. 'Ij South American Mis- 
sionary Society 

riyer* S. A. Sel(-«acrifice: or, The Pioneera 
o( FruKla. PWl.'fii Pre*. B. |t 

tcSchfielder. Ein Beauch In Par^mittribu 

StiiltCJin. Grnnnny''Qi HolUnd A Cci. 

i-joM. 
SiBWoa A. Travel* In the wild* ot Eeaulor 

L *fl7 Low. ta. M. 
Taylor W, Our South Amertean c«)u*in» 

N, \ "tS Nd»on A Pl>ilht« (1 

Vtoeent P. Around andabout South America 
N. Y.V> Ap. ti 

3 ASIA 

(1) Oancml Woritm Caverinz Mar* 

Than One Conotry 

B«mnr« J. H. Chriiilan corwiueM of A*ia 

N.V.'w S<:r.»i.5u 
OMtterbuck W, J, About Ceyton and Bor- 

nr- N. Y'^a Long, fj 
Cnrzoa Q. N. Problent* of the Par EauI 

New ed. L.'o'^ t-onjC- TS> Ad. 
IHo«7 A. New Far But K. Y.V Put. 

Qrwiktm J> On the ihre«hnld of tlirec clustvl 

UDdi L \7 Black IS. £d. 

Hanzhtofi R. C Wamen of the Orient 

tin :: Meth. B, Con, *t,»o 

Joliiutoii J. China and Formosa h.'^j 
Rrv. |i.7J 



nacgngor J. ThrouRh the buRer otate*; 
traveU through Bornru. Siam, aniJC.itnbodU 
London, En^.'^ft F. V. White f^. 

Seeer R. B. Missions and politics In Asia 

N. Y.v? Rc».Ji 
Tenple R. OHentat experience L.'Sj 

Mtirr. i6s- 

Wltojr L W. China and Japan dn.'yg 
HIiclKock. f.,50 

Voanffiaatwud P. Ilean of a continent: 
MAfKtiurla. TurkciUn and the Pamtra L.'qb 
Murr. ais. 

(a) Arabia 

Blant A. t. N. Lady. PilKrina«e f> Nejd 

■ V. L '81 Murr. 24*. 
Dongrhty C. M. TraTclt In Arabia Ocsena 

»v. L.M Camb. Pt. 63*. 
Jeasup R. H. Kamll Phil. '90 Pm. Bd. 

Jmnp H. H. WotncA o( tbe Arab* N.Y. 

■ts X>oi{d |i 

Palsrave W. fl. Narrailviof a year's iotit- 
ncy tbiouKh Central and Eastern Arabia In 
itei-^3 New cd. L-'6q Macm. ^. 

5anBel J. Mltsionary tour through Arabia. 
to Bagdad L '44 Slia. Bs. (d. 

Sinker R. Memnrlalftnf thcHon. Ion Kdtb- 
Knknncr L.'go Bell ». (<). 

WrtKht T. Early Chrttllanity In ArabU 
L V Willtams4i, 6d- 

Zwcner 5. M. Arabia: the cradle of Islan 
N. V.190C Rev »j 

(3) China and Mar Dependende.t 

Ball X O, TlilnR* Chinese L-V I-ow 
toa, M. N. Y.^M Scr, (j 

BanMa I. H. Behind the great wall L *o6 
Mitr. n. 6J. 

Bcadi H. P. Dawn on the hills o( T'ang 

.\. Y.v! S. V, M.F M. SDC 
Beraitord C. Bre.ikup of China N, Y.*in 

Har, I, 
BlJbop I. I_ Bird- Among the Tibeuns 

N. Y.'94 Rev.lt 
BUbop I. L. Bird- Ynngtfc valley and be- 

fnnJ J V. L, igoo Murr. N.Y. 'go 

ut. $6 
Boalger D. C. von K. History ol China 

L-'v* Tha, »4»- 
Bnraon n. L Chitd-life la ChiiKse boaes 
L 'Bj R.T. S. J*. 

Brytan n. I. Hunie-llfe in China N. Y.'lt 
.\T. S.Ji 

China nij«lon Handbook. Shanghai '96 
(•itsb. Mr»», Pr. 

Christie D. Ten years in Manchuria L.'^ 
tlout. IS. 

Chnrch work hi North Cbkia. L. 'ai 
S. p. C. K. .1, («]. 

Codcbnrs 0. lohn Chlaainan, hi* ways and 
nutions Edinburgh. Scotland 'gfr Gard- 
ner Hilt. jsL 6d. 

Calquhonn. A. R. China In transfomaiion 
N. \. 1^ Har-lj 

Coltman R. ChincM, ibcir present and 
future ; medical, political, and social Phil- 
adelphia. Pa., 1914 Cherry St.'gi F. A. 
DavU Co. |i,;s 

Comaby W. A. Rambles in Central China 
L.'.,7 Kel. i». 

Cummlaa C. F. Q. Wanderings In Cbim 
J V. L.'Ki Blackw. loa. 

Davia J. A. ChlneM sUve girl PhiL'&> 
Pres. B. 7SC. 




45» 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Davli 3. P. Chliu : i jreoeral description of 

Uut Bmptrc And Li* Lnubluou Ed. t ir. 

L.'jr te. 
DoolMlcJ. So<^*i life ut the ChfncM a v. 

N. V.&i H»r. «4 
D<mslM R. K. Cbuu N. Y.'gq Pui. 

•" S'' 

Donstu R. K. Sockiy In China L-'m 

Innca. ta. 
Drmkt S. B. Amonsihe dirk-balred race in 

the flowcrj' land L.'w R. T. S. «- 
OvkesB. J. Evrry-dxjr life U China N,Y. 

'»5 A T. S. |i 
w F ibf B. Cbifu In tLiitorbchcr Bclctichtuag 

Bei.'gj HaA. iM. 
PleUs A. n. CoratT of Cath>r K. Y.'i^ 

Macm. »j 
PWdC A. n. Puoda shadows ; Uudies from 

life In China H.'S^ Car. |t 
Plm J. Hlstorv of ihc Jews Id China L.'43 

Wenhctm h. m. 
Port«r A. Christian prosress In Chliu L. 

-Sg K. T. S. M. ta. N. V. R«r. ti 
Poster Mrs. A. In the ralley ot liie Yanfrue 

L 'v<* I. M.S. rt.6d. 
fUtmoar J. Amone the Uoiuroia N. V.'flj 

A. T. S f > 
OUaoor J. More about the Mongois L.'ai 

R. 1 . S 5*. N. V. Rev. ta 

Oorst n. e. CItiiti. L.V Sands U. 

N- V. Dull. |a.ja 

OravM R. H. Forty yean in China BalL 
'gj Woodward 

Gray W. J. H. China: a hisiorr of the l^vrs. 

manners and cuftioms of the people t v, 

I. N Y.'tS Maem. «ta 

OulaocM il. a. In the Far Bast N. V.'«i 

Onndry R. 5. Cbiiu, present uid past L. 
•^5 Chap. .OS. 6d. N. Y. Sci. 

Oiitxiaff K. P. A. China opened i «. L. 

'jS 5m. ■4S. 

Hut V. C. Western China B.'SS Ho. f* 
Henry B. C Cros« and the drkfoo L.'ts 

Pan.M N. Y. Kan.$i 

Henry B. C Uag Nam L.'M Part. tis. 

Holcomb* C Real Chinaman N. Y.'Ss 

Dodd. $1 

Hnc B. R. ReeollecUoftsafaiounieythrouKh 

T^narr, Thibet, and China In tia-^ New 

cd. i.'sj Ncl. I*. 
J»ha«ton J. China and Its future, l-.'99 

Siwlt. 3S. 6d. 
Ka«*OD J. The croaaand the drmicoit L.'sj 

Sn.&s. 

Landor A. R. 5. In the Forbidden Land 

N. V.V Har. 
wLecbler R. Drei VarttSie Ober China 

ilA<irr;4 Miwhiichh. 
Le Lacbear D. W, Ijind of the Lamas 

Nyack. N, Y. Chr. All. Pub. Co. j^e. 
Utile A. B. N. B. Inlinute China l^ndnn 

j« Paicrnonrr Row'gg Hutchinson & Co. 

J IS. 

LocfctMrt W. Medical mbalonary la China 

L.'Ci Hut. ijs. 
Lovett R> lames Gflmour and his boys L. 

'V* R. T. S. M. Cd. N.Y. Rev. 9i.i5 
Lwa O. W. (Bd.) F.vangeiiuilian of China 

Tientsin '97 sac, 

Hacley R. S. Life anonr the Cblneve 
N. Y/6. Kat,»i.ji 

rUntea A- W. Great closed Und Newcd. 
L.'«$ Pxn. n. N. Y. Rcr. rsc. 



H 

N. Y. 



narttn W. A. P. Cycle of Cathay 
V Rer ». 

Jlvtla W. A. P. The Chlnoe, their cduca. 
tion,phllo«ophyandletters N. Y.'lj Ber. 
»• »S 

IlartlD W. A. P. Hanlln papers, csaarsoa 

the intellectual IKc of the Cblocse L.'to 
Paul. N. Y. RcT. ti->3 

Hartln W. A. P. Hanlln papers, ad series. 

on Ihc biuory, philoaopby, and rtllrh>n of 
(he Chinese Shanghai 'm KeDjr A 

WAlsb 

Medtaarst W. H. China, lu state and pros- 
pects L-'i* Snow, s*- 

Mllnn W. C Life in CUoa Bd. s L.'}! 

Ro. Ov 

Mlbie W, KeirosDeei ol the Arw ten nsrsttf 

the Protestant misaion In China Malaoca 



nonia T. n. Winter In Nonh China N.Y. 

V Rev. $t.sa L. R. T. S. js. 
nnula A. e. New China and (rid L.V 

.Seel rk. 6d. 
nalrlMad W. CliiAa and the Coapel L.'re 

NU. lO.Od. 
Nevlns J. L. China andthe Chlneae I^'&j 

PhiJ Prc^b. Bd. jic. 
Reld a. ounces at CMna L. B. T. S. 

iS N. V.V Rev >i)C 

Rodcblll W. W. Diary of a }oamcy itaronrh 

Moniolia am) Tibet In iSgt-a Wash, it 
Smltbsoniait Jnsi. (« 
RocJcMU W. W. Land of the Laouij notes 
of a journev through Chiiu, HongoUa,aBd 
Tibet N.V.'9> Cent. (3.50 L. Let^. 

ISS- 

Rockhni W. W. Notes on the ethnologr od 
Tibet Wash OS Govt. Free 

5chfseld«r H. 0. Working and wailing lot 
'1 ihi-i 1. 'r,i Mi>rK, IS. 

Salth A. H. Chinese chsratrteriMka Ed. i 
.N.V.'sM Rev. Is L. Pauiias.ed. 

Smith A. M. Village life in China N. T. 
•« RrT |] 

Stredder E. Aluieb : a siory of the Chinese 
liilis LundDa, 10 Warwick Lane, Paiat- 
raster Raw'03 U. Stonctnan ta. 

Stott O. Twenty-sU years of miHioaur 
work in China L -.y Hod. Ca. N.Y. 
A.T.S. ♦..„ 

Taylor J. H. China's spiritual need and 

claims L.'E4 
ti-Voiakaflip C. J. Unier dem Banner del 

i>rachcn und im ZclchendesKreuscs Bcr. 

'.jfi Miubuthb. j.joM. 
u'Voakaoip C. J. Zcnt&rende und aufbaaendc 

.Ml':lilc m China Bcr. Ml*sbuchh. .fcM- 
Wbcdcr L. N. Foreigner in China CUcl 

'Hi Griggs $1.50 

WlllUmaS. W. Middle kin dom Rev.ed. 
^v. N. V.'rjj Sct.fv L.'9g Allentss. 

ing; 

L.'gs Pan 
3s. 6£. 

WlUlma 5. W. md P. W. Hlnory of 

China L.V Low i<s. N. V. See $t 

WintamMMl A. Jour(»ys in Nonh China, 

M.-inchuiin, and Eastern Mnng^ia sv. 



WIIKanu F. M. A new thing; IncideatsoC 
niiittonary life In Chloa L.'gs 



Sm. IIS. 

Wllltanuon 1. Old highways in Cbuu L. 

■8^ K. T. S. 5s. NTY. a, T. S.|i 
Wllaon W. Eye-Gate : or, the ^'alae of m- 

Uvc art In the mission field of Chiiu l^'w 

Pan. 2S. 




BlBl.lOCkAPIIY 



453 



(4) Indian Emplr* and Caytoa 

a. /ki/ja 

4«Albefx B. Rn Dae under Indiciu Sol. 

Siockhnl-n 97 KoMcr. »scre 

tAndcracn P. Eriailrijtscf Ira Indien. Cop 

•}i 
n/Bakrleln O. R. Xach itn<l au« Indien. 

RciiC-und Kullur-bllder Lpt.'Ts Nau. 

wBaiaMfi O. R. Unt«r den paltcen, Im 

Unde der Sonne Lpt.'^o Sau. j.t^M. 
Bailey W. C. Glimpse at the Indiiin M^uiun 

ti<'lii .iril leper anylums T. 'ga Sb.iw 
Dalley W. C. Lcpcnof our Indian Empire 

L.'>j bhaw 
Barnes 1. H. Behind the Pardah L.V 

Mar, 3». (d. 
Banaa J. On Ifae aativei of lndi;i L.'Iq 

Sim m 6d. 
DuTctt R. N. Clind of the Ganget, a taJc ol 

Uie Juilson Miitlon N. Y i^i Rev. |i.>j 
Barry A. Ennfland'si mlulon to India L. 

■.,s S. P- t, K. ;i. 
Bhaltacharya J. N. Hindu caUes and »ecui 

L 'A Tho i6i. 
Bllltnfftan n. P. Waaua in Indu. L.'u 

ClLil[>. 14«- 

Blaekett H- P. My two ye*n In an Indian 
mi» on L.'&t S. P. C. K. ■«. td. 

Base P. N. Hiitorr aC Hindu clvillucion 
durinK- Rrltliib rule 4T. L,'^-'^ Paul. 
7i. td. ca. 

Ba«* S. C. Hindua aa Uxy «r« Ed. 1 L. 

■44 Tlia. jB. 6d. 
Bradbory J. India; lu condition, religion, 

an^l uiii^oni L.'B4 Srvow. 4K. bd. 

British India. N'. V.t^oa Funk li.ja 

Bocbanon C. Chhatian naKArcbci In Aaia 
L.'jii Ro. ja. 6d. 

Botlcr W. From Do^ion to flarcllly and back 

N. \ -Ky Eat.»i 35 
Butler W. Land of the Veda N. V.'jt 

Meih R Con. ti 

Buyers W. RecollccUoiu of Xortbere India 

L.'^a Snow. 
Carstalrs R. Human Bamre In rural IndU 

L.'gs Btaclcw. 6t. 
Cavalier A. R. In Nonbera India L.'gq 

Par: j*. fed. 

CbaoiberUiB J. Cobra't den N, V. isioo 
Kcv. $1 

CbamtMrlala J. 

"Vi kcv. St 
CbrUren of liMlla L 'Sj 

N V.gl kcv. $!.*« 

Cnraka W. Nnnhwrstern provinccit of India 

L '97 Met. io« i^d. 
Cntoka W. I'opuUr rcliKion and folklore of 

Nonhetn India j*. Weiitininater'gd Cam. 

>■* net 
M-Daltofl. Indischc Rci«c^rlefe GUt. Bert. 
DnBol* J. A. Hindu mnnnm, cu«tnntv and 

ccninonieii Ed. 1 l-.'^7 N, V Frow. 

t5« net I4.60 

i»Btl besdk pa w mlsaion ftUiioa 1 Madttra 

UpcaU'n 
Frazcr R. W. Briiiah India L.-« Unw, 

• a. NY. Put. 
Prazer R. W. Llierarf hluory of India 

L -gS Unw, t*i. N. y. Scr. I* 

ii^ahriBS H. Siiilituiieo. Land utid VolW 
del lUmulen. OIlE-'gq Uert. jM. 

Clanton A. Minion* dan* I'Inde: l.e Ra}pu> 
tana Ccaive, Swiiurland'ci Bcroud 
afr. 



In the tiger jungle N. Y. 
,. T. 5. t». 



Oogarly O. The pioneer* A narrative o* 
fact* connected with early miHlont in Ben- 
gal L.'7( Snow. 6a. 

Gospel in Santbalivtan, by an old Indian L. 
'is Nis. at. bd. 

Oreenfleld H. R. Five year* In LudhUoa 
r. iCj ?an_ .». w, 

QDlnDcM L. B. AcroM IcdiA at Uie dawn of 
ilie auii) ccoturv L.*o8 X. T. S- a. 
N. Y. R«v.|..5o ^ 

oIlMtal L. Indbk Hjemmemlaiion blandt 
Sanialcrne Tad llBrrcsrn og Skreltnid 
Kolding'77 

HopldlW S. A WiUiin ihe Purdab N. Y. 
*ijK Eat |>.t5 

Humphrey Hrs. B. J. SU yean In India 
.N V Hi F--kt Bsc- 

Huntcr W. W. Brief hlslory of (he lodUa 
Peoples Ed. 7t> Oslord'9* Clar. Pr. «. 
6d. N. Y. Frow.»» 

Hunter W. W. Indian Empire. Ed. ^ L. 
Vi Smi. jS*. 

Hunter W. W. <Tbc> old mmlonuy Ox- 
lord'^ Clarcn. m. bd. N- Y. Ran. soc. 

Hum J. P. Indika N. V.'gt Hac. $i.n 
rlhle A. tender Svdkarsrc Naiuren Of 

Folltclivet t Sydlndirn Cop.'i;^ 

Irving B. A. Tlicory and practice of caste 

I. 'sj Sm. s«- 
Kennedy J. Life and work In Benares and 

Kumaon. ityf-77 ^. V.'Sj Caas. %i 
Klaln A. Among the gods K,'^ Blaelcw. 

IS*. 
Kolmodln A, Indlen sasom Mlulonafllt 

fLar«cn L. P. Hlnduitudeoterne og Krt^ 
tcndotninen Cop. '98 

Lawrenca W. R. Valley of Kashmir. Ox- 
(oril'jjs Vniv. Pr. ij«. net. 

Laalla M. E. Basiern blu^somst .Sketches of 
iiiiiUve Ciiniti'iii life L.'^j Snow. 1^ 

Lcotwldt C. B. Recolleciloni of an Indian 
icniiiiunr)- L.\b New ed. Vt S. P. 
C. K. 11. 6d. 

Lenpoldt C. B. Further recollections of an 
Indian missionary L.'Ot Nis. sa. 

JvLlfsbilder ur den evanKell&k-Iuiherska m)s- 
Bionen blandt tamuteT-ioJket, i Ott-Indlcn 
i7oviS40 IV. Stockholm'^-''^ 

rLowentbal B. Indlen (ftr of nn Odease 

JMalabarl B- H. Infant marrlaee and en- 
(urccil ividnwhood in India Bombsiy't7 

Matcer S. Gospel in South India L.*86 
R. T. S. 3S. M. N. V. Rev. Jt.^o 

Mataer S. Land of charily ; account of Tra. 
vantore and its people N, V. L.'ji 
Snow. es. 

MItcbdl Mra. X M. In India I..'7« Net 
jti. M . 

MltcbcU mr«. J. M. In Sontbern India 

L. B5 K. T. S. 6a. N. V. A. T. S. $1 
nnlleni J. Minions In South ladU visited 

L \i Dalion «!. 
riullena J Brief review of ten years' misaton- 

nry iabor In India L'63 Mis. ji. 6d. 
Mil Her IK. India-, what can It icactt us? 

N. V.V' l-oag. tt-7S l^- 3*. fid. 
Murdocti J Tndtan mlasloinarr manoal Ed. 

3 U.ij Nis. 
riiinvy J. R. Hindu pastors London, 

EnR 01 '. Hrywood 6d. 
ivNeaflder J. Zmanamlsslonen I Indien 

:>tuckl)ulm Foster 73 Ore 




454 



BiBLroGRArnv 



Oman J. C. IndUo lite, HJndu and Mnham 
mnlaii L *8<) Unw. An. PtilUdetphla 
9-J0 Chemnut St. GebWe A Co. %i.:$ 

Owvn W. MenorlilB o( ChrlitUn martyn in 
iJic Indian rebellJon L-.'t<) Sim. it. M 

PwHIeU J. B. Hindu ai botne Mgulnu V 

1.. Sim. 3>. 6d. 
Papcm on IndUn ■octal rclonn. Madran'^j 

Cbr Lii. Sot. 
Powell B. H. B Indian vUlBgc coaffionlty 

Rm a n. Srrian Church In Indlft L.'«i 

Olsckw. toa. fid. 
RamabBl P. Famine cip<flcncn in India 

l.niio^Ei. Eag.'gj Vytt 
Rantbal P. Hlgh-casicHlnduwomaa. New 

ed I.,'qo Brll is 
Rrpori of the (eprosy comttihsion In India 

L.'si Clowe* 

RIeeH. Naiive life In South UdU L '8a 
K T. S rt.M. 

Row* A. D. Evcryd&r ^^^ La India N.V. 
'«■ A.T. S.ti.}o 

Rowmy H. B WIM iribt* ot India Lon- 
don. iK> Bunbill Row Ha T. de La Rtje 
A Co. j» M. 

ittSmnitfTta ' C J. Om Hlnducrnat uiU 
t<run:uit UpaaU*q6 

Scott T. J. Mbnonary life amons ilw vil 
JftCn ol IndU Cin.'76 Meth, Hk. Con. 

Scudder J. Apficjl 10 ttie children and fouih 
ol i)i« United] Siatei □( America on hehalf of 
iht heathen world Phil. '46 Ara. 5- S. 
*sc. 

Sberrlns M. A. Hinda tribe* and cut» 
1 V. L."7»-Si TrUb. ao6k 

Sonfl A. W. Lixttt and «hade in len&na 
idihsiunitrr life Paisley. ScoLlaad '41 

Parlanc •*, 

Stewart R. Mfe and worlt in India Phil. 
g6 Pearl Pub. Co, 

Storrow B. Our Indian siaters L.V 
R. T. .s. ji. M. N. V. Rev. (i.i} 

vStateh O. In fcrncn IndLeti D«r.V 

Warn. 3 t«M. 
Turtor W. Four yea«" vampuien in Indix 

L.'*5 Hod. 4S. N. Y. E^t. 'Si fi.ij 
Taylor W. Ten ynn o( Klf.«u;kporiinit 

oiiuloni In India N. Y.'Ba Kal. f i.«5 

Tbobarn J. M. India and Malayila N. Y. 

'4a Mcih. Bic. Cua. f J.50 
Thobum J. M. My mlislonarT apprentice* 

•b<p N. \':6i Mcth. Bit. Con. $i.jo 
UrwIck W. Indian picture* L.'Si R.T.S. 

8«. N. V. Nel. |_v5o 
Vaurhut J. Trident, the Creicent, and Ute 

Croia L.'jO Lon,);. ^ 6d. 
Walah J. J. Memorial at the Futiehffurh 

mlH^.uri and her rnanyred mluloiurics 

Pbl1.'j9 J. M. WLIaun L. Nis. loo-M. 
Weltbrecht M. Missionary sketches In North 

li.dU Kd. 1 L.'rs Nii.si. 
WeltbrMht M. Wutnen of India L.'rj 

Ni». 3». 
HV'bltebmue T. Llascringi of llghi In a 

6»iii U>n<1. the Syrian ctiurch In MalAbar 

L.'7) Haml1lan6«. 6d. 

Whynptr B. Ererrdir t"« in SMitti India 
N V '9< Rev. «t 

WIMer R. P. Amons India's students N.V. 

m Rev. joc. 
Wllkbw W. J. Diiis work In loilia L 90 

Unw. )S.ed. 



WllliMm n. and Wllllwiu L. Eds Scrus- 
pofclctierK. correspoDdcoce of W. Circy 
and otbcri N. Y.'gj Pui.li.jo 

Wimaaum. MoBkr». Modern India aod tlte 
IndUnt Bd, j L.'gi PauL i«l. 

i. SmnmM 

DatW* J. Rivers in Ihe deten ; or, Tbe 
Great Awakening in Burmata L. Vc 

Seel, js. 

BMiop I. L. (BM) Golden ChmoBcw 
Ed. 4 L.'li Mutt. M*. N.V. '83 Put. 
♦' »S 

CumlnK 6. D. In the shadow of the Pagoda 

L "^ Allen 6», 

Cnalnc E. O. WUh the JtniRk folk L.V 
Ok. ■<«. 6d. 

Hart rirt. E, Picturesque Burma, past and 
prwe/vi London, »q Bedford Sl. '^ 

J M. Deni A Co. iivnet 

Lanbert C, W. MIsdonary nurtyr of TM- 
baw : Brief record ol life and mUsUMary 
tabors in L*pper Buma L.'g6 ^VL 
IS. Ad. 

Maaoa G. B. CIvllltlaK fflouniain men [tbe 
Kaicn«) L '6> KIs. js. 

^nKcmafW V. Burmcae cmfifrc a tniadrcd 

j-cars xgo L '« Cons. loi. (id. 
Scott J. Q. The Burmanihfs Fife and nottottk 

by Shway Yoc (pseud ) Ll'gb Kacsk 

IM 6d. 
Wbwtoa W. R. Four ycara in Upper Boraa 

L. g? Kel, 39. 6d. 
Wyllft Mn. M. Slory of the r>"f>d In Bgr- 

mab L.'m Ditilon sa, 

r. Ctjrifm 
Ballon m. n. Pearl of todia R'm Ho. 

Cummins C. P. a. Two happy yean is 
Ceylon 1 v. L,'gj BUckw. jga. N.V. 
Ser. |g 

Perffaaon J. Ceylon Id 1S93 Colombo '«] 

IHddon 7s. 6d. 
Lancdon S. Happy valley L.V KeL m. 
Udtcb M. and Ldtch M. W Sei-eo years 

in Ceylnn N. V '90 A. T. S, ft if 
RouM. Missionary pictures — Indina and 

Singhalese L. Bapi. Miss. Soc ^ . M. 
SelMiic J. RecollectioQs of Ceyloa L.'m 

Dobn. 5>. 

Wbialow M. Memoir of Htrrlm W. Wl»> 
low N. V.'js A.T S. 

Woods L. MetDoirtoflUrrlettNMna Ed.i 

B. j8u 

<gi Japan and Pomoaa 

Ba c on A. hV, Jd|unese t'ult and woocn 
H.'^t Ha, $t.iy 

Batchelor J. The Ainu of Japao L'a 
R. T S. fc*. Rev. ti.ya 

Baxter J. a. In bamboo lands N.T-, fir 
Fifth Avc.'()ft MerrUm Co. ^.y, 

Blckecrteth M. Japan as we saw It L.Vj 

Low BIL 

Blobop I. L. (Blrdt. Unbeaten tra(±s I3 
Japan Ed. j N. V.'St Pui. (•.jo 

CaoapMI W. Account of ralaslonary wccnt 
In Formosa, pobli^ed In i4)o, and raccu 
nlssienary work la Formoaa s v. |^'l( 
Paul loi. 

Carrotbcra J. D. Sunrise klncdva pKil 

'70 Prcs. B, |i 

Cary 0. Japan and its reccneration S. V. 
M. F. M. N, V.'gq 



L. 



BIltLlOCRAPHV 



455 



Chuibertabi B. K. Thins* Iipuioe L. 

■ Oil to w. Auf MiS9tontpf>drn in lapan 
Brencn. Gerauny*9S &1 Molkr j.toM 

D«F«rMtJ.N. Brief tttrvty ol CbilitUn 
«mrk in Jaun VokubAuw'iji Suln 

Und 

Pfttf Mr>. Leticn tron Japkn > v. N V- 

Qardnvr B. I.Ue In Tapin K«*bvilLr tqoo 

(.uiDb Pm. Pnb. Houk ti.v> 
OnrdoaM L, American MlA^oiur; in Jadoo 

B 0) Ho fits 
QrtUU W B. Japan, In fclntor)'. (oiklorir, and 

j(l U'oa Ho. 7}C. 
Qritttf W 8. Mlkado'i Rmplrt N. V. 76 

l!*r (4 
Hall AD- Japan and lU rcKuc NullvlUc 

« Cumb Prwb. Pub. ?ic. 

Hairn L. Glcantos* in Buddbt Iteldi B *gr 

Hmth L. K>Aoro Q '</ Ho $: ij 
HoLrn U Out at Uie &ul B.'oj Hu 

JaMii«M pUlowplwr. and oiher paper* on 
CbincM; pliiitj«Qfhy in Japan VolccbAOia 

ITmi'II a. n. Feudal and tnodern Japan 
Hoatoo, 196 Suramer Su oO ) KaigLil Co. 

Jl.JO 

ifeKolnodla A Fran "5a|i>i>pci*niiena and ' 
Ja|>4n EBrr oeh nu SiocKlioIm FoMcf 

60 utt 

Luiilor A H. S. Alnne with the bairf Ainu 

I. (^ MuTf ie«. 

Msckay Q L. Protn tar Farmou E «■ 

Otipn 7». ftd. N. Y. Rev |i »i 
(c-nuRilngcr Die lapiner Berlin Haa 
Hamy O. Smrr aS J^iun N.V ^ Put. 

Ii.jo L. Unw 5». 
NOTMan H. Rrai Japan L gj L'nvr 

^. Od. N y. Scr |i y> 
I^gfl J. Japan, lis people ani! miMlona L. 

■ij!. Pin m. 6d N. V. Rev 7sc 
Peery R. B, Gi« ot Japan E V Oliph. 

H S V. Hev ti »5 
Pickering W A Fii:>neeriiic in Formosa 

L "r^ Hiir. M. 
PlWAMi L. n. Quarter o( a centurv in the 

liUiid £inplrc Tokvo'ou Melh Pub 

Ho. 
Rwiiwit S. Japu In traoKlttDn N V « 

Bar •) 
tteta J. J. Japan 'S4 Hod. n* 
Saanby J. W. lapian. the land ol the mom 

in^ Toronto'!)! BHkksIi 

Seldaora B. R. linnluha day* In lapia 

N V gi Har J» 
Tr):rtrani H. B. R^unbles In Japan L. ps 

R. T. S. los 6d. N, V. Rev. ft 

{Ai Kor«« 
AU«Q H. N. Korean lak* N. V 'V* Put- 

BtstMw I. L 'Bird). Korea and bet neigb 

borV N V9I Re? Ji 
CariM W R. Ufc ia Corea N. Y. 04 

M.ICIII |3-SO 

Dallai C HisioUe de I'EfflliedeCor^ a v. 
farib France'74 Palmd ulr. 

Oalc' J. 5 Korean skctchei B.'tt Ollph. 

,• 6d N. V.'«8 Rev. |i 
aifford D. L. EverytUjr life in Korea N.T. 

■^ Rcr I1.15 



QllflMTB 0. W, Korcj from its capital 

Phil.'vi Preib Bd |i ij 
OrlfSa W B. Corc». the ticrmit aation Bd 

« .N. V.*q7 Scr $t JO 

QriKIs W. C Corea. without and within 

Pbll -Ss Pre»b. Bd. |i 
Nan R, 9 Life of Willlaa Jaise* Hall 

N V « Eat. 
Laador A H, S. Cofca or Cho-Ms. tbe laad 

Dt tbe Htornini; calm L. 'ut Macm. 

<7) Malay Arcblpdaso 
Brannvwl J P O. nrri£tpn omtrcoi de 

cvanicellMilr ran Java AtnM^rUam, Hoi- 

tand'u Van der Hci) fi.eo. 
BmnmBiid J P. O. Bijtlranen loi de kenala 

van lict Hinilorismc at Java Baiavla*K 
Buys M. Twre lartn op Sumatrls Weiilctm 

AffiUcrdaTD'e^ AkkerUisa (] q; 
oCoolama S, Wrst Jara Rotterdam. Hol- 

tand'Br I. H Drunk fi.50 
diDI)lutni H Hei Kranirelte In onie Oo«l 

t.nrlrTi i^^i.i)i Don (1.40 

Foreman J rhillppine Ulanda Ed. 1 L. 
'qd Liivf iti. N.V Scr Is 

aulllemard P H. MalarvU and the Pacific 
ArcbipcUsoCit L.'9« S\kn. t}>. 

aHarttioom S. B l>e loenranil en rie behoef' 
ten van hei iin(lcrwi)»btj devolkrn <ran Nod- 
ertandt Ooai-Cndic Hurlem'Os Knite. 

sHalunayar P C. De rechlMneMaiMl der 
)njandx:b« Chriitenen in Nederlaidich- 
Indie Utrecht Hollands* P den Bocr. 

«}toluBeJ)erF C Bouwtioflen vonr een re- 
({clin.B I'M )tcl HuwelfkMrechl en vtior de 
invornriD; van dfii burgerli)ken atand onder 
de inUniliche <Thrinenen op Java Am*- 
ieTdatn,'o4 Buuy 

nintiiMoS J Jara. the pe«rl at the East 

b v> HdU 7SC. 

dHofftede P Ooit-Indtiche Kerkiakcn wo 

ou^c iih nieuvvc, by een vcri^iocld door 
PetruvHofatedc iv Roiierdaiu. Huhland. 
17TV-S0 Botch ] Bosch A U ArrciiberE 

Kinm<l. Im Dienuc dci Kreuietauf untce- 

bahnicn taden 4 nuirben Qanaca'or 

MiKiunihautvasM per number 
LalaR R. Phillpptne 1s>and« Kew Vork. 

V) Continental Publiihing Co.)>.$o 
«Nvlaad B. Sthrlsen uit InMllnde Utrecht, 

Holland qi H. C. Urejrer 

Rbl|n L J. Van. Reii door dea IndiMben 

Atchipel. RoiicrdamSi 
Ratb M. L. Xaiio:i« of Sarawak and BritHh 

North Borneo London, tfj Osford SI. 

g6 Truiiuve, Hanson A Combs (oa. net 

nSctaut B. De Zendlni op hct ciLand Java 
Schctten uit inyn levcn Kotieidam, Hal* 
land, '(4 Taueaieyer 

ThoBuonJ. Sira<i« of Malacca. lodo-Chiita 
and China S. V.>( Har. Irelwued 
'((Sunder *Tbf9uiib China with a camera ") 

WoroMter D. C Pblllppfne Iilandsaod their 
projiK N V '<;i Maem. S« 

VottOKhuttead a. J. Pf^ilipplnea and round 
abouL N. Y.'99 Macoi, fa.jo 

(81 Parsla 
Baaa«ttJ Pcriia : the land of ihe ImaiM 

NY U Scr t' so 
Bird M R. S. Penuan women and tbelr 

crccd« L -M C. M. S. ti. 
Bishop I. L. (Bird) Joumera In Pe-*U and 

KurdlMan. ■ v. V.y.'^t Put. ^yt 

L. Mnrr. «4«. 



45« 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Bg»w M < B. 0. Year amoof the Peniani 

L.'qj BUck lis. 
BrrcsJ. Tran»caucK«Uand Ararat IM. 4 

C. and N.V 'gft Macn, 8«. 6(1. net.l3 
CaMbw B. T. In the kisKdoai at the Sbah 

L 96 Ub«. tt*. 
CarxoB Q- N. Pcrmla aoil tb« Persian quca- 

uoa > V. N.Y.'9J Lung. |ii L. 41*. 

MmIou a. J. ami Browne W. H. Catbolkoi 

ot tbc Eau and Hh people UV S. P. 

C.K sa. 
l^rktnsJ. Mlationary life la PenU amonK 

the Ne«orian Chrixttana N.Y.'6i A. 

T. S »t 
WinaC.J. In the land ol the lion atul the 

Sun Nrw ed, L.'ot Wirri is. 

WlUoa 5- 0. Penlan lUc and ctuiorai Bd. 
I N. Y.'9S &mt. Ii.as £.'46 Oliph. 

r%. fid. 

Yo<un M. P<r»ian wcinen -ya^hville'tja 
Curnb. PfM Pub $1 

<9) SiKBi. Luc. riaUy PaalasoM 

Back C Teoapin and el«ptianu L 'I4 

Low »ta. 

ClIftordH. In court and KimpOBK Lon- 
don, y [learlelia St '47 G. Rlcbardi ;« fid. 

ColiiubouR A. R. AinunK ili« Sbans L 'Si 
Kicld and Tuer, ii». 

C»rt M. L. Siaro; or. Tht heart o( fanbrr 
India N.V.'S6 Ran. fi 

F aodf P. R. Eaiiern aide: or. Mifatonary 
lire in Siam I'hil. Am. Dap. Puh. Soc. 

Hallett H S. One thounnd milei on an 

elephant In the Shan Sute< Bd.'qo 

Black w ji* 
Progrnnuf wcdem rditcallon in Siam Wa*h. 

■to US Bnr o( &d 
^am and Laot at Keen by our American mL»- 

ilonanct. Phil 'S4 Prca. Bd. %i.yi 
demnorvtlla M. Slam on the Melnam 

Phii.'i,: Lip. L. Low 149. 

(10) Turkey, Armenia. 5yrla 
Alcock D. By far Euptarmtc*. s tale '47 

Argyll Duke ot. Our re*p<nuibililiea for Tur- 
key L.'t/i Murr. ja M. 

BarriMra J- O. On bonet>ack In Capadocia 
B.'S4 Cong $1.9$ 

Baanajlan K, H. Social and rctJKlou* life ^n 
ihc tiri.nl N. V. i>j A. T. S. )i 

Bird I. BiWevrorkin Bible land» Phil.'ji 

Pre*. Dd. 750, 
BtUs B. M. and Hanltai C Turkey and 

the Armenian atrodtle* Phll.'^C t' 

Hubbard Pubmhln^ Co. %» 
BUaa I. a. Tweniy- five yean of lUhle work 

In the Levant N Y.'Bj 
wDas deut<>cbc Kalierpaar Im helllffta Laodc 

Berlin, Getmany Miuler & Sonn 
Dav«]r R. Sultan and hi* Mibjecu • *. 

L.'« Chap. it*. 
Dwighl H. O. O. Chriitlaniiy rerlred in 

ilie Vjm N. Y.jD ScT.^i 
OabfiallaB M. C. Armcniant |i 
Ooedcll W Old and the new; or The 

ctiangrm of thirty year* In the Kati N. Y. 

'sj M. W. Doddli.t] 
Oraat A. The Ne«loflana: or. The loal tribes 

N. Y. 41 Har f 

QranaP. D. Rule cf the Turk N.Y.*o6 
Put. jjc 

tlaadht C. Among the Turfci N. Y.'tt 
A. T. S. »..so 



HarrU J. R. and H. B. Lett«n from the 

scene* of the recent masucret in Armcnb 
N. V.fw Rev. 91.15 L. Nia.fi*. 
Hopwortb O, H. Thratigh Amenta on bar*»- 
back N. Y.'4fl Datton (j L- Ub. 

I ■laiiial J. Modern Palestine .or. The netd 
ofancwcniude E,'<fi Ollph. ja (d. 

Par^llBl n. P. Home and work by the 
rtven uf Eiden PbiL'SS Am. S, S ft 

Poolff 5. L. and other*. Story of Turkey 
L.n Unw. 59. N.Y. PuLli.y. 

RaBMjr W, M. lmpre»Joi» of Turkey 
Lq; Hod 6a. NY. Ptit.((.75 

SnIth B. and Dwiflit K. O. O. Mlsrianirr 
tckCirchcs in .\ra:cnli L '34 G. Wl(hl- 

■nan 

SntHh 5. H, Datiithlera of Syria, narrauve 
ol cRurt* by Mra. B, Thompaon L'yi 

Tracy C. C Talkt on the rerutda la a far- 
away land &.'«] Cong fi 

We«t M. A. Romance of miuiona: or. In- 
•Ide triewt of life and tabor In the laad of 
Ararat .N'. V.'yj Ran. $> 

Wheeler C. H. Ten year* 00 the Euphratc* 
N. Y'68 A T. S ti.15 

Wheeler Mrs. C. M. Utailona In Eden N. 
Y 9) Rev t' 

Wlatle W. J. Armenia and its lOrTOwa 
London, 16 Pilgrim SL'qtf Andrew Mel. 
roae la 

(II) Fields wholly or la larva pari 
iiDoccupled 

Bellew H. W. J. Rate* uf A(Klmm«an 
L So TfUb. 7a. fid. 

Bookwalter J. W. Siberia and Ceatnl Ada 
Ed. . N Y., 19 We« »3d Sl.-« F. A 
Siokei & Co $4 

French in Inilo-Chlna L '84 NeL ta 
Lantdett H. Cblncac Ccatral Asia ■ v. 
1. Lowjes. N. V. 94 Scr. li 

Schoylcr B. Turklaun « v. N. V/f« 

Scr Is 

Wolff J. Narratl.ve of a mlmlon 10 Bolchafa 
Bd. i L,'4a BUckw. ica. 

4 OCBANU 

(I) AaMralasIa 1 ladwUng Now Qnlaaa] 
Brltlih AuitralasU N. Y.™ Funk 
Btiller J. Forty years in Sew Zealand L. 

';a Hod. lo*. «d. 
Buller J. New Zealand, pau and prcacat 

L -Art Hod IS, 6d. 

Butler A. R. Glimpae* of Maori land L, 
k. T S. sv N.Y.-86 AT. S. 9i 

Chalmera J. Pioneer life and wofk la New 
Guinea. i87r-'o4 L.'« R. T. S. la. «d. 
N. V.V Rev. Ii.jo 

Cfaalmrra J. and QUI W. W. W<>rk and 

advi^nture In New Guinea, tin-ii L.'te 

R. T. S, w. ^\ 

Qrey 0. Polynesian nTthology aad aacSeaf' 

traditional hiuory of the New 7*«i»r(i t race 

L.'jj Murr. lo*. 6d. 
Lkiaibol.ta C. Amon^CanntbaU; four yean* 

trareU in AuMralta amonK aboriglnei of 

QurrnsUnd L.'Sj Murr. *4t 
McDoanll D. ConTcraion of the MaertI 

Phil. V> Pre*. bd.|i 
Mtf>ari«Mi S. Among the Cannibals of Jitm 

Guinea Phll.'M Pre*. Bd. ytc U 

L. M S. j». 
Paso J. AmoiiE the Maoris L,'94 Pin. 

IS. «d. R«». TW- 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



457 



Shorlfauid B. Maori rellKJan and nytboloiy 

L 'Hi Long. i». 
Sp«ncet B. cod Qlllen P. J. Natlre tribes ot 

ilcmtnl .\ui.u*\U L.'n Macs), ats. act 
WUllan* W. Cl)risiUnlir koonK the New 

ZcAUndcn L.'66 SkI. n- M. 
Yatu W. Accoant of New ZeaUnd L.'jj 

Sect 

(a) Ooewili Praper 
Al«zandcr J- M. IgUnili ot the Pacific 
N. V.'95 A- T. S. |> 

«4ArtmnssrtT. Tahiti el 1m ilei uljxcenco 

Pjru, Frari;e,'64 Grusart 
Armntrons B. S. The faiuarv of ibe HrUnc- 

si»n MlMion N. Y.'oo !t>ullOD |].i)o 

Bmcnrft H. H. New Pacific N. V. 1900 

BaqIu M. B. Heron ol the South Seu 
N.V.'./. A.T. S.fi.ij 

BlnxhABi M. Retld«ncc of iw^ntv-one year* 
in the SandwUta IkUnda HarilordV 

BtngkBD H. Jr. Story of the MomlDic Sun, 
dMCblldrcn'i miulon&rr vcimIs U.'So 

B to bap L (Blrdk Hawaiian archipcLico 

N,V,'g4 Put. |l.J5 

Bralo B. n. TraDsformatioA of Hawaii 

N. Y.'w Rev.Ji 
Calvert J. Fiji and the Fljlani L.'r? 

Cferixdan P. W. The Caralloe Isluidi 

N. Y.-M S«. |«. 
CoaT. Life in Hawaii N.V.'Si Ran. 

Codrtaglen R. H, MeUnnians : Mudlei in 



chclr anthropology and foliclore 
Prow. it*. 



L.'«, 
la the 



Conalns Q. Prom ialand to Island 

South Sea* L.'4j Snow. 1^ 
CmuMm O. Story at the Sautb S«as L-'u 

UM. S.«s. 6d 

Cratby E. T. With Soutb Sea folk B.'<» 

Pilgrim PrcHti 
Camntng C. P. 0. At huroe in Kiji E.'Si 

HUrkw. 7x. 6d. 

Citaiininir C P. 0. At home in Pijl E.'Sj 
EiUckw. 

Ellis W. VindlcntioQ of the South Sea His- 
iLoru from the mlftrepre»ecitaitans of Oitu 
von Kcfticbuc L.'ji WealJcjr ]>. fid, 

PSniHr S. S. HUtory at Tonna and the 
Friendl)' IiUnd* L.'j^ Hamilton 5s. 

am W. W. From JarkncMio llubt in Poly- 
nir^ij, with l^luuradve ctan lonn L.'m 
R T. S. N. Y. Rer. t'.4o 

am W. W. Jottinf* from the Pacific L. 
■8i R. T. 5. i*. N. V. ■» A.T.S.I. 

am W. W. Life in die Southern Iilea Bd. 
i L.'87 R. T. S. s«. 6d. N. V. Nel. 

Olll W. W, Myths and tunci from (he South 
Pacific L.'^fi Lonif. 

jOro»e-RMtnaaa«n A. C. L> VUi (fir ag nu 

lorllJ J. Bible lILustratloni from the New 

Hc:>[ido L.'^ Nei. s*. 
UurlU J. In tbe New Hebrides L.'K 

Rel.5». 



Kan* O. Sftcnoa Ber .'00 Ware. 
Mlctwlssn O. Cannibals won for ChrtM L. 

'r;J Morff, »%. 6d. 
moRtsoiBMT n. n. Light of McliaesU 

L.'^S ^P. CK. 3*-W- N. Y. Ya. 

• '5* 
Mamy A. W. Bible In the Paciflc L.'Bq 

Marray A. W. Manyrs ot Polrnesla L. 

•8^ Stack 
Mwrray A. W. MiMioni in Western Poly- 

itc^la L.'<] Snow. loo. M. 
PatOB M. W. Letters and skeichea from (he 

New Hcl>ride« N. ¥,'95 Arms. 91.7s 

Pwuiy A. Ten years la Melanesia L.'87 
Gatd. 5s. 

Aalwyn J. K. Pastoral wnric la the colonies 
Mid the mission Geld L.'qj S. P. C, K. 

Stair J. B. Old Samoa L-'g? R. T. S. 

S*- 
5tatey T. N. Five years' church work In the 

kinb'doino( Hawaii L.'6a Rlv. js. 

8tMl« R. N'ew HebHde« and Oirf«Un miv 
slans L.'So Nis. &s. M. 

Stewart C S. Journal in the Sandwich 

Islands £d. ■ L.'aS 
Turaara. Nincieen year*' mlitlonary life la 

Polynesia L.'6i Saow. iis. 
Tamer O. Saicua. a hundred yean »go L. 

'S4 Macm. ffi.. 

Watt A. C. P. Twenty-live years' misston 
life on Tanna, New Hehftdes L.*g& 

Haul. 69. 

WeatT. Ten yean in South Central Poly- 
n«Ma L.'tis Nil. nt. 

WmiaaanJ. Narraiivt of missionary enter- 
prises in the South Sea Islands V. Y.'xt 
Phil. Prcs. Bd.li.»s 

S MISSIONS TO TTtB JEWS IN VARIOUS 
LANDS 

Oansisen S, R, l„ Jews; their pact, prcMot, 

*nd future Ed. 3 L.'8t Snow. 

Qldney W. T. Jews and their cvangcliution 

L.-99 S. V, M. U. 
Oldney W. T. Missions to Jews Ed. j 

L.'w L. S. P. C.J.fid. 
Oldaey W. T. Sites and Kcnce L.'m 

LS P.C.J, ^ 

Isaacs A, Biography of Rev. Hiory Aaroa 
Starn L.'86 Nls.gs. 

Jrwlsb question, and the miasion t* the Jew« 
London, » Bedford St.'^ Gay * Bird 
7S. 6d. 

jKalknr C. H, Urarl og klrken Cop.'Si 

Keliogg S. n. The Jews; or. Prediction and 

futtiThnent l..'S3 NIs. 4*. «d. N. Y. 

Ran. It. as 

Lecturer on the Jews by mlnlsten ot the 
««tabUtbed cburcb In GEiugow GUscow 
•n Phd.V ^ 

Leroy B. A, Israel among the natlooa N. 
V\i Put. |,-7s 

Wllkbuoa S. Erangeli cation of the Jem la 
Rus«U GUsgow'pq Alien 



VIII STATISTICS. GENERAL AND MISSIONARY 

Dennis J, S. Ccnienrial ^^tstlitics, MAy. 1900 Vahl J. Missions to the heathen, a itailnlcai 

{«e appcridi* ol il.^i vuliinje) ^.j^^ (dlicontlnued in iS»S) Cop. Ben. 

Kdtle J. 3. and RcbwIcIi L eds. Stawa- „„( „r annum 

nan's year book L. Haca. ^^ "^ *"«mn 




458 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



IX MISSIONARY BIBLIOQRAPHIES 




Day O, B. Caulogue of tb« Foreira MUdoo 
[.Ihnirr of (he Dlrlnlty Scboal of Vale 
Univef»ttT ^ pani New HaTcn. Tui- 

tle, Moreboutc a Tar^or, 'oa-w 

DcnnU J. S, See bibliographies followtoK 
the various Icciurr* of "Chriiiian Miwlon* 
and Social ProgreM'' » v. N. V.'w-go 

Rev, Jj.iopcTTol. Atoo In hU ■"Foreign 
Mlulons After a Century " 

Bnr. WnprHi«r diirch die rolkicUtntkbe 
MlstldTulItteratur Ber. Warn. ajoM. 

Prtea e. Bin* Auiwabl aus il«r dcutacfacn 

X MISSIONARY 

A. Ocneral and CollccUv* Skttebm 
AnuM P. e. Herald* of tJtc Cro«i New ed. 

L. B5 Hat. to*. M. 
B««ch H, P. Knights of the Labanim S. 

V, K. M. N, Y.'!>6 
Bvniamin In. n. O. MUilitcrlng iliters 

N. V.'to A. T, S- I1..J 

Baddbud A. R. Heroic in ihImIoim L.'94 

lib. ikM. N.Y. Wbitt. y>c. 
Buckland A. R. Womeo In ibe mlulnn fiddn 

L \i Ub, li. 6d. N. Y. WhltL soc. 

Charles rire. Three manyn of the Nine- 

teenih Century L'Ss S. P. C. K. ja. 6d. 

CTMon C. C ana OoBdoow nrs. J. A. B. 

Grciit mistLonariei of tli« cburi:h N. V. 
*f>j CrbHi. $1.50 

DMicuter B. P. Faithful unto death L.'«7 

Hejidler 3*. 6d. 
Eddy D. C. MlnlsterlnK women Eil. by 1. 

Uuminingv 1'-'S9 Dean }«, 6d, b. 

Tlcknor tjc. 

Qracay nn. J. T. Knlocnt oiLiaionary 

women N. V.'qS HuntSjc. 
Harris S. P. Ceaitiry of ailMlooAry aurtyrs 

L.-V7 Nia. M. CkI. 
Hayden H. C. American heron on mlulon 

field* N. \:.^ A. T. S. ti.JS 
Huarbaa T. P. Heroic lives In foreign tleld« 

S. V.'-» E. P. Herrick.* Co. 

Indian [Hindoo] Christiana, SkeicfaM of 

Madras *^ Chr. Lit. Sac. 
Japp A. H. Maner mitalonarlei L.'fij 

Onw. ja. 6d. N. Y.'Si Cart.$t.;o 
ricDawrll W. P. and others. Picket line of 

iniMloa* N. Y.'g; Eat. 90c. 
Pitman Tin. B. R. Herolaca uf the laluJon 

field L.'Bo CitwelJ 5»- N. Y. Ran. 

ll.JO 

Pttnan Hrs. B, R. Lady njlsalonariea In 

foreign land! U'Sq Part. i*. 6d. N. V. 

Rev. 7SC. 
Pitman Mrs, B. R. Miuionary heroine* In 

RnMcrn lands I-."9S P»t. N. V 

Rev. 75c. 

RobcrUoe W. Kartyn of Blantyre L.'qa 

Nis. 1%. M. 

Rtrtberford J. Mitsloiury ptoneera In India 

E.V6 Ell- li. 6d. 
fltock S, a. Mlulonary beroca of Afrlcn 

L.q? L. M.S. li. fid. 
Tamer n. P. His wttneaaea [..'91 Sim. 

Walah W. P. Heroea of the intiulun field* 
L.'«i Hod. J*. 6d. N. Y.*7j WbiU. 
• '.»S 

Walah W, P. Modem heroe* of the ml»[oa 
field J..'«i Hod. s»- N. V. WbKt. 
f < S<» 

Voata C. M. Ploncera and fovodov L.'jt 
Macm. |t.7s 



MlMlontllttcratur Halk. c;«T«iany.'9T 

VerUK del Studcnteobnndea f fir Miah>B 

Jadwoa A. n. Ribliofiraphr of lOftlgD ■!»■ 
■ions N. V.V Funk The MUM !■ 
Appendix A. in Vol. I of B11<is.'s Eneycfape- 
dia ol Ml*sk>ai i v. N, Y.'gi Funk f t> 

StraBMal B. WcKweiaer durch die wlBMrf 
•chaftUchc und pauocale M isaianklitteraior 
Bcr.'^ Warn, t 

VablJ. BPger a ngaaertd* Hcd p In fCttdsaJwuB 
og derhcn Dltrendc Aemoer 5 parts Co^ 
enbagen, Dcnmark'B^-^s FischtBano 

BI0aRAPHIE5 

B. S«cr«tarlea or Missionary Advocataa 
•ttfAnMgariiia, sveiigca apostct Stockholm 



Foitcr JO Ore 
Banler Rev. Qeorr*. 

euu wraian. 



By H. P. Barder 



ByJ.E. BlUa L.-n Mi 



Pranke Augnst Hcraaan. By A. Knma 

] V. Halle'Sf Waitrnhaua u.SoM. 
vOoasatr Johannea, EvansaHsta. By H. 

Dalioo Ed. ) Friedcoat?oS Hlaibwhh. 

iM. 
HiOraal Karl, und telnc Bedeutang (Or 



die lutheriscbe MlMioo. Br G. Henoaoa 
uchhai 



Bedeutang 
Buc&handlung da 



Halle. Germany '£7 
Wabenbaus 
sHaniM Loula. By T. Harnvs Ed. » 

Hcrraatiniljufic Mi-«lnichh. i.^oM. 

MFHeldrlng Otto Oerhard. Sein Lcbm u. t. 
Arbeit von ihm sclbsi cnahlt Clli.'ti 

Bert. 6M. 

HottoiafiB Lndwlc Frtodrieb WHbelB. By 

C Hoflm^Lnn 1 v. In one B.ucl KoK. a^a 
M. 
»Jo«cahans Joscpb. By I. Ilcasc Calw. 

■g; Verf iriiljULlill. jM. 

nslffscnfaajis Joscpb. Ausgewihlte Redcti. 
Ed. C Jotcnh.uii and G. Gutbrud Basel 
'K ^fiMbuchIl. iM. 

Knak Oiutav, ein Prediger drr OeracMg- 
katt. By T. Wangcmann Basel'ttt SpMt. 
4M. 

aUad van Wllngaardon J. D. de. By An- 

lonltis WaUeui I.eidcn, HoUiuld*«t G. 
Los. f.3 
fpadnUla AamiMl Jobn. By G. Sprlag 

N. V.'jD. 
Mortaan John. Pntlirniand founders of the 

Lnndon MisMonary Society L.'44 
^RahBB Comel^tit. Van arbundradr* 

Kirktc svcn»k^ luissiur'Sr Bf H. BruM* 

"nits Stotkhulin Fin,[cr, ikr. 

SplttlerCbrtatlan Fricdrlcfa. By J. Kobu 

Bascl'8? Kob. 4M. 

Venn Henry. By W. Knight L.'8o StA 



wWali niajtoniweckrul des Ba^ _ 
Unlan von dca Origin aid ruckaa 

t«M Her "v. Fjti i.M, 
t»W«l» Jojittnlanuj von ider V 
der luUierlKbcn MIsslonJ. W. Grdnei 

tfW(tt»v««B H. W, Leven ea arbeU van 

kH. Gunning, Jhr. Groalagts 'gi 

y Wolten f 75 -■ » 

Zinicndorf Cvaat. By P. Bovet L. '46 
Kel. 

soZlniendorf nnd die Britdtrgvcnatae. By 

L.C. K von Schrauienbacli Sd. a Goa- 
dating Bar. jM. 



I 



^ 



PIBMOCRAPHY 



459 



C* Two AHOclaUd Livoa. 
ABOtnou WllllaiB and LouU*. Qy W. 
Uarwkic P. V F.W ii 

Dwigtit Bllnbett) Barker uid Onnt llni. 
JudKb 5. By H. G. O. Dwkglit N. V.'4o 

Orant nn. Jaitth S. (See DwUcbi} 

Lynuo Henry, (See Muruon} 

McDongall Francis T. and Hantotte. By C. 

K, llunyao I. ind N. V.'JKj Lone !«■. 

• » "J 
Msrtln WllliMB and Savin. By W. P, 

Martin H.IW Ell i». M. 
Maftat Robert and Mary. Br J. S. MallaC 

L.'Sr> Unw. JR. «d. N, V*as Arnu. 

riaiiMD Samuel and Lynun Henry. By W. 

Tlijia;i5ur. N. V.'jq 

PluUcban. (Sue 7.ieger\halg) 

Pond SbbimI W. and Qldcan H. Two rol- 
uniter mitiionarlet among the D*kotu 
ByS. W.Fond B.'jj Cong. Ii.jj 

S«aB<len Bleanar rad Elizabeth. By 0. 

M. Berry L.'ffi Nl». s». N. ¥.« 

Rev. ll.JD 

Stewart Robert and LeaUa. By M. E, 

Waisoa L.'gs M*''. j» <^- 
Vlntona, Tb* [Juotus Hatch and Callata 

Vlnlan] , and the Karena. »>- C . V. Luihci 

B.'Si Ccr. t> 
Wadaa,Th«rJoaathan WadeaiKlWKa]. Dy 

W .\l. Wyctb N V. ,j Wjril Tjc. 
ZlcsvnbaJf BarlhoioBias and Helnrich 

Plutschau. Dy W, Germans ErUiLgen 

"Sa Dcich. ftM. 

Mlailonarica to More l^nda 

Than One 

Baldwin Maty BnsbM. Mlvlon 11/e in 

(•recce and Palcnioe By K. R. tHun>n 

L.'li Can. SI. 



Clulncra Jeswa. Br W. Robwn Wij 

Part, It. id. N. Y.'m Rcy. jjc. 
CofcaJahn. By S.Drew N. Y.'jr Mctfe. 

Bk. (.one. f I 
ajtBacamla B. "Soureoir* InUmei." Bx- 

tncu dc son jourriiil en rie 9> carrenpoadance 

Geniir«'i>3 FiKti. 6 fr. 

Oallcfc Lotber Halaey. By F. G. Tewett 
B.'os CoQg. $i.ij l"'-); Stock. 5*. 

JaaiiLiow Wm. r>«is]>el tn ihr Afrleans By 
A. Robb Bd. 6t Hamilton 

Martyn Henry. By C. D. Bell L.'Bo Hod. 
IS, '■;!. .S'. y '8i Arms. 7jc. 

Martyn Henry. By J. Paic N. Y.'oo 

Rev. -51. 
Martrn Henry. Saint and tcholar By 

G. SiDiih N. Y.'fl* Rer. >j 
Martrn Henry. Journal* and lelteta By 

S. Willierlorce » t. L.'j; Seel. * is. 

namy A. W. (Under title, Party ycara' 
mluion work In Polynesia and New Guinea, 
i8js-i575) L.'7s Nle.7».6d. 

Ocla John Pamlia. Lite and mUttottary 
iraveUoC By J. A. Wylle L.'tj Lone. 
lot. t-C. 

oJfander Cari Oottlkb. Bin Zeu(e dor 
Wittifheil unier ilcn Bekcnnein d«a Itlan 
Qy C. P. Bppler BaMl'BS Ulsahudih. 
].(oM. 



Taylor Wllllaai. Story of my lite 
Kal- 1. V Hod. M. 



Temple Daniel. 
Tnnwr Nathaniel. 



N. Y.V 

By W. H. Temple B.'a 



By/. O. Turner U/ja 



Wotn Joaepb. Travetoand adventure* L, 

'6i Saunder* tie. 

Xavler S«, PrancU. By H. J. Cdertdge ■ ▼. 

L.'jf'ji Burnt i3<. 



E INDIVIDUAL MISSIONARY BIOQRAPHY 



Africa 

Amteyard John Wblttla. By T. Smltb 

L. Ai Wcs. MfUi. Bk. Rro. r^. 
Amiatrons Jobn. By T. Carter X-.'vi 

Pjrker r*. ». 
iioBamhennict I Belleaa. By E. Landahl 

Stockliulm Foster ij.fifC 

itBoRion Charlea. .Minio^iaire au Confo 

IrAD^la By A. Boui^n NBncy'97 
Bowan Jobn. By MIn Bawen \..%t 

Calloway Henry. First blabop of KAlIraria 

Uy .M S licnlMin L.'^ Macm. 6ft. 
tfitCaialU Enceae. MesSourenlrs Par.'tf 

Flsch. ift. 
Caaalla EaEcna. My life in Basutu land 

L,'89 k.T. S. s«. 
Cbamplan Ooorga. By Hr*. H. Champion 

New Ha veil '^ 
aColUard Madame. Hy M. C. Rcy Par.'^i 

MIh. Evang. 
Colniao John WUllan. BUbop ol NaUl 

by G. W L<>« L.ES R»d|{. aia. 

Colanao Blabopi. By F. Gregg L.V 

S. S. Amoc. i«. 6d. 

Conbar Thomaa J, By J. P. Hyer* L.'ai 

Pan. n. 6d. N- V. Riev. 75c. 
Crowtber Aamnel. By J. Page U'SS 

Pan 31. 6d. N.Y.'gt Rev. ysc. 
Ethvanla J, RcmlaiKcncea o( early life and 



DiivUonary labors, S. Africa 
Wool. ai. 6d. 



Bd. 



L.*« 



Praaman Tbamaa Birch. By I. MIIbb 
N. V n. A. Kev. rsc. 

Oobct Sanntl. MlMlonary In AbyMlntaand 

bishop ai Jerusalem rrom tbe Geroua 

L-'m .Nik. 7k.«>d. 
Oollmcr C, A. By C. A. Gollioer L,'So 

Hud. M. M. 
Good A. C. (Under title A lite tor A(riai) 

£*!■ E. C. Parionn .V. Y.'«j Rev. Ii.js 
Hannlngton Jamas. Liiw louriMls L.'tt 

SccL j». 4d. 
Hamlnrtoa Jastaa. By E. C. Dawion L. 

«r :^eel. ». M. N. V. Ran. $> 
Kill iaanph Sidney. Fir»i Hithop in WcMvrn 

Kquatorlal Africa. By R B. Faultutei 

L. 9j Aliens. 3«. fill. 
Hoffmann Cbarlea Colden. By G. T. Fos 

L 'f-3 Seel, 'ji, fcd. 
Inglla Walter. By W. Cochrane Toronto 

Jobnaon WUbdm AMCuatln Bambard. By 

A. T. PIrrann (Under title Seven yeartin 
Sierra Leunc [iSt6-iS>))> V. V.'q; Rev. $1 

aKamp van dar JobaiiMa ThMdbma. Br 
1>. C. viin cli-r Kriup Aanicrdam. Hoi- 
land'r^ ). H, and G. van HctcrcD f.r.go 

Kkberer John. N'arracire of hia misaioiu to 
itie Ilutiii.[^>i& jni3 Buitbenea I-.'w 

wKrapf Ludwhr. By W. Oana Baaci 
Kob. 1.60 H. 



4^0 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



L«p»lcy SABad Nonrdl. By Lapslcy 

KicliiiionilVij 

LMOOCk HmnVtm Jaaiea, the manyr ol Ui< 
Pltrba* 'Jy H. CmwiU L.'sj Bit. 

}*. ca. 

UvUvstoaa OavU. Bjr H. G. Adan* Bd. 

I] L 'i>i Hod. 3*. 6d. 
UvlncstoDe Davfd. BrW.G. RUlkie U 

k) Murr. N. V. Revjijo 
jUvtaBMmw David. Bf V. Muncl^ Bo 

Lcvcodk^ldldring III Cnp S? 
Liv tegrto tf Is Afiica. Br R. Noel L.. 

l)i:Le S:,\( W^rd & Downer ia«.«d. 
LIvlDvvtoae Dcvld. B]r Smile* L.'8s X. 

Y. C^M. iuc. 
UvlnxvtoM David. Hy T. HuKbcs L.'&) 

M^cm. ji, £d, 
Madcay Alexsadtr rUirdock. Ptonecr 3t(>- 

uimar>- of ihcC M. >. tu L'uaatU. Br bl» 

*iMer, Mrs. T, W, HatfUon S. ¥.'91 

Artr%. |i 40 
Mackeiizla Chartca Fr«d*rtck. By tl. Good. 

win I. 'tH Bell tiA. ad. 
flapIcA diauocy. BUhop of LUcoata By 

k! Mipln L. and S. V.'iJ LoDff. 7»- 

MoHat Robert. ByW. W.her* N.ySj 

Moffat Rntart and Mary. By I. S. MofUi 

N. V.'65 Arms. Ji -j 
JMaUtle Adolphe. By II. Diecerlea Pai. 

■•/■- 
PearM Horatio. ByT. SrolOi L.'64 Hub- 

lUun 41. 
Ptlklnrtan of UcBJida. By C. P. Harford- 

BftJiershy I..'./ Mar. S. Y.'qij Rev. 

Plaoflck S. O. Bkptltt BlMlonarv tn Wcm- 

em Africa L 'qj Joylul itewi Book 

Depoi 6(1. 
wPoaavh Wllh., Der KaScrmlMionar By 

T. Pfituier and WinifciBanii. edk Ed. j 

Bcr.'Qj Mfabudih. i.asM. 
Rae Bryan. My C. R- Jotmsoo L.'96 

Kfl jS. 6il. 

RobertMin Mrs. Henrietta. Mlulnrurr life 
anonic ibc Zulu-Kalira By Anne Mack- 
eniie X.., ij Old B«Uey'7s Bemro&e dc 
Son 39. 6<]. 

Saker Alfred. By E. B. Underhilt I^'g* 
B. M.S. i», 6d. 

Scott William Affleck. By W. H. Raokine 
K.V^ K];ickiv. ^ 

Sbaw William. Uy W. B. Boyte L.'ji 

WmI. (_'..ih. 6s, 6(1, 
5hrewab«iry W. J. By J. V. B. Shrewsbury 

ICd . J L. '69 HAraUtOQ 3>. 
5IID A. P. Life and Lciten L-'^A Univ. 

MIh. 4t. 
gmytblo* Cbartea Alan. BUhop of the 

t'(i)ve(MLic» Mi»5kjn it Central Africa By 

ft. Vi'itcii L.'^ Univ. Miss, to Cen. Ai. 

Bafa, 11yo. Tbe mmld Kafir mUstoaary 
By H. T. Cauajna L.'q? Faru is. fid. 

atnra Bdwaid. Br R. M. Heanley L.'BS 

Bell «», M. 

jtfTaraaaJd I Uganda. Fmu tie trartca 

varldtdel Stockholm Fmer ikr. 

Townaend Henry. By O. Tuwoiend L.'By 
Mar. 

WaUBteJcr T. Autotiiof[rapliy L.'M 

Part. 1* 

W«M n. D. Sidney Roberta, yeufts Conso 
miMionary By W. Brock L.^ Al- 
iens, as. ed. 



West Daniel. By T. Wm L.-jt Ham. 

Itton ^. 

WlMtdy nary Laala^ By B. J. Whaidj 

L.> K. 1, .S, 7>c 

North America 
Braloerd David. By Jvnutban Edwards, td. 

by S. E. Dwieht. cd. by J. M. Shtrwood 

S. \.'i4 Vixak $1.50 
Bralimd Jobn. By T. Bralatrd PtaO.*** 

IVc*. Bd. Pub, ^.y, 
EaSs, "Fattier," or, Resutu of jt years of 

iniuianary Ubort By M. Beth B.'m 

Cong. $i,)5 

Bva«s James. Bv J. McLean Toraaio, 

(~>inada'v« Metaodist Mission Rooms 

Bvans James. The apostle of the NorUi 

By B. R. VuttOH N.V.'w Rev. ^Kas 
Hofdsa B^ J. FoTty-lWD vrar« amonKn the 

Indian! and EsUnoa By B. Battr L> 

*93 R. T. S. *•. ed. N. Y. Rev. )t 
Oeoom g— fi—| and the Christian Indians 

By W. de L«»» Love Boston 'no Pilgrla 

Prcu S'.s^ 
Rlrga Stepban Ralurv. Hary airf I: 

Twenty year* with the Sioux B.'Br 

CoBg li.so 
Wblppla Bp. Hanry BaBfaaasu Ligfats 

and shadows of a lonK epiM^patc, brine 

reiainiaceBcea and recullectfons N.Y. 'oo 

Mae. ts.oo 
Zelsbargar David. By B. A. Dc Schwelalta 

Ptiil.?o Lip. ti-jo 

The West Indlas 

BurcbcU Ttao«a5. Bv W. P. BurcbcU L. 

't^ Green. 4*. bd. 
Cartlsla W. Thlnv-eighi years' mission life 

in Jamaica L.*a« Nu. 3*. fid. 
Knibb WlllluB. By J. H. Hintoa L.V 

HliuI IJ-. 

Knibb V^'lUlam. MiasJODary In Jamaica 

By Mrs. J. J. Smith L.'gb Ales. is. 6d. 
Pbnilppo Jamas Msraell. By E. B. Under. 

hill L.'B7 Bapi. MiM. Soc. sil 
Soutb America 
Brett Rev. W. H. Apoctic of the lodtaaaof 

Guiana By. F. P. L. Josa L.'S? Gar. 

&». 
Oardiner Captain Allaa. By J, Page L.'«r 

Part, t" «). 
Smith Jobn. By E. A. WallhrldKe L.'4 

(iilpin 7%. 

Winiams Richard. By J. Hamilton New 
etl L.'57 Nl». 3s. 6d. 

Wray Jolia. Pioneer nUaalonary in British 
GuMOj. By T. Rati) L.'^a Snow. js. 

Youd Thomask Tea years of nlssianair We 
in Driiith Guiana By W T. VcDca* L. 

rs s. p. c. K. 11- 

Chlna and Her Depeodendes 
Abeel Oavld. By G. A. Waiij:;i>oa N.V.'*! 
BrIdKninn Blllah Colnan. Pioneer of Amer- 
ican ititsirion* in China By E. I. G. BrUg- 

toAii N. V.'^ 
Barm Wm. Chalmers. By I. Bums L.'lf 

Nil- ts- 6d 
Douslas Car^talr*. By M. Utniglas U'n 
Ollmour Jamca. Of KoneotU: his dlaflca^ 

kner*, and reports By R, Lovett N.V. 

'mi Rev.Ji.7i L. K. T. S. ja. 
Henderson James. Medical ntaslaBanr la 

Chins L.'&7 N. Y.'j) Can. 7S«- 
HUl David. By W. T. A. Barbour L-'oB 

Kel- JS. 6d. 

Ha Vong ni. Way of Faith Illustrated (anto- 
bioirrapb}-) K. V.'99 Bat. (i 





RtRI.IOCRAPHV 



461 



John Qrifflth. Founder el Uir Hknkvw (n!«- 

Mon by W. RotMon L.'U Pari. 

t»- M. N.V. Rer. jjc. 
MWckcBZte John Kcnnctb. Mrdical mts- 

slonarv 10 China By M. P. RrjrtoD L. 

■<ji "Hod, j». M. N. V. Rer. Si.y> 

aiiM wiiiiuB. Br R. Philip PhiLV 

nvnUoo Robert. By B. Morriaoti >*. L. 

' 9j Long. i^i. 
Mi^rrtMn Robert. Rr W. J. Towniwni] L. 
'88 Pjft. N. V Rer. 75*:. 

N«vlas John UvlnsstM. Br H. S. Nerlus 

a*€Mn> X. V.'t,s Rev •» 
t^•rker Rev. and Hon. Peter. Br G. B. 

Mcvni* ttiKl W. F M.>rwicli B.'»e Con|{. 

Roberts Frederick C Hy H. I. Brnoo L. 

'i>i Allent- J*. M. 
SchofleM R. tlarold A. Br A. T. SchoRcld 

Stall}i>rmM Mr«. Edward. By E. SullybnuB 

Talauge John Van N«m. (Under^thlc : Fonjr 

Sc^in ia Souih CblDK) By J. G. Fagg 

Wang Old, Klnt Cblncae ersngcllu In 
MiticlmrU By ], Rom L.'Sg R.T.S. 
.1. M- N. Y. Rev. &ac. 

Wllltems S. Wen*. By >-' W. Williams 

N, V.'W Pul. %i 
Vatca Story of. By C. E. Tiylar Na&h- 

vllle, Tean.*gB Sunday School Board 

SfWifaern Baptist Conveniion |i 

India 

■UAIbere Evelina. ZcnatumlMlonlrcn By 
P. Kor^hdl Slocltholm FcMier 30 tire 

Caldwea Robert. Coadjutor. bUbop of 

Madr»» Ity ]. A. Sbarrock Madnu'gb 
S, P. C. K. 

Carcjr WlltlaBU, Sltocina,ker aod mhnofuUT 
bv G. Smith L.'Sf Murr. ifti. 

Cvey William. By J. CuUom N. Y.'Si 

.■\rrn!t. 751.-. 

Dutf Alexaoder. Qy G. Smiib a v. L.'tq 

ll'>'l. j<t .S'. V.'Bo Arms. I3. 7 3. 
OuH Alexander. By W. P. Duff L-V 

Dwl|. ThC'i.'unvenldu of a Brahmin tij the 

(iiiih of Clirist By W. Smith L-V 

Nil n 
eiaulle William Jecksoa. By W. B. Thonp- 

Mfi Ell i L.'»> Nil. t«. 
wPabriclae Johann PMItop. By. W. Gcr- 

■ti^nn F.rI;tii|!cD'bj Ddcb. jM. 

Fox Henry Watsom. Br G. T. Fox Ed. 4 

L SI k T. S, .*. M. 
French Thomas Valpy. Rlshnri of l.ahorc 
II* H hHrki ) V L,'^( Morr. joa. 

Oordon Oeorge Maxwell. By A. Lewis Kd. 

, L M Sccl. 7». 6d. N. Y.*8» Yo. ft 

b^nndert Hernumn. Calw.'o* Vrcloa- 

t)Ut:)ili. sM. 
Hcber Reginald. By A. Hcber ■ T. Wy> 

Murr. 
Heber Reginald. [BUhop of Calcnlta) By 

(i SiTiif 1 I- '"SS Miirr. 10*. 6d. 
wHcbich 5amBcl. Ein B«iua^ xur Ge- 
tLliktiLc lict Indischcn Mitiioa, von iwel 
Miukrijciiern 6c* Vcrcwlifien BaMl'p 

Mi<iatiuchh jM. 

HeWch Sannet By J. G. HalUaay traaa. 

L W'j Seel s«. 

Hialop Step4wa. By G.Smith Ed.* L. 

'8^ Murr. tlM, 



Lacroix Alptionm Francola. By i. Mulleaa 
L/f-j Nlii. i*. 

MacdooaM Jobs. By W. K. Tweedic Ed. 
'tr, JuhUEtune B*. 6d. 

Mllaan Robert- By F. H. Mllman L.'^ 

Murr i>». 
Milne John. Rv H Bonat N. V.V Carl. 

$3 L '68 Nil. 6f. 

Calw. 



t-'sl 



i-Moslanc Hera. By II. Gundert 
'81 Wicifutwchb. J M. 



Ncabit RobarL By J. M. Mitchell 

M*. cs. 
Noble Robert Tnrllnrton. By J. Nobit 

Ed. t L,"67 Seen 3*. 6d. 
Padman^ B. Once Hltujoo, now ChriMlan 

L 'ijL, Nts, M. N. V.'^i Rer. TSC. 
Pearce Wm. Howard. By W. Yaic* L V 

Jloiii, I'.*. M 
Ramakrlahna. By H, MUllet L.'»S Long. 

S*. N V.'v) Scr ft. so 
Read Mary. Miulonary to lepers in lodia 

By i. Jnrkson L.'gq Mar. as. tid. N. 

Y. Rev, 7S«. 
iwftsnaaa Lana. ZeoanamiationBren By J. 

Timlin Sii>cktMjIin Fiwtet ij Ire 
RbenlBS Carl Oottlkb Bwald. ByJ. Rhenias 

L.'4t Sl:>. lu*. 

Rice Ben|amln, Or, Fifty yean In the Mas- 

irrs' service By F.. P. Rice L.'B? R. 

T.S. js.6d. 
RvtbqnUt Alaalna Mackay, Or, Sinffina the 

<ir>i|it-lamcing Hindus and Gurds By J. W. 

liarrivin l-.'gj Mod. 6s. N. V. 

Armt. |i.$o 
Saber Ellaabath. The Zenana otiuionary 

By Sin. E. H- Trcsirail U.^ Bapl. 

Tr S.K 
Soidder David Con. By H. E. Scuddcr N. 

V.'tn Ho. t< 

Scndder John. By J. B. Watcrhury N. Y. 

■70 Hjf $i.7j 
Schwartz, Christian Frtodrlch. By H. N. 

PcjrKin • V. L. n HaL 1^. 
wSchwarU ChrUtlan Prladrlch. ErUngeo 

'70 Di-ich. ) M. 

Sea Keahub Cbtindcr. By P. C. Mcnoomdar 

CalcuttiB? J. W. Thomas 
Slmpaaa Wm. Ovaread. By S. Wray and R. 

Sicvert«in L,'86 WooLmcf 39. Od. 
Tbomaon Thomas T. By J. Sargent L.*i| 

N. V\,i Phil. Am S, S. 4jc. 

Thomaon ItioiDas dalth. By J. H, Hacker 

L/e? R T. S. »i. (d. 
Wenger John. By B. B. Undrrhil) L.'S5 

Bj.|;t. Miit Soc. IS. M. 
WUeon Daniel. By J. Batenua ■ v. t.. 

'63 Murf. Q», 
Wllaen John. For fifty years phDanihropItt 

and KhoUr In the Eau By G. Smith 

Ed. 3 L.'rt Murr. q«. 
Yatea Wtnun. BvJ.Hobv L.'47 Hoal. 

toe. Ad. 

Sunna 

Po a rd ma n Oeorge Dana, and ihc Btinnan 

miuiijn. Of Goud fight. By A. King New 

cd. U '75 Loth, tt.js 
Jndaon Adonlram, By P. Wayland * r. 

N. V.'sj Sheldon Jj.ts 
Jadaon Adonlram. By H. Booar L.'7i 

Nii. ji. «. 
Jndaoo Adonlram. By E. Jodton L.'Si 

Hod. QK. .N. Y. Ran. $> 
JndaMi Mrs. Ann HaMeMoe, By J. D. 

KdowIci PtaiLV' Am. S. S. 



463 



BIBLtOGRAPHY 



Jmtmam Abb MMMltln». Bjr W. N. WycUi 

N. V.> Wajd 7JC- 
JateM e— rffclitirtr Bf. W. N. WtoH 

N. V.> TTard tjc. 
Jndami Hra. EmUt OwMwA. By A. C. 

Kendrkk N. V.'to An. Bspt. Mis». 

Vn. ii-n 
JudMM Mrs. SmnM BoTtfiaw. Br ** Fjtaay 

KoJiT^.cr ■■ L '7* AjUittn.M. 
jBdaoB Sunb Boardsm. By W. N. Wynb 

N. V/l>j tt"-.r.J ;: . 
gft Mihwi llvarledc* Hans, blcT Rfldkarntrr- 

ftc* Hiwiinrr B7 H NtfUboni Koldlns 

•»T 
5(*v«H e*Mrd JibUl. Hail cenuirT 

in tluriBa By S. W. StcrciM PbH-V 

Am Hapt Pub. Sue 
Tfaib-Bya Ko. K^tta ApoiUe. Bv P- 

Maion L.-,4 R. T, S, i». 



a beatlMa 



Rr A. S Hxr^T 

MAker of Uw New 
N. V.*M Ke». 

Nub- 



Haw I became a Cbiistun, bjr 

convert Tokyo' 9S 
Iwunoto rirs. K. Pint mdaatc ol Fcrria 

Sciniiurjr, with a coltcciMn of her BfiKtUh 

nrritlnei N ¥.'96 Brinkcrbaif 
MaMyoahl (Milluwa. " Won bj pnytt." 

By A R B^rilioloiscw Ptul.'gi 
Neevlna Joveph H«rd«. 

Bo. H.,.S. 

(NcMlKa JoMpli Hmray.) 

JujHii H>- J. I) D-riB 

l> 
Noften Mr*. J. H. FUM handa 

viIic'mj Cunb. Prcs. Pub. joc. 
Sawaymnu R«v, Payl. A modem Paul in 

Jajun Ity J Sarin* B "qi Coag. {[ 

Vcrtieck. Quido Pradalbi. A dOxan d1 bo 
country By W. E. CdS> N. V, 'to 

Rev. S I to. 

Mslar AfCtlpBkfQ 
Ha— ell J. L- van Gedenkboek ran een Tljf- 

cntwintiKiHriK lendcUBnlerrn op Nleuw- 
Gulr.ej (le^f-ieSr) I'trccht'SS Kcm. 

alttwi will Jiuiaa, eeoe bvdraKe tat de 

OeitchiulenU dc* Cfeiinteadnni* in N'eder- 

Undach^OoM-Indle. By J. K. CkUcobach 

Nrkerk'9} 
wAtepd Job. Prtodrtcb, eia Lcbctubild By 

R. Crundcmsnn GO-'jj Bert. jM. 
iiTl'toiiiwii J. N. Cr/aringen ticdurendc 

myn twaalllulg lendlngftlcven Rvitct- 

dam. Hollaiid';ti D. 17 G. Storm Lou 

t.t.u 

PMBla 
FUke PtdellB. Faith working by love By 

D T. Fitkt B.'6a Cook. I1.75 U'td 

Mtrrg. 31. 6d. 
Fbk* PIddU. Womaa and itx komwI tn 

PcrtU By T. Uuric N. V.'qi R«t. 

)■<- 
Grant Aatiitl, and the (Dountaln Nealor- 

l-n* By T. Laurie Kd. j B.'74 

1.01 h ti.v> 
Pcrlcina JkjUa. By H. M. Perklas Cblc. 

'87 Rrr. yic. 

RjMa SftDuel Aitdley. Tcnnnican In Penia 
add Kuidistan By D. W. Marali PhU.'fiv 
Prn. Ikl. Pub. ft 

Turkey, Annaalft, £yrla 
Barclay JoMph. A Mi«*lonary blo;^phy 

L Sj Part. ij*. 
FUke Pllny. By A. Bood E.*4« Groom- 

tmClii-' n.'»8 
Ooodai Willlan. Pony ytar> In tlie Ttirklvh 



Baptre ByB-aCPirtoe B4.« K f 
*ij Can. •(..«» 
ItaHlta CjnN. Mjr Ut aai< Hwa &« 

Cooc. ti.9» 
PatMMLanrL By CO. Me 

*;a Goodrich ^c 
Pntt Aadnv T. (Uadcr tUc «■ 

life) By G. F. Bcnick X. T/v 

yc- ^ _ 

Im Ba*e]'&. S[it 'M. 
SetenOUr WBUam OottHak. 

H.y.'*; Ran |ij^ 
■MkaeBM' Vater. E<n l^utefcb 4cr Cataa 

MiMion la Hdltc«fl Laa4e T iliilg, Ok^ 

Schodlcr L. H. G. WaBa^'i^vM. 
Balth Mn. Snak Lmhk My B. W. 

Hooker N. Y. <j A- T. S |rt 
Van Linaiy flra. ttarf SKaAiiMk. By 

Loam Hawcs HartloM. rnaa 'u H^^ 

aap ft War6cld 



B«ab7 i*lM IfnrtW. By A. Bamu Ed. a 
L.\) M^aoa 3*. 

ItevU RJclHrd. By J. S. Coksaa I-'H 

NiV7». fxJ. 

allaaMK J. U ran Gedcakboek r«a a^ « 
JaHg Zendinnlertn op SGcawGvlHa 

Uirrchi'eS Ken. f.i.sa 

Lateb Sanmi. What be did for etwna 

and caanlbalt By A. B- KecUac I.V 
Kel. la. fid. ^^ 

MarKtea SamaeL By J. B. tUnttmrn l.'U 

R, T. S. 3*. 

Sdwya Uoorgc Atagiwtas. Blsftoo ttf Kaw 

ZeaUnd. i8ti-i86o > <r. Br R W. M. 

Tucker L.'?? Card. »4^ H- V. I*aa. 
Sdwyn, Bishop of New Zealand and Ltte^ 

field By G. H. Cnrteii L.'vy AnL la. 

M, 

Tyrrell Wllltam. By R. G. Boodle Uu 

Giifd. 7». M, 

tvWoUar*. BrtnnerunffenauaiaciaaMl^k^ 
Bremen Miu--0«acii. a.teH. 

l>) Oftmnut yV^«r- 
Galvart Janea. By R. Vemoti I.V 

Piirt. li. 6d N. v. Rer. 7jc. 

Calvert Janaa. o( Fiji. By C. S. Rows L. 

'9j Kel. j». bj. 

Hont Joba. A miarionary asMlu caoaJibAk 
in Fiji ByGS. Howe L.'fto M. Y/ar 
Pjt 

Obooklab Hcnrr. Memoirea with aemooa 
By U Bcccber aiMl oLbcn PfaiL'je As. 

Patoa John aibMMi. By). Paton N. V.V 

A. T. S. »iS'^ ^ 

Paton John Ulbaon. Auiobiofp^pby 
Hod, !«.. N \.<fi ReT. Ii.jo 

PatteMfl John Calcrtds*. lalisjonary bWeo 
<A the Mdaueauii iaiaoda. By C N. Veofe 
• V. £d. 3 I.. 7] MacBi. tia. 

JvPattMOB Jobn Calerldg*. By A. Kala»> 

dill Siodtboim Foucr 7)Bre. 

TbnrBtoa Mrs. Lucy Q, My life and tloa 
Ann Arbor, Mtch.'Si Andrews (t.yj 

Thomaa John. By C. S. Row* UHt 

Wofilinrr 

rtWllllamj Jahn. 
WUIlaniB John. 

eii. L.'« 
WUmo Capt. Jauca. 
L.'i9 inAmcr. ad. 



\~-M 



t>e Apoftel ran PoJyacn 

(Under title The mutyr 
By J. Campbcil New 
Snow. j»- 

Bt J. GriAn Bd.j, 
B. ti Crodcar 50c. 





INDEX 



Abbreriuioui E. C, Bcunetiicftl Conlcmm; P. M,, Pord(n MImIori; S. V. H., Slodcnt 
Volunteer Morcnicni. Sec tlto Uu at ihe head of tlic " Member* af ibe Conference." 



Abbott, Miu AnnlicF, Widow* o( India, 

II. jjB. 
Abbon, JtutiR E., India. I. 509. II. 66, 190. 

JJO. 

Abdul Uaiib. I, 4CL1. 

Abeel, David, and Woman's Work. I, ziS. 

Aberly, Jr. J.. II, as*- 

AboriffinM of Nortli Am«fica. I. 4&I-4S9- 

Accc»*or7 R«*uiik c(. F. U., I. 74- 

Accounti and ItitnkkrciimK, I, 191. 

Achievements c( Missiun». Recent, 1. 97. 

Addre*! to Ihe Cburch, tl, 346-359. 

Addcesaeb. Conference, Character of, I, a6. 

Adniiniilraliun, Cliurch Gavemmeni. 1, aB8i 
yonds. 1, tSi; the MJHion. I. to^-jjat 
370-^1 : Orfimiation of Native Chutchca, 
II, t?3-i?i- 

AdmiMiun iiid Discipline, Native Churchea, 
I'. 275-^7. ^ „ 

Advance, firm lor, II, ms-J50. 

Advance Cltib, Rockfcrd, 111. I, 163. 

Alglvaniitan, I, jjit, 11, jjs- 

Alnca, GeniTAl Survey of, I, 4S^47Ji 
Period, i8sc-i87S> '• 4°^: t875-i40O. T, 413; 
Americui NcKroea in. I, •m): Capaciiy of 
People, I, 4(^, 47t; Cliinu of, II. jjj; 
I>i»cuver]r in. I, 3^5: EducaCioaBl Prob- 
lem, I, ASf^iSo: F.vnngeliwiii on of, I, ifii; 
Extent of, 1, aUi: Ccim^tn Mictions, I, 
4151 IDitcracy. 11, id'; Indiarubber 
Traffic. I, 468; InduMncI \Vork. II. isj- 
iSa: Literary Work, II, ai; Medical 
Work. II. 188; Need* of, iCiP; Parti- 
lion of, I, 411; Religion of, II, 196; Study 
of bUdicme in, I, ijS; Touring in, II, 
ic6; Women of I. 115. 

Africa. Lucbo, J, 97. 

Africa. North, 1, 44a, It. 356; Uoham- 
mcdaniim, I. 3^. 

Africa, Sonih. Cerman Mission*, I, 300, 

f; Literary Work, II. 8»; StitisiTca, 
466; S. V. M. in. I. 107, III. 
Africa, WeAl. Health of Miaslonaiici. I, 

V- 

Agende), aee Methnda, T, mi. 
Agnoaticlim, Method of >fFcting, I. J71. 
Agra Medical College, India, 11. jiC. 
Agricultural Minion Work. 1, 419, II. 163. 
Ahmednagar High School, II. [49; Indua- 

trial School. 1 1, ijo. 
Ain oi K. U. Detined and Oiscusted. L 

7 1 Sir. 

Aintab Medical College. II, atK 

Al Aihar Univeraity of Cairo, I. 438. 

Abuka. I. 4!ta. 

A'-inndr-i. Bible Translalion, II, to, ». 

Algeria, I. jjo, 

Al'a^aKad. bniversitiet tn, I, $"'. Training 

cf Colpcrteurs. II. J70. 
All-dar Meeting. I, ii-ij- 
Allen, H. N., Medical Work in Korea. 

I. iJT- 

Allen. Mi»» M. O., Training of Mi«sian- 
arics. I, jt<£. 

Almora Leper Aiyluffl. II. a«9- 

American Baptist Missionary Union, I. 97' 
«3- 

Amcrican Bible Society. »ee Bible Soeictiea. 

American Board of Coniinifiianen for For- 
eign Million*, I, ^. 07. X2J. 401: Co- 
operation with the Preabytetiani. I, ui; 
Pre*). Peking, I. 948. 



American College for Girli. Constantinople. 

I, 4^ 

Amennn Fricnda Board of F. M., Pre**, 

IL Cj. 
Amrruu^n Mtminn College, Jaffnai. II, mS. 
American Nr(troc» in AFfica. 1. .^0-4^1. 
.\merican Student Volunteer Movement. 

The, I. 104- 
Amecican Tract Society, II, 4]. 44. 
America!., The, Survey of, 1, 474-489- 
Amoy, Co-operation in. I. 166. 
Anderton, kufui. I, 27- 

Andrcw and Philip, Brotherhood of, I, ui. 
Anecdote* and llluntraiions. Sec Index o(, 

II, 484. 
Aneileum. I, 49t- 

Angcll, Jamra B., I, 48, iSo, 3x1, 341, II, 370. 
Angels. Not H'Tnl to Teach Men, I, go. 
Anglo-Cbineac College. Fucfaau. I. 97. 11, 

119. 
Anniul Coafcreace ol the Foreign Misaio&a 

Boards cf Che U. S. and Canada. 1. 9, ^■ 
Annual ke|iort», I, 154. 
Anii'Chrittinn Korces, 1, JS1-4M9. 
Anti-Semitic Movement in Europe. 1.444- 
Aotiodi, Cenier of llible Translaliuo, II. 

toi Paul and Barnabas at. I, joi. 
Aoki, C, 11. jfit. 
Apologetic Prcblemi, Relation of Misaioni 

to. r. 3S7-»7. n, 37>- 
ApoJogclic Value of Missionary Literature, 

'• '/■'- J7'"3r7i of Misiions, II, jjo. 
Apostolic Age, Example (or Modern 

Church, I, 304- 
Appeals. Sjiecul, Baiis of. I, i8a^ 
A|tpiupriations. Arrani^ement ol, I. 3B6. 
Arab Trader* not Misnionan'ea, t, jay. 
Arabia. I, it. 36^. 4J.Wj8; Creatcil of Un- 
entered Coumneii. ll, 3j4i Medical Miv 

sions, I, 4J7, 4j8; Missions, I. 41J, 456. 
Arabic Language and Literature, II, .\S, 
Arabs, Intelligence of. I. 471: Medioil 

Work. I. 437. II. 'IS- 
Archibald, Mra. J. C, Work for Woneo. 

II, >ui. 
Argentina, I, 47R. 
Argument (or Comity tn the Need of the 

World. I. atfJTo. 
Armrnia. Conversion of, I. 144. 
Armenian*, in Persia. I. 4JS: In Turkey. 

I. 449. 45J; •« alio Turkey. 
Armstrong, £liaa C, Consecrated Giving. 

I. iRi. 
Arnold. EdwHn^ " Light ol Asia," I, 363, 
Artiaans, Mitstonary, I. 418. 
Ar^a-Somaj, Tlie, 3. J99. Sta; Sciall of 

Christianity. II, 3^ 
Aahmore, William, 11, 354, 3Sy. China, I. 

4f. ij. 103. $S3i Self-*upport, II. .nj. 
Alia, Weilern. and the Levant. I. 4M-4S7' 
Auam. II, jss; Character of the Countrr. 

1, ixa; Sue of Stalioim. 1. 396; Wild Men 



of. L Sii< V' 

■ Press, I, 16*. 
Asuncion, Paraguay, I. 4S2. 



Associated Press, I, 165- 



Atheiim. Number of Adherenta, II, i]fi. 
Auburn. S, V. M. in. I, ita. 
Audience. Mow to Intrrctl. 1, 17a. 
Aukas of Dutch Guiana. I, 4>a- 
Au4tralafia. Mittiona in. I. 3$, 414-A'8: 

Moravian Work, I, 3j&. 
Au«ir«1ia, i. 107. 



i 



^u 








•. _ *»i 



Skid*? Jtm. 1 aL 

*•»!' ; V ;; as. 



ic*lfe 




-- ?l 



aw. Or^uncas 



w 

trnf-tm 7vHBC ^«19«^• VwM. L IS. 
Xia9«'.«-« Adx^'tM. fan *■«■«• ^"SF^- 
itwvw > 7 A. UoRabdM. :i. :^ Qg» - 

(VMM, I, »?t _ 

*W{^. TuMU*. O'jmXj. I. 3*i; Fa r ^wg. 

%^v^. ;j*Twro., E>£KiiMB. L »sr; m»- 

•iMM a«4 ' ^^•ii ^a n- .m :*, I. jft. „ 

Ufttv», H. % . %^-l^titvyjr^ II. ma- 
%wr. A. -A'., Jfc'ii'.'^^-r;, II. »». 
htfjtr. I'A«, AiML. I. K>. , ^ 

Utorf^ r/'AwT X , TW Cvafarcae^ I, jS. 
ISwr'yw, '*">»«-. RM« V,*»rti«, II, «. 
»«rrv«*. ;. H,, II. ^^. C»f«>» Crr»- 
"..ttK.*, I, tn, .s'o»-OertfC>M lUltcwM. I. 

l»^-/«, ;, I-, II, »&i: Til* SrxictT sad (he 
UfMwwMfi'*, I, aji; TotIwt- I? 4«t ^ 

Km*I M>»t»'/n. I, 4i|; Emit Aln«, I, 4»: 
fMia, II. tsr*'-*- Mctki>d«, I. >9»- 

ljMk*rr»JU, MiM A. E., Work lor Uomcs. 
If, M- 

%tMHf/%, I, ^iA. 

fi«ti'r*l>r- !t"^ Ilarfor'l'BmncnbT. 

H"k. S'A.n. f, 4*7- 

!»"■»*<', K. C ll'r*;nul« and Di«p«uvM^ 

((, »('.. 
K*hr»»vl«, A. I. F.. Owfiwiofi a* Aim 
•ffl l*«<i*«. I, Jj; Keflex Inflticncc oi 

I»*ifiil, I, «: Ar*bi>; ChriMi»n LitTmtnre, 
f r. 4A; f'.ll-K- *f. I, 44t: Medical CoIIefe, 
If, »f«; <Jrfih«n« Ilfjine, I, jii. 

ft'lrmm. Kinf '»(. I. «<•- 

ll'tf'rhr, Mr«, K. )., Prtnury and VilUfe 

H'h'i'rl*, M, HI. 

htU'.n, A. K , Nalin; Chriitian Women, II, 

/'/., 
nrrrtiener. Sjr«efniltc. B^' Giyinj. 
RrnKall, ItJhIr Tranolatiin. II. ai. 
Brnn, Kachcl, I'liytician a> Evangelitt, II, 

190. 







tl.4»^ 



BoM d^M . Sank Ha2. I. n». 
Bovdwa^ Sy? ■■■!> Y«a& «. L b«. 

Bovda. Mi iiii M i j . Li« •£. ZX.^^ Sec 
Msano^sfT Socicc*. 

BoliTia. I. «•, «v- 

Bomlttr. Cknstiaa Colleges s. tl. 

Bomlnr DcccaKial ~ 




Lherarr Worfc. II, jy 
Bo«b«r PrendeacT. Litr»M-i lad 

iac-tooma, II. & 
Bombay. Sadbaraa-Sov^ 11. j]^ 
Bombay Tiact Society. II. «L 
Bombay. Uoivenitiea ia. I. ai. 
Book-acent. Kccd of tt Scabonk. II. Sa. 
Books, How to Circalatt. II, ^: Power rf 

in EvanscItxstioB. 11. te. 
Booth, Catherine. IT. jaa. 
Borchcrerink, Charlea, Tbe Co nl erep c e . I. 

57; Sclf-snpport in Madax^scar. II. no. 
Boaton Female Society for MtasiaBary Pnr> 

po«e« OrKanized. I. 906. 
Boys. Liter a t ur e for, I, 138; Tniaioc of. 

I. 138. 
Bradford. A. A,, H, 360. 
Brmhmaoism, Compared with CfaristiattitT. 

I. 377; Effect on Women, II, 190. 238: 

Fitndaniental Concep t ion of, I, ^3; 

Growth in India, I, sos, 903; >\*hat It Hai 

Done (or India, I, 330. 
Brahmans, Their Work of Proaelrtixiii& I. 

jgB. 



INDEX 



465 



Brahmo-Soinai, I, 511: R«iult of Chri«- 

tlaniir, 11. tj8. 
BraUk SyMcin foi Chinctt Blind, II, m3- 
Bnadiam, }. B.. Kumamotu. Japaa. 1. ^tg. 
Braail, Langiuge, I, 476; Minsiun VVorlm's, 

I. 47?; 'he Crrs^i and Mis'.ioni, II. ia>. 
BremiMi, Conference* a(. I. ^97- 

Brili.ili Collcac Cbrislian Union, I. 109, iii>. 
Unliiih CommiUcc of K. C. (IrganizAtion 

of, I, li, 1 1. ^79, 
Rriiish Columbi*. I. 48$' 
Bfilifh Ea»l India C«mpaiiy, II, 8i. 
Sriiixli and X'orciKD Bible Society, 1, 40, 

II. 7, jg, JD- 

BHiish tiifis (or Mistton*. I. iji. 

British Student Movement. I, 140. 

Brock. J. II.. Tlie Staiion. I. a«j. 

Brooke. Wilmut. Wurk in the Sudan, I, 
330, 413. 

ftrolherhood of Andrew and Philm, I, ill. 

Dravrn, Hubert W., Cliri«iian Literature. 
II, 49: Romim Ckiliolic Misttons. I. 479! 
SeU-tuppurt, II, 3Qb. 

Bruce, H. I., II, js6; Christian Literature, 
II, H; Manual Training. II. i8j. 

Rrunner. Mrs, W. F., IL j6i. 

Bru»el!i, Conference o( Ruropean Power* 
on the Jtrink Traffic, I. *Rj. 

Bryan, Mary E.. Medical Training. II, wn. 

Huckley. Janic* M., Mi»>iua.ary Society and 
the 1)cnrjmiiiali<~>n. I. mo. 

BuiltliMi, Mi^s. MiiMuni lu Li:|>ers, II, M9- 

Rud-dhism, ArftiiiTirnt .^gairait in Burma, 
I. 1-?. 36.1. n^r; in Cliina. I. jrr, ws. 
;sj: Conceplion uf Salvation. I. 361', Coa- 
tcaMed with Chn-iianily. I, jj, isi.j^i'. 
L>Tiven Out by Caile. II, Jfiaj llie Fun- 
damental Idea nl. 1. 373: Klllilily of, I. 



; Morally Lifeleii, L JJ9. y»: in India, 
11, ii6; in l^os, I, jao: tTvcfthrown by 



ifi 



502: in Japan. I. $17, 



in Korea, 



Confucian isni in China, Korea, and Japan, 
I, 389; Sacred. Cities of, I, ija; in Kiam. 
I. SJJ- 

Bneno* A;ire«. I. 4S1. 

Bullock. C. S.. DcnominAl to nation), T. ajj. 

Bunn, A. C. II. 365. 

Bureau of Infnrmancin, I, iAqi. 

Burma. A, Jfudioii. I. 118; D^mon Wor»hip 
in, I. JI&: Living Buddhism. I. j&t: Re- 
ligions of. I, 51b', Self-6U|)ii<'it in, II, »o?. 

Burniana, Hetiginiia Evnittiiun al, I, sij- 
5<0- 

Burrcll D. I., n, 363. 374- ,US. , 

Hu*h Negroeit of Hutch duiana, I. 483. 

Bu«inr«« Men. And Mis«lc^[l!t. I, 47. i;8, 179. 
357. Sif. and K. C. I, 54- 

BusineM Method* in Giving, I, tgo, iqi. 

Butler. Mi«. C, II. 361- 

Butler, J. W.. Co-operation. I. 356: Chria- 
tian l.ileraCtire. 11, 6^*. 

Rutirr, Nichnla* Muitay, Kducalional Prog- 
r**s. II. t?o. 

C«li-o, Mus^ue of AI Aahar, I. tjB. 

Cakulia. ChnsTian Collrgc in. IL 104; Coi- 
venilie* in, I, j"- 

Caledunia (Britifih Columtiia). I. 484- 

Calendar!, Mimionary. 1. ISS- 

Calhoun. Simeon. 1, JH, 140. 

Call. The Mi*»ionary. I, 94. 

Callenbach, Y. R., II. J7i. 374; Ml«»io!ianr 
and Science, I, J31: Dutch Mi*xion», L 

4«7- 

Cainbridge. Eng.. Birthplace of S. V. M. II„ 

L 109. 
•' CuBbridge St-rtn,* and S. V. M.. T, 106. 

top. 
Cameroon, Africa, I. ^Sj- 
Campaign Library, S. V. M., I, 1&4. 
Campbell. Mr*. Belie McPbcraoa. Abuo- 

dani Giving, I, 17B. 
Campbell, Mra, L. M., IL J77. 
Canada. Church t'ninn in, I, 773: Indianti 

of. I. 409-409, ^. 



Canadian ttaptiit MitHon, Self>iuppnrl, U, 

Canadian lntcrrj>17cgiaie Miiiionary AIU- 

ancr and S. V. M., I, los- 
t'anarew. Literature lor the Blind. IL %■ 
Candidate*, Policy with. I. ^ 
Canaiba.ls in South Seai. I, 498, jna 
Caatetbury, Archbi«bop of. on S. V. M., 

L >oj, 1 1 J. 
CatJton True Light Seminary. I. 97; Work 

For Blind Girl», II. Mi, fij- 
Cape Colony. Getnuin .Min^iont, L 4^6; 

S. V. M.. 1. III. 
Cu,pe I'rincr ol Wale*. 1. 4Sg. 
I'ajien, S. B., Syitemaiic Giving. L i96; 
Support of Individual UiMiunarie*, I, 193. 
Capitulalioni, Tlic. in Turkey, I, JtJ- 
Caprtiii. Mr», S. «.. It. ^i. 
Carcle*s Criiiriimii of Miviions, L 333-J35- 
Carev, William. L 75. 86. 118. ijj. 401. SW; 
A<uptation to Work. II. .ja?; an InJnic 
trial Miamunary, II, 137; Rihle Tranfla- 
lioo, IL 16. fi3; Literary Uork, II, 8»; 
a Penny a Week, I. 131; Sett- supporting 
Miaiionarieii, II, ijo; and Sydney Smith, 
It, 337. 
Carletua. May Ellen, Ilospiiali and Dii- 

pensaries, 1 1, ;i6, 
Carmc!, Alanka I, 489, 
Caroline Iilandn, Under Gcrouin Govem- 

menc I, 494. 
Carter, Miw .\., II. jfc. 
farter, 11. W.. 11. jj?. 
Cn»e, Mr». C. n.. rf. 366. 
Ca^aelberry. W. W.. if. j6a. 
Caste, Power uf, I. 3^. StJ, II, iSi; ■ Rc- 

ligiou!! [nstilutinn, [^ jij. 
C'a*ir». High. Hv&ngclixmg the. IL ia3>ioc. 
Ca»telU. dt, Scnor F., South America. 1. 

476, U 376. 
LaswcII. Jci>!ic, in Burma, I. jai. 
Catalogue of Vernacular Literature, Need 

of. IT. 80. 
Catalogue* of Literature on Mis«ions, Need 

of, 1, iM- Sec Bibliography. 
Calerhiit). Training nl. 11, ^Sl. 
Cniechwmens. Training of, I. *». 
Caxton Exhibition of Biblcf. II. 14. 
Celibacy, I, joj. 

Centenary Conference, London, 1888, I. w. 
I'entennial Sl:ati>1Jc*, Abstract of. I, 4A 

430. 
Central America, Roman Catholic Religion 

in, L 4,> 
L entral China Tract Society, 11, iS. 
CentMry. of Mliiioiu. A, 11. jsB; the Com- 
ing, Outlook tor, 11, jjf-^i: Review of, 
L 40i-4i>. a]ii-43]: StaliiiiM of, II, 337- 
Ccylon, 1. 401. SM, S>5; Revival Work of 

Thomas Cook. It. Ji6; S. V. M.. I. 107. 
Chaco. Paraguay. Indiana of, L 48i-48>, M, 

JS8. 
Chalfant. George, Self- iiup port. II, 318. 
Chalmers, Jamrr, iu New Guinea, I, 4J7. 
Chalmcra, TboTnia. Rcfttx Action o( Mia- 

HioD». II. jag. 
Chamberlain, C. W., Teacher as Evangel- 

irt. 11, i*x 
Chamberlain, Jacob, 1, 103; Rrfpotttitbility 
of Women, 1, 116; Outlook in India. I. 
foi; Medical Mi»ion*. II. toi; Reipooae 
in Behalf of MiMionaries, I. jj; Scnac ol 
the Divine. I, 174; Tract Work, II, 43; 
Youth of. 1. tsS. 
Chain herlain. L. T., IT, 3J7. 
Chandsg, Leper Hornet at. I. 174. 
Chang Y«n Church, Self'Support, II, y>a. 
Chapel Preaching, IL 91- 
Chaplaina Eaut India Company, I, 403. 
Chapman, IL T., Aathority and Parpo*t of 

F. M., L 71- 
Character. Native Cbristlin. See Natirc 

Chrinlian*. 
Charity and Cbaraclcr, I, 304. 




^ 




tKDF-X 



Cbvity, DiScTciil Kinds of, I. aozi Neces- 

*)ly of, I. 43. 
Chenter, S. H., II. ^691 Nuifc Wofhera. 

Cbici«o. Circulstins LtbnrirR, I, 161. 
Child. Abbie K.. Study of Miniont, I, 

Chifircn, Mrthml o( rtcsi-ntiott Coaixl I0. 

II, 97. jfti; Primarj- K Lucatiun ul, I. Jud. 

Childfen'i ,\l Uiionarjr Itan-in nnil Sdcit-ties. 

I. 119, ij6; Training in KBOwlcdzv of 
Miksion*. I, ijo. ijt; MiMiorury Mccl- 
itiKS, I, 143. Sec ^ovog Pcoplr'ft So- 
cietict. 

Childreii. Mr». J. W., Reflex Inilurnee o( 

Mi»iiunB, 1, xi. 
Chilr, 1, 477. 47a. II. aSBL 
China, Ccncral Survey ol, 1. 401, 407, 411. 

Sj$-S58; AJv4ncc Tow»rtl CiviJviatinn, 11. 

106; Arretted Development of. I, 71: Bc- 

tinnins of Misnion* in, I, 4fJ. 4'*: Bible 
I'ark m. II, ■& j8. J}, y. Ilible >■ ■ 
Trxlbook, II, 71; Utiotl in. II. AU-ws: 
CtntOTi True Lighi Seminary, i. 97; Cea- 
trml. I, v; Christian Literaluie in. I, jjo, 

II. St. 78; Claims of. II, Jji ; CoBlcreiices 
in, I, >7>i: Co-ajieralion in, I, j6i; £du- 
ckl)onal Work in, II, 119, lyi: Elhical 
and Philosophical Sysieitis of, I. jS^-jgj; 
Evolution oi. I. «J-ss*: Fuchau Angla- 
Chincte CollcKr, I. w; Fukien Province. 
K 97; Oermiin Miaiiuna in. I, 4<5; Ilifh 
Clat»es, II, los; lllileracy lii, II, iW; I.cii- 
ro«y in. II, Mj: Literary Naiinn, II. 69; 
Literature, I, 305; Methtnlii for IlifTcrcm 
ClaMca. II, 8j: Married Mi»*)Ooarie« in, 
1. 3<5-3'6; Medical Work in, I. 543. II. 
IfO-Tq*: Mrdica] Work for Women, II. 
I<||; Medical Training, II. *t3. aaj, JJ9- 
Miiaicia Prc**e*. I. a*S: Minions and the 
Government, 1. 337- >*J '. Missicoary 
Force in, 1, SJ^'M'- Native Work in. It, 
ats, rri, 183; N'ewspapcrs in. I, Sjo; Ob- 



•Uclca. I. t4<i. 359: Opportunity in. II. 
131. 3*6: Ovetl»i>t)inK of Field*. I. r7s: 
Fupulace and the Mitsionary. I. S4J". Re- 



fupuiace ano ine jviKsionary. 1, m*. 'x^' 
form Movement in. I. U9-SSJi Regener*- 
tioa of, I, A<S: Roman Cathulic Methods, 
I, j6s; Self-iupport, II. 309; SUanKhai 
Mtsaionary Conl^treocc. l. ny; Study of 
MiMions in. I, 14^ 14s; & V. M. in, I, 
107; The One Sueeeniuil Thins in. !• S4'- 

China and Japan Compared, I, itj- 

China Inland Miasion. I, 97. S3)''M<i II< 37' ■ 
Blest of God, I. 88. 173, 410: ttrifin and 
Orsaniulion, I, 407. 539; Rules on Mar- 
riage. L iifi. 

Chinese Bible Translation, II. ai. 

Chinese i*et.ple, Chwacier nf. I. mj. S»}- 
S5t; Converts. I, S4S-«7; Home Ufe. II. 
tag; Need of Gospel, I. 90; Religious 
tloctrines ut, I, i$^. 

Choice and Quallfirations ol ULstionartet. 
I, 301-308. 

Christ. Melhod of I'ublishin* Redemption, 
I, 6S, los: Last Hope of World, I. 14; Su' 
preoi* Hatter, I, 79; World Savior. I, 
S6) Recogniii'd in India a« Morally 
Pure, I, S"; Witnesses for. I, 81; The 
Authority and Purpose, I, t*. ?o. 73. 9?; 
Attitude lo False Religions. I. jtt; Sufler- 
inga of. Incentive, I, 80; Center of Mis- 
sions. I, 67, 71, »*. m. iW. XH- 

Clirittendom. Debt to Hrnihen Woeitt. I. 
74; Grievances Aicalntt. I, 3»: *nd China. 
i. 5SS; «nd India. I. 510: Keipontibilily 
foe Slrength nf Heathenism. I, 373- 

Chfiatitn Adherrnls, Motive of. I. S^S- 

Christian and Missionary Alliance. Africa. 

I. 4tJ- 
Chriitian Associations. I. 99. 
Chriitian College. See College- 
Christian Furcei, Sulidariiy of, I. >3- 
Chrislian Home, Influence of. I. jig^ 
ClwisHan Life. Power of, I. 4ij. 



Christian Lttcr«lure. Sec LiletMtirc. 
Christian Literature Society. II. 66: Cluak, 

II, 69; India. II. 47. 7«- 
Christian Mi-muns and Sficiai Prngre n 

II, ija. 

Christia.-i Philanthropy, Influntce ol. IT. 

ijf*. 
Christian Rnlcfs of ooa-Cbrialian Peoplaa. 

I. 431. 

Christian Socialism, I, joi. 
Oiristian Training. See Nati-re Cbrislianv 
Christian Union of United Brclhrcii. I. i.-i 
ChriKtianily. Adaptation to Asiatinv I, 34J. 
Compared with Other Keligion*. I. 371-. 
Educaird Natives of India and. I, siojij. 
Mi^tion.iry Character of, I, 59; S'm tie 
Sole Religion, t, 365; f'oacr ol. in 
Heathen l^nds. I, 3?;. 48;. II, 113; Sqikt- 
natural Element Defcndnl. I. jjn Treisd 
Tuktaid. in rtiina, 1. eji; lu Apol^iy 
far Chrnlendom, I. 350. 
ChriMo-Sotnai. a Sim of Procrcu. II, jjt. 
Chung Ju. Korea. I. 536, 
Chungking Medical Work, I. uj. 
Church. Duly lo Evangelue tbc World at 
Once, I, Q%: Foreign Miasiona Its Ctm- 

i"' XS.'^'^^'' '; r- ?«• 7* ?«. H "■ *»: 
Its UbliAation. 1, 79, ^: Oaetr for Eds- 

calion. Its ()pi«irtunity, It. 131; Kcta> 

tion of Mitsionarv Boards lo It. I, »9; 

Resources and Alembechip, «B-i<w: Br- 

Mronsible for Sirenifth nf iKUm, T, jmi 

Social Oue»tioni. I, hm ; Translation aad 

Distribution of the Bible, II. r-ij; Vnity 

of. I, u- 

Church Building. Korra. II. jo»ja4. 

Church Courts. Snhstiluie for. I. aSy. 

Church Uiaaionary Society, 1, ^t, yj, aa. 
ny 330, 4oa; Centenuy lli^tory. II. 7*; 
Literary Work. I, 155; MeUiral Work. I, 

4<0, II, 310. 

Church, Native, see Native Church. 
Church of England Zciuna Miuiooary So- 
ciety, I, 1+8, 
Church of Rome. See Roman Catholic 
Cburche^. Support of Individiul JJi 

arici t>y, I, lattaz. 

Chute, J- E. Sell-support. II, akt. 
Claims of the Hour, II, 3J9-J47. 
Clarke. E. W., The Station. ir»96- 
Classes for Reading, Counrry. in Korea. IL 

Clough. I- E., Tt^ci-work. II, 43. 

Cofltes, H. H.. II. jM. 

Cobb, Henry N.. Impressions ol th« Coi 
ference, I. 11. yj; II, 37H, 375, jgj_ 

Cochrane, W. W., The Burmaiu, I. 07. 

Coe, E. B., II. 377. 

Coillard. M. F.. I. 174. 

Coley. H^II. n- 

College. Christian. Delhi, II. 104; Trac Ol 
jecl of. II. liy-ijo; Euphiates, 1. 97, 
rounded by Ihifi, I, 97; tiovcmrrieni 
(or, II. i«: JaSna, I. oy- Literary CI 
acrer ol. II, 144: Local Managrmroi oC 

II, 146: Location of. II, 144- Lovedale. 
II. lib: Lucknow Wonun'a, I, 97. Mu 
agcmeiit. Principles ol, II, t43(4^: Uri. 
ico, I, JS7; (or Women, I, 4S5, II. jjyj 
Robert. I, 4$. 'I9: Study <k Mis-tiona to.^ 

I, ip; Standard of. II, t44; Support of, 

II, 1461 Syrian Protestant, I, 97 i Tung 
Chow, I, 97; Turkey, I. 4sa S«c also 
Kducalion. 

Colombia. I, 47S. 

(.'olnnies. German. See Germany, CaloateL 

Coloniiaiinn and MitsionL I. 337. 

Colporteurs. Work of, II. t&, 64: Cbotec 
and Training, II, »Tt>-»7'- 

Ccinity. I, aa-tjj: Argumeoti from K<«d 
of World. I. 368; Co-upctation. 1. aei. ijSi 
with Divergent Convictions. 1, 33^; CcMI- 
omy o(. I, IS': Federation ihf Be^i. I. 
190, 37x: Grosrth of, I. 174: I^ack of. I. 
ajy, 364, Methods of Securing, L xjii 



Jilt 



d 



INDEIC 



4*7 



UiuJonarr Apalosvtics, I, H3: MiMioih 
orjr Confcrtncf-. 1. JJ5. »sr. **». V^l 
Xecdcd 31 tlomc, I, la, 3St- "^S- Nccet- 
aaty In Svlf iu|jpvirl, I, Xii. M4. aA m9: 
U»e of M'p* fui. I, a6i, a66. 

Comiij. Chiraei eristic* of: 
Chriitian. IJ, mi; ihe GoMcn Ral«. 1, 133; 
Eftcimt but HOT Sufficirnt. I. afi: Fnc- 
lion Dot NtcciMTily A^auiiicil. I. 473; 
Neccw*rr LiroiUttioim of, I, ijjijb; nul 
Orstnic Union, 1. J33. jji, J7j: nul Uni' 
(omiitjr. Ii ZJi; I'nncip]?* of. 1, 275, 306: 
Varioui Aip«cta af, 1. 37^-^77; Vcnccfcd 
SelfikhneM. 1, ao?. 

Coniiiy, Practical Application* of, 1, 334, 
*Jt> JTS; at Amov. I, «S6; FurtnoM, I. j£|: 
Japan. I. i^g: rroicrlanl Murom;. 1. 237: 
Bible Work. II, ir; Education. 1, i%7. aw; 
Higher Kducaiiunj 1, 2ja-24]i on Field, I. 
4Jo: in rhoicf oi tirld*, I, t^H; llivitinn of 
Field*, Ij J60. «s: De no tni national Work- 
en on Field. 1, tbj; Medical Mit»ion(, 
1. m-x^: Medical Work. 1, ^63. Native 
Minitirv and Tcaclirrp, I, i|i, 176, Lit- 
erary Work, I, uS-iji. «63. 11, 5>. M 
79; Reciprocity m DiffcrciH Lines, I. 
341. 370: Krlaliuns wilh (he Fcople bl tbc 
Field, 1, 363-16^; KFlatinni with Koman 
Catholic*, I. J65; Wafca <jl Kmplojfcen, 

I, ajo. 

CoDimcRtaricK on Bible. II. 63. 

Commerce, Dclil to Mii'ton^ t, 178; Con- 
tribution to MiKMinns, J.. J36: kclation ol 
the Mitiionary 10. I. irjjaj- 

Comrnctcial Latvcuac^i ol ^rica. I, jn- 

Commercial rrogTCM. Japan, I, U5. 

CoRimilleei o( the Conlerence, ll, 378- A; 
Britith, ir. 375; Formation of, I, ij; l)c' 
voiional Scivlcci. IL jSj: Editorial. 11. 
jBi; Executive, II, 379; Kxhiliit, II. iSi ; 
Finance, 11, jBo; tlcneral. II. 378; Hall. 

II. jSfi; llnopitalily, I, 17, 371); Popular 
Mcclinut*. 1. 18, II. jUt: I'res*, I. 17, IL 
^i; Programme. 1. 11. 15. II. j&j; Sta- 
tistics, If, j8i: ^tudrnts and Yuimv Peo- 
pSc. II, 3S3: Ticket. 1, "H, II, 3B1; Wom- 
an* «■ Work. II. 383, ,1(14- 

Comtnuo-scnHr in divjigg, 1. iSg. 

Community, C,"hri»iian, I'roitrcs* o(, II, iij. 

Coirparative Religinn, Study of, I, JS'-J?'- 

CoDclittons ol Misiionary Labor Afwar' 
Chanjiing, 1, u6, 3^. iji. 

Confedcniiion u( Missionary Scicicties 
LociciUy Kc<iuiiT<l. I, 179. 

Conference between \liB*ionaries Essential. 
L 37^. 971, 368; S/alcm in China, II, jS3 

Canlcrencr? on Mis^tuns, 1, Jbq. ^77; Note 
on I're^-iDUi, I. i?-»j. Sfe Ecumenical 
Cuafereucc; Inter Jcnuminalional Annual. 
of America, 1, 9. 43: Intetdcnominaliunal 
ol HoHand, I. 4J0: Liverpool, 18&0, I. it; 
Liverpool. Students. I. tie; London, 
Uildmay. 1876, I, la: London, Centenary. 
iSBS, 1, aa; London, Students, I, no: 
New York. i8u; .New Yotk, 189^. I, JX. 

Confercncet of Miiiionaries in ihe Ficla, 
I, ^7: BenEal. I. ax: Rombajr, II, 79: 
MeKicu, I, 352J SbatiKl"i- '1- J7- 



l^ck ol a Personal God, II, 331; Nearing 



II. 236; 
iring 
Like 



Confucianism, CharBcter 
l^ck ol a Personal Go 
il» Fnd in China, I, S4S 
to Chriatianilr, I, 35S. 

CangL' Free State. I, 4&s^ India-rubber 
Traffic, I, j68; Unwor Tfamc, 1, 3B3: Lit- 
erary Worle in. 1 1, oa; Trade and lb* 
Nsiive*. II, 81. 

Congregational Churcli. in ZultiUnd. I. 470. 

ConKreaationalism in Mission Orzanixalion, 
I. jHi. 

Conklin. John W.. II. 363. 364: Training in 
Teachina, 11. nS8. 

Conklia. Mrs, J. W.. 11. rfi. 

Conro. Mivs, (.ourtc* of Study, II. 178. 

Consrcrsird CivinK, Need of, L i8o-t86> 

COQiccration, Power of, I. 93. 



ConttanttnoplF, American Collefc for Girls. 
1. 4U: Ceniei of Bible TranslatiDa, II. 
10; Center for Western Asia, II, 44; Falll 
ol. Its Effect. II. ah; PteachinK in 
Greek, I, 456; the Turkish Bible II. 44. 

Consular Couris and Native Chntiiana. I. 
S37 

Consummation of F. M., I, 84. 

Converse. John H., 'fhe Conference, I, ffi 
Abundant Ciiving, I, 178; Individual &fii- 
sionaries, I. iot. 

Convefti. See Native Cbrislians. 

Cook. Mrs. Josepfa. CtUtjini Public Libra- 
ries. L ita. 

Cook, Thomas, Work in Ceylon. It, 116. 

Cooke, Miss, First Single Lady Miiaion- 
ary to India. I. $06. 

Co;operation between Missionary Societies. 
See Comity. 

CorrcU, Irwin H., Encironment and H»ra< 
ol Missionaries. I, jt?; Christian Lilcra- 
lurr. It. 48. 

Cmi ol Misnton* Compared. I, 178, 

Costa Rico, Mission Workers, I, 477. 

Cousins, W. E., Madagascar, I, 47a; Med- 
ical Work. II. 108. 

Covenant of Service. Ecumenical, Need uf, 

I. *i7- 

Craven. Thomas, Christian Literatve, II, 

sa- 
Creolr* in South America. I. 479- 
Criticisroi ul Miwou*. Caretc^s, 1, 331-1)5- 
Ctonkbitc, Mr». L. W., II, 355. 
Ceostiy, E. TheodoiNi, Micronesia, 1. 493. 
Cross. J., II, 174 

Cross River, Africa, Women of. I, J15. 
Cro'Hther. Samuel, I, 404. 
Croiicr, W. N.. 11. 376. 
Culia, Ilibic IVnrk in. II, JO. 
Ciilhrnson. Mrs. I N.. II, JJS- 
Cumberland PresbyterLan Church, Yooai 

Ladies of, I, IJ4. 
Cunningham, A. M., Work for the Blind, 

II. »4J. 



Cunningharo. T. A.. II. 354, 
Curricula in Mission Schools, II. 



171.. 



17». 17* 



Currie. Mrs. W. T., II. 359. 

Cashing. Mrs. J. N.. The Durmans, I. 518. 

Cuyler, Theodore L.. The Drink TrafKc, 

I. 3R4 
Cyril. Inventor of Rusiian Alphabet, II, 13. 
Oatr, J. Fairicj;, The Hcbrtws. I. 443: 

Mrani of Arou»ins laterett in Misfioas. 

I. 131; Train ing-scnool*, II, ijj. 
Daly, Mrs. J. Fairley, German Sysleroa ol 

Training Misiionarics, I. 311, 
Damascui. Eiigntry of, I, 305, 
Uanicls, C. H., Minaiunaries as Rible Trans- 

lators. It, jti; Secular Press. I. 165. 
Uarwin, Charles, On Ihe Language ot the 

Terra del Kuegians. II. A3. 
" Daughtera ol India " School, 11. 137. 
Davidson. Andrew. Mnlical Miaiiona In 

Madagascar, 1, 473. II. 19B, 
Davis, }. W., J I. 361. jM. 376; Populace 

and the Mitiionary in China, I. 541. 
Davis, Margaret C, Manual Training. II. 

iBi. 
Day. David A., Induitrial Work ia Afrka, 
„". 153- . 
DcaCQitcsB, I, 310, 311. 
Ucaring, J. I.,. Christian I-iterature, II, 48; 

Progress in Japan, I, SJj', The Station, 

Dei>l, How to Raiae a. I, 1^, 
Debts of Misiionary Societies, I, 191. 
r>egradrd Womanhood, I. 387-389. 
Delcgaie* to E. C, Forei^. I. *4, II. 395. 
Delhi, Christian College m. It, io«. 
Deliverances from Savages. I. aoB. 
Demands of Coming Century, II, }4D> 
Demararn. German Missions, I, 414. 
De Mcrritt, Mrs. L. A., The MiiiioDMy 
Magaaine. I. 17a. 



469 



INDEX 



D«nonisEn. in turmi, I, its: Lao*, i. jii- 
iJcnatiuiiaiiiiiig. Duivtr erf. I. »90. 4SJ; lit- 

Hrnlisl, I, 4U1. 
Dtrnmark, S. V. M. in. I. 111. 
UcnnU. jam^D S.. Abstract of C'enlennikl 

SlBtiitic*. I, 4^; Htiptt* hi PrcrtHt*nt 

Mission SchooU, II. i6d. 
Driinttiinatiun. RcUliwA of Mi«iiaiUT]r So- 

ciriy 10. I, jjo-ajj. 
l>(;nominBlionBl Boards, Knrina ol, 1. un- 

DcnomioBlioiul L'nion. I. >J4, 
DenonnnalionBlisin a Hindrance, 1, ^M-3j6; 

Dcsiralilc. II. J8;; Su[ipTciied by Foreign 

MinKions, I. ^ll^. 
Depoic, Scmmnry ol. Java, I, 418. 
IJcpuUlions. Misiioniiry, I, uS. 
Ilrtrnit ^ubtk Library, I. 143. 
D«va», The. Cnn(r»ivn u( Piulb, 11. Jj8- 
Ueretopmeni ol Native Workers. See Na- 
il ire Worker*. 
Devolional E)icTci»eii at Conlercncc. I. rf- 
llrwey. Prof., Object -Icfiiom in Teachinc< 

11, 177- 
Diplomacy and Missions, [. 3^. JJ?'- I^e 

lation ol the Missionary to, 1, J=5JM- 
Iliici|iline, AdiniMLon and. Nativr 

Chiirchr*. Sre Nalivr Churchrt- 
Di»(>rnMrics and HcMpitais, II, aio-aiS; Re- 

liKiom TcKtiing in. II, »3; Palcitine. 

i, 446. Sec aUa Medical Miffiom. 
DiMatiifaction willi Present Methods «» to 

Comity. I. ITS. , , _„ , 

iJwtribution snd Translation of Ihe Bible. 

11, 7-is. 
Ditnwrs. Dr.. II, 37?- .,, . , - 

Divine InteriHiaition* in Mii*ion», 1, 37^- 
Diviiion of Kidil*, Sec Cutiiity. , . 

Dixon, A. C, Mi><^ion« and non-Cbn*tian 

ReliniolU, I. 364. __ , . ., 

Dnine, W. C, Th« Claim* of the Hour. 

11, 3J>- 
Dcbhin*, I, v.. U, 376. 
Uv.ii(re. D. SiMBrr. XtissJon College Man- 



iiKciyient. 11. ij:^ 



Nt» York and the 



IMdfce, \^'iUlam 

C'finlerfncc. 1. 11. 
Dod». Krv- Marcos. On Biiddhi»ni. 1, ?»- 
rJod»on. W. 1'., II, as7- 
l>oKi>i3, Deference in, I, J74- . 

Uumc^lic and Foreign Ktiwioruu-y SociMy 

ol the Proirtlam Epiicop»l Church, 1, 

401. 
Dominican Kcpuhlic. Ncslcct of Minion 

Work in. I, 4;7. „ , „, . 

Dorrmua, Mri-. Fir« Wotnan « MwMojttcy 

Sut-it'iy, 1. 114. 31&. 
DoihiKha, lite, Japan. I, 07. 
Onuglat, A1uVa. V'ork ol tbe Frieod*. I. 

489. 
Oouglu. M., II. 37<^- 
Dnvragcr KniprcKx and Kef arm in Chioa. 

I. MJi. 
Dowkonti, G. D,, II. jT,^ 
Downic. v.. 11. 356. 

Drees, Charles \V,, Kucnoi Ayret, I, 48J. 
Drink Traffic, an anti-Clmsiian Force. I, 

jBi-387. 4Q6; and Ibc United Stale*. 1. 

Drummond. Henry, Leader of S, V, U, in 

Kdinburcn, I, 109. 
Dudley. Btshop T. W.. II, 3*3- 
DuR, Alexaitder, At the Conference of iSs*. 

I, iq; Fdiicaiiun lor Women, 11. ij9: 
Means cf EvangcliraiioTi, !. 76; Upper 
Claim in India, I. 405: Keflex Aesinn ol 
MifKion*. II. 3»yL 

DulTerin Acxncuttion in India. II, ui, 
Uufferin. Lady. FducatDinal Work in India, 

II, "37 
Duncai). H. C, On Duty of Parenla. 1. mo; 

Ihr .S, v. M.. I, i<^. 
Dnnmn, Jessie, Work for Women, II, flff. 
Duncan, S. W., Urganiialion of Ihe Con- 

(efcncc, I, 11. 




I.tiiplicnlion of Adniintctratioa, 1, U$. 

Dnrilicntion of Forcen (Comity). I, agf, 

Dutfce, Mi»» S. C, II, 361. 

Uutch Guiana. I. 483. 

Dutch Mi»*ions. Sec N'ctlicrluida Hi 

.iry Sucielic*. 
Ptiteh Rrfonticd CViurch in Ainof, I, jtt. 
Dwiffhi. H. O.. Cliri^tian Liieraiurr. It, bo. 
li^arlr Mt*Mlon« al the Century, I. 40*. 
t^sl India Comfkany. I. ^li ChapUins af. 

I, 40J; Oppofiition to Stiisiom. I. yfi. 
Fsit Indian Company (Dutch). I, 417. 
East Indies. Dutdi MiBsiona in. I, 4J0. 
Katlern CUurch. 1. 43$. 439. 449, 453. tit 

Easton. Miti. Christian Literatare, II. 73. 

Eaton. T. T., 11. 359^ ■ 

" Econoinical " Conference, Ihe. I, aji. 

Economies, I, jjj, 3^1, See (.ofnity; Ad- 
ministration; S<lf-<upport; The i^i.ittuo. 

Ecuador. Power ol Home Br<Aen in. I, «j<. 

Ecumenical Confederal] on. An Ideal. I. 179. 

Eciimi-nicol Conlerence, Ausj.iciniis Tiinr 
for, I. ji : Conquest by, I. i^ij; Dcraorutra- 
tiun ol L'nily. I, j^ 34; Liicci ol on Biui- 
nr*» World. 1, m: Farenrcll MeetitiK, I, S'" 
id; Infliienc-c of, I. 61; Meaning 01, 1. la, 
ui Mcmb<:ribip of, l,2S;N&rrative of Tre- 
Timinarv U'uik, 1, lo-u; National Wcl- 
come. I, jS; Necessity ol. I, 9; Opening 
Seiaion of, i, si; Organiiation of, I, t%; 
16: Origin of, 1, <>-jj: Power of, I, to; 
Flayer for Bksiing on, I, u; Prcparatioci 
for. 1. 10; tMr]x>»c of. I. ij. t^. Kc^Hlar 
Seui^ns of, 1, y; Scour and Si){nificance 
of, I, 40-64; .Spireial Ueelings. I, a|-4B: 
Spiritual Power in, I. 4g; SiinmBrv w 
Programme. 1, S", S'- 

F,ddy, IJ. Brewer, Consecrated Ciring, L 
i8u 

Eddy, Mary Pienon. Medical UissJom^ II. 
»o3- 

Edtsja. the "Oxford of the Eajt." U. lo^ 11. 

Edinbursh Bitilc society, ll. J7- 

Kdintfurgti, Sludeikl \'ulutilccr Work in, I. 

l-jjiiorial Committee. II, 3S1. 

Edmonds. W. J.. II. 3V>. 365; Christian Li^ 
eratufc in EvatiKclualion. II. jK; Chur^ 
and the Translation and Drstribnlion at 
the Bible, 11. 7: KxiH-rirnet and Bible 
Tranilaiion. II, ti; Modern Bible Work. 

II. is: V 
educated 1 

I. Jio-si] 



11, J4: 

II, ij: Words ol Farewell. L 51. 
F.diicaicd Natives of India and Cltrisliaaily 



:i% 



Educated Womanhood, Power ol, n. iji. 
.133. 



Education, in Africa. 1, 417, 458, 4^9. tl. 
»5, '$^ t^s: in South America, II. ijd; 
in China, I. sjB-ss* H. us. "9. '3c: in 



jd; 
, ,, . '■ 5jB-55tJ. if. IIS. "9. 130: 
India, 1, ^BJ. 503, S09, S'l. II. 7;. 1*1. 
'J'lS'i >n Japan. 1. 5J6.534: la Korea. 
ijfi. 53?: "> iiyria, 1, 440; In Tnrkey, 1. 
4SO. iS*. .155: *ee College; Theological, 
see N,ilivc Workers; ftlrdical. »ce Med- 
ical Tminin^: Kindergunen. II. j»j; 
Industrial. II. 147-1S7. 179; Elemmt- 
■T}-. I], ui; HiBher. I. 405. 4S5. II. uj- 
ll^: Training-schiols. II, 145-1*7. I, «m, 
j-yi; \n Evangclsiic Agency, f, ^t. 
40s, 4jl'. II, tiai46; Projtress ol Conrent 
in. I, 411; Cotnilv in. I. J30-443, afct IL 
118-M5; f*elative \'alites in, II, ijj; Uie 
of Engliih in, 11, itj, 13-. 140, 145; Suptt^ 
Mition Crushed by It. I, 43(8. 11, 119; New 

Melhnilq, II. [67.187, 

Educational Dcparlmenl, S. V. M„ I, %<A, 



in; in Brtt.iin, I, 110, 1 
Iducal 

74-7*- 



Educat tonal Literature, 



;■«; 



4SM7. ja. to. 



Educational Campaign on MissJeWk t, iis, 

133- 
Edwardes, tlrrhert. On .MivsJoa* In Ifldi*. 

I. 407. 



ma. 



INDEX 



469 



Edward*, Jonathan, Infucncc lor Mis- 
sions, II. jtij. 
Eeirpi. H. 356. I. 4JS-439: Asyut Colleec 

I. 97; Early Missioturr LUc oi, U, u: 
Oppurlunitiv* in, 11, jja. 

KI Arlur Src Al Ailiar. 
Ekctroiypins in MisMon Field*, 11, M. 
lilcmcniary SchooU. Power of, II. to, tij. 

iji, li*- Stt Scliools. 
Eliot. IV».. Mantiol TrainiRK for MUiil 

Cullurr, II, 184. 
Kllic; I'iBndii, I, 401. 
Ellinwood, F. F., II. i%y St. 37?: Londnn 

Ccnicnary Conrcrencc l7 ^; Cooiiii- in 

Higher Educatiun, 1, J39; SsK-aupporT, 

II, jji. 

Elliot, Charles, Mi**i<wiaric* in India. II. 
3371 TrogreM of MiMtont in India, I, 

EfliS'l. H. R.. II. m8. 

KIIi«. A. Caiwcll, Keligioua TTaioIng and 

PedaROKy. II, ijr. 
Kmperor of Chmn and the Rible, I, M9- 
Enftliih L&n(uji(r in Mluion Scliool*. II. 

iij. tJh '*^- MJ 
Eniiiinh Preshytfrian Mtuioni. See Pre»by- 

lerian Church in EnaUnd 
Enoch l*nilt Free Library. BahiinQre, I, 

i6j. 
Hntertainmetili, Muisionar}', 1. 141. 
F.nvir^nment and the Muiionary. I, 317* 

Sit- 
Epworth LcoBUe. t, ijq. 
ErhaiJi. Chrisllan. VWtt Uiialoaary to 

r..-ihr:<lor, I. j*',-. 
Krhnrt. ('iri> graphical Work on Africa. I. Jjo. 
Eikirao. Mi>rnviar Work among, I, jfij, 

■^ 
Katimalci for Alt&&ion Expeiue, Prcpiirs- 

linn tif. I, di6. 
Ethical «nd Philo«o|ibical Sy*teB>» of Cliina 

and Ja[*un. I. J^J4J- 
Ethic*. Christian. Adopted by EsKnllal 

He.->lhi-iiiini, I. 4U. 
Ethit^pian Mnvcmml, South Africa. I. 4^ 
Europe. Not a Foreign Mtiiion Field, I. 

Eiinnwan Conimuniiic* in Mission Landi, 
InHiicnce ut, 11, jttt. 

EvnnKrlinl Chriitiant, Example of. Sec 
Examcrle 

Kvannefical Society of Pari*, 1, AT*- 

Evun^lc(i^l. Tlic. I], 106-111; The Phyiicwn 
■1. 11. ilW-tgs; Thi- Tracher as, 11, nS-i^i. 

Evangcli»t». N»ttvc. Si-i- Nfttive Workers, 

EvangeK^tie ;\grf!cir«, Kilucaimtt. li. lu- 
146; Literature, II, JJ-fiJ; Meilicjl MLv 
•lOB*. II. joo, x^: Personal U'ltrk. II. 
«. hi; PhiLinlhrupy, II, jjo-ajo, 

Eraogeliilic Work. 11, 3S»: Characler of. 
II, iid; Dtfiicultict in, It. f^: m lli^b 
Catim, II, luj 505; Native Anency itj, 
II. j6o: Sciciitifie KcKareh. 1. 3*>; Sell- 
■upport in. M. 360: Woman'*. IL JW- 
ia Afriea. I, 461. 471; '" Jap»n. Ii S^- 53^- 
in Turkey. I. asi- 

Evani^elitatiati. Means of. I. 7^; not Con- 
version, I , ini ; t Irgini^alion of, I. irp; 
of World. iVf^ned. I. 9^: of World in 
lliL.1 riencraiion. I. of-ioj. 

|-:«e1cih, F. H.. The nurmani. I, sis- 

Eveleih. Mr»- F H . IT, jfi. 

Kvolul'itn in Missfooarv (living. I, io<5 

EvlU. Pariiculur, in N.itive Cliurches. IL 

J7T-^3- 
Ewbank. A.. Tlie Native Church. If, rfW: 

Co-opt r. It ion. 1. 3u; Soutl) AraericoD 

MiMionary Society. 1. 4SJ, 
Ewirg, A. H., Minriuiim, I, jgg: N'jilive 

Worker* and the MiMtoDiry, II. m; Self- 

^uppo^. II, 317. 
E»ample. Power o^. I, 4J9. II. J65. 
Exeter Book, The, l|, jj. 
Exhibit, The MiMsaiwry. I, ifi. 



K:ihibit«, MisstoRary, and Book Salei. I, 

■ S7- 
l'xi>ericncc and Hiblc Tranilatioo, II, n-3&. 
Exploration. Missionary, I. 3^. IK 106. 
ExuretMtun and Itnprnitions in Teaching, 

11, iTfriJto. 
PabrfpluN, Bible Translation. II. 16. 
Fiith Millions, I. in. 
Faiih. Mottoes of, I. 9$. 
Falconer, Keith. Spirit of, 1. 171, 4j^. 
Famine, an EvangeLisilc .^Bency. Tl. ajp; 

in India. II, Jji. Jjf,; K^icf. I. 48. II, 

14^ I»0. 331. 

Farewell Meeting of the Conference, I, 51- 

St- 
Fcarn, Mrs. A. W., If, jfj. jCs. 

Fed;r.ition ir Mi->ioti U ork. See Comlly, 

Fees for Instruction. II, loa 

Feci in Medical Work, II, J04. :ii, >i], jDS- 

Fellow ■«' or ken Uniun, The, J. ij4. 

Female Mitmonary Society □( the American 
JU. F„ ChtircJi, t, ji-fK 

Fetich Rcligtnni and Their Trealment. I, 
^: in South Araerica. I. 477. 

Pirlj. A Misqiun. I, tjR, l^f. 

Fiji Jilanils. I, 97, 492. 

Financial Management of Boards. I. itx, 

Findtay. W. II,. II. ^, 363: The Confer- 
ence, I. j8: Adminulrirtion of ihe Mia* 
4ian, I, rn; Native Church, II, jRs- 

Finland, S, \'. M. in, I. iii. 

Fllckinger. D. K.. II. JS7- 

Fliediier a Syslcm of Inining Deaconcucii. 

I. jii. 

Foochoi*. See Fiichau. 

FoDT-hinding, II. 191. Ai. 

Foreign Dcrc^tcs. Farewell for, I, Si. 

Foreign Mi»llun^. Se« .Mi«*iDns. 

Foreign OpprcHsom, Africa. 1, 467-461^ 

Porcien Societie*. l>clcg«tei of. t, ^5. 

I'iireign Training for Converts. Sec Tr«in- 

tng. 
Foreigner*. Religion of, in Durnu. I, 517- 
Formon Cluislinn Lulleitr, India. I. IM. 
Forntnu. I. uji Cuiniiir in, I. ^4; noltve 

Work, II. iSi; Srlfnuppnrt. II. agiH, mo. 
Forsyth. Mrs. 11. IL. It. 3J0. 
Fort Wrangel, Presbyterian .Uiiskin at, I, 

409- 
Foster, Henry, UcoIUi of UiMJonary, 1, 

JU. 

Fonrah Ray College, I, j<u. 

Fox. John. The Itible in Mission*. IL 39. 

France in China, 1. ip; in .Madagoacar. 

L «7j; Protection ol ConTcrta. I, jjj, Jn; 

VVe*i InUicii, I. «-K. 
Frsncia, Mrt J M.. II, 3Si>, 
Free Church College, MaJrat, I. 405. 
Friends' Foreign MifMoo .\<Mji:iatiwn, Dan- 

3er» In Convert* in. India, II, j&i ; In- 
uitrial Wt-rk. II. isa. Sec aLsu Amer- 
ican Friends. 

Frisbic, Mm. A. 1„, II, 359, 

Froehel, 1, 110. II. i»j. 

Frohnmy'er. L J.. Case) Induslml Hit- 
sions. ri, 157, 

Fry. Edwin Sorgoott, II, 357; Medical 
Training of Native-., II. Ji8. 

Ftjr, H. W.. Indian Mission Tt»duMries. 

II, ISO. 

Fuchau. Angto^lhuicsc College. I, w; Sclf- 

mpport, n. 131,- Xlcdical n'ork, II, am; 

MiMion Press al. I, at8. 
Fukien. I. 551. 

Fuller, A. C, The Station. I, jm. 
FtindSf Administration of, I, xti Casta of 

Raiting, I. t^; Foreign Une of. See Self- 

»wppori, 
(■Alilce. Mis^inn lln^pttal in, )I, ji«, 
((Mlpin. FrrdcncV. Native Churclie*. if, 173. 
Garrison. I. II. , Co-oprrali<in. I. JSi- 
Gary. Emma, Misimaary Meetings. I. 141. 
liaut. Mrv j. M.. Arnuaing Intrrecl. I, IJI, 
f^tcddie. John, Anriteum, I, 491. 
General Survey of the FicM: 1, 401*433. 



470 



INDEX 



Gti)«ratlon, Prc»«nt Duty to, I, ^-■I'l- 
CtogTiohy, Contribution to UtMions. 1. 

3Jt>. MiMiooary, I. ibt. 
GcogranhiCAl Sucictiri., Aid to Minions, I, 

loo; Aid ■>! Missianarics to, l< J^ i'9- 
CeoTgc Mrs. L. O.. Training ^itemi. I. 

Gcrbcrding. G. H., II. jrb. 

(rrrmani, I. gy; in Minion Work. I. 4IJ- 

iiA; Comity, I , tj^ ; Conlerrnce^ al 
treiiien. I, 397; Mtdicat Mimont, I, 
4I4: MLssionarr Methods, I. Mthjoo; So- 
cielie*., I, aii, ^5; Syitcnis al Trainins. 
L 311-Jii; in Drnifrarii. 1, 414*. lUbie 
Tnnitation. II. j: Pohiiion of Mi«"inn» 
in. I, 4i6; S. V. M. in. I. 111: " Inncf 
MU>iun." 1, 41*; Work tor Colonic*. I. 
4i5i in South Airica, 1, Km. 4''&; in Su- 
matra, I. jji ; rhrory pi SlisMoti*, I, ^u. 

Giffen. JoHn, Egypt. 1, 4JO' 

Gilbert. F. M.. S. V. M. in Yale. I. iij. 

Gilbert Iklandt. X. 4ui. 491. 

Giltnan. Kdward W.. Bible Work, II. S3. 

Gilmour, James, I. r?^. 

Civao, VV.. Fouitil* L^ivediile. II. us. 

Givins, I, ijb, 175. ivti, Uutinctt Methods 
in, r, 1^19!; Alivtniinnt, 1. i;j-ido; Cchm- 
<r»wd. I. t6o-iS6; The Civer a Force 
U«ed by God, I^ a?}); to Irresponsible 



Partirt. I. jiji bp«a^l Appeals. I. igi- 
■9^: Syntematic I, 186-1001 Taugbt by 
Mlttinrtii, I, 4x6; A Teat. I. 464. Sec In- 
dividual Churches: also Support 
dividual Mikninnariv*. 
G[aTy KinJereulen." II. i*t- 
Go.'' Force of Word, I. 60. 
od. Source of Power, I. 68: Hia 



dividual Churches: also Support oi In 
dividual Mikninnariv*. 

Cod,' Source of Power,' l. f&: Hi* Favor 
Shawn Miwion*. I. 1^ tl. 32$- 

Gold Coast, Airica. 1. 465. 

Gorrian. M. L., Persunal Work for SooU. 
II. 101 

Coipel. Adaptability- of. 1. 71. 7*. S*; Inu"- 
enci of, I, ;t^ 91. 416, II, qj; Mnnnrr ol 
PreamlinK. It. 8s-u4. 97. 107. *» 

Goapel Extension CiicuUtitiK Library. 1, 

Co»incr Mi»«JotL t, 0?. 411. 

Gouchrr. J. F.. 11. 367: Iligbec Equation. 
II. ■4<- 

Govemment Editcalion. 1 1, 65, lai ; The 
Bible. II. 31; College*, H. 1+4. i«; Kin- 
dcrgartenk, II. t^; an<l Mtdtcol School*. 
II, m; in Cbira, II. iji; in India. II. 
7J. 77. mi Number of Studeiita in India, 
11. 6s. 

Gov«riimenti and Miasion*. Pretenl Prob- 
lems. 1, 9T, jj8. 3Ji. 33S'J^*- *!-■ ^'- ^"7' 
508, jn: Mission Itoards. I. jio; Litera- 
ture of Mi»Mor«. tl, 18; RiRbift of Mil- 
siunaries. I. jaS. J44; Native Convert*. 1, 
437. 3A*'- >«i '■-'^•■i Imlie*. I, 417; FormoM. 
I, SJ4: Msdniiftscar. I, 473; Persia. I. 4^- 
South America, I, 477; Turkey. 1, 4Si. 

Grace, Wat*on. Indu*tri.il Education, II, 
■St. 

Grsaey, I. T., The Conference. I. ij. s6. 

Graccy. Mr*. J. T,. II, J67; Missionarv Lit- 
erature. I. isj: Systematic Study of Mis- 
■icrtis. 1. 147. 

Grant, William Hsnrjr, Sclf-*tipport. II. 
111; F-ducaiiniml Miiiionarie*. II. 1271 
The Station, I, jgi 

CraybilU A. T.. Menico. I, 4*1; Apologetic 
Problems. 1. 37T. 

Great Britain. Ilible Translation. It. 7; 
Mininnnry Pcrioibcals. I. 166; ihc Drink 
Traffic. I. j.^1 jB?: S, V. M. in. I, io6. 

Greek Evatyrelicftl I'nion. I, ijfi. 

Greeks o! Turkey. The, I, 4SS-4S*- 

Greene, F. D., Tl, 376. 

Greenland and Moravian ^^ ork, I. jjra, m. 

Greer. David H., Reflex Influente ol Mis- 
sions. I. ao], 

GrIIEtht. Miu M. B.. Educational Pn>b- 
lema, Japan. I, 531. 



Grubb, D B., Indiana of South America, 
I. 460; Tbe Misaiooary and Sciaacc. I, 

Guam, Work in. I, 49s- 

Guarani LanKuase, I, cA 

Gnatemala. f, 476. 477. 

Guiana, tlutch. I. ui. 48J. 

Guianes*. H.. II. 357. ra, ^63; Xeed of tbe 
World, I, a68: Foreign Oppreasors, Africa, 
I. 167. 

(•uiurathi. Literature for the Blind. II, 15. 

Guiick, Mr*. A. G.. II. JS9. 3E6. j(i& 

tiulitk. C). H.. Hawaii, T. 49a. 

HKckc-lf, H. M. M.. Native Worken ftfid 
the .Mi»«icinary. II, jji. 

Haggard. F. P., H. jjs- Comity. I. 3J&. 

Hall. Charles Cuthbert. JI. 356; Young Mco 
of Future Ministry, I, 14S. 

Hall, Gordon, Appeal of. I. iiu; " Fir»t 
Book for Children." II. 66. 

Ilsllara. E. C. B.. Native Christian Char- 
acter, I. SI3. 

lialkry, A. W.. MiuiotMry Lileralurv, I, 
171. 

llnm. C. II., Manual Training, II. iB<. 

II.-tmilloii. }. Taylor. Aborigines of North 
America, I, 4!^; Moravian .Uiuiaiu, 1, 
4"- 

Ilamlin, Cyrufc, Robert CoHeKr. I, 450. 

lUnkow. China, Scotch Bible Society Preia 
at. I. i*8. II, 18; P. E Mission at. I. ab. 

Harem. Womrn of, I, »88. 

Harford-tlaitcrtb^. C. F., II. jt*; Aoirri- 
^n Staziit* u> Africa, I, 471; Drink 
Traffic. 1. ji*j; Hralih of the Missioiury. 
1, jji; Medical Mit<ionane>. II, xrj. 

HargTovc. Mr», T. B.. Arousing InteresI 
in .V1i<i«iun». I, 1J5. 

Ilariju-ol. Sclf-suapurt in, II, aji. 

Harris. Aleck. Work in Airic.i. II, IS4. 

Harrison, Itcn;amin, Miiiioiiary a* Pioneer, 
1, 3fy; opcntng iiJdre»», I, jfi; Responae 
by, I. *j; Word* of Farewell. I, jj. 

Harrison, W. B., Korea, I, t]6. 

Hart. S. G.. Egypt, I. 4JB. 

Ilanranfl. C. [).. Misaioma, Social FVor 
ress, and Peace, I. 347. 

Ha«ey. T. M, it. £1 

Haskell, E. B.. Native Worker*. Tl al*. 

Ila«4cllinc Ilausc, Newton Centre, Macs., 
I, J09. 

Hnven. Ji-ni, Crrrnl.ind, I. 468. 

HaviUnd, Mrv E. H., II, j/b*. 

Hawaii, Anictic.^n Board in. I, aj6. 493; 
Evotuiion of, I, 401, 4m: Influence on 
Japan and ( nina, 1, 443. 

Hawaiian l-vangclical A»>ocia(ion in MicT«- 
netia. I, 44J. 

Hawley. Mis* F. B.. IJ. j66. 

Haye., T. N., II. 355. 

Haxtard. Mis* C.. 11. 350. 

Hcadluiitl. I. T.. Sell support, II, 313. 

Heiilth al the Miisinnnrv. I, ui-j^i. 

Ilraihen, Clojms and S'ecd. 1, 90. II, jj8; 
Flcments of Truth in Tlieir Belief. I, 
1^7. 39^, II. W: Evan^elitinR the High 
Cailci, II, iQj-iojjExccnive Respect Paid 
Their Hrligiun, I.Jfj; InflucrKC 00 Mi»- 
«iDnarie4, I. jiS: Their Horror ot Death. 
I. 90; Their Religious Ri:liels. I. jsB-jfij, 
377; Superstitions. 11. 119; Transforma- 
linn of, II. (54, See non-Christian Reli- 
(ti'ins. t'se ol Them As Teacher*. II, flj, 

llebrcwa. The, L 443-449: Their Claims on 
Christen dom, [. 446: Their CerrnoiUal 
Not Forbidden by Chritl. 1. 447; Coo- 
venionn. I, nt; Their Ntimber. II, jjS; 
tlieir fncrrase, I, 443; Their Impomoce 
to the World, I. stto. 441. 

Hemrl-en-Aarde, Moravian Mission for 
Lepers. II. a47. 

Hemphill, C. R . IL gSB. 

Hcndrix. E. R, Authority and PuivOK 
of F. M,. I, 73, ^ ' 4— * 



INDEX 



471 



Hepburn, J. C. 11. 35*, 373; Cbosco by God 
(or Hit Work, II, jjg. 

Mcrnunnsburs Mitsicn, I, 41 j. 

Ilibb*. H. H., The Conference. 1. jS. 

Uiub Cute Hiadus, Evuigcluiag, II, loj- 
1*5. 

BiBiicr Education. See Education. 

Hm, Mr^ J. L; II, j6i. 

BinijtiUni (tee Urahmauiism). I, 397-400; 
Compared with Chri»liaiiiiy. I, jtd', 
Deinuratitititf 'icndcDcy. 1. XXi- S>>J- •!■ 
jKj. ^>i Litrraturc nf, II, 41; Overcome 
br Oo«pel, II, 63, 3^; UndeTinincd by 
Education, II. 141. fiee India. 

Hiailus, Christian Lilcrature for. Hi 77. Boi 
Contempt tat Labor, II, 147. I'SJi Copyios 
Christifin Methods, II, 6j; Vvomrn and 
Work for Them, I, jf?. j«8, 50J. jt*. 3"fl. 
I], gq. 190, jjc, 3}if. Kit.: TeMimotrjf to 
Cliri.itianilv, I, juj, $su; DcfcDie of Thctr 
KeliRK'n. El, ftj: Siudv nf Their Litera- 
ture. I. .jojf Social Reiormcr*, I, jjj. 

History o( Minion*. Stndy of, I. aoi. 

Holland, Firct iii Furcign KliuLOU Work, I, 
417- Sf^ Ncihrrlarini. 

Jlolmct. G. \V., II, J74. 
lolmcs. Miss M. C, Syrii. I, 441. 
Hilly 8i>irit, Ekscnlial lu the .Mitiioaary. 
I. J°i> Jio, l^it II, 88, iiu; in lliritury of 
Mistiont. 1. i;j. I?4- Sec Source of 
Power. 
Hume, The. an Educational Institution, II, 
179; and Environment ui Mi»Bionarie>. I. 
17-jji : Gift of MiHiinni la non-ChriMiaDs 
, 457; Influence, I, no, jw; Life in 
China. II. 19J. 
Hrme ChurciL, Incrtate of Local Need*. I. 

*J7. 
Home WorW for Foreign Mi»si«n.i. Sec 
Ciiving; aUo MiMiotiary Idea, lit Culture 
.11 Honie. 
Honglcong. I. M. S. Sution at, I. a&a: 

Scif-iuppon in, II, jiz. 
Honorary .Meralier* of E, C, 11^417. 



i: 



Ho«hao«bad Induilrial Work, II. lU. 

Hosaitais antt OisjicnKarict, I, 457, II, ai<^ 
ati, us: Canii>ciitiiin of, I. tiSi Comity 
in. I, ais; Mnhnd>, I, 446, II, au-jia 
Training of the SuiT. fl, wj; Preichera 
tor, II, ai4; R«lai:oii> to Million. I. J46. 
II, 110, jji. Ser Mirdical Misiiioas. 

HolchkiM. W. K,, ir. ^. 

Hotirntott. in South Afnoi, I. 4W, 

Hough, S. S.. Interett in Mitnions. I. ijg- 

Howr, Miiit A. U. KictdrrgBTten in Japan, 
II. tt^. 

Hulben, H. W., Chriitiaii Literature, II, 

Hunan. China, I, ur, uo, II, 69. 
Hunter, Wiliiftm. Hinduism. I, J9&. 
Huntin^on, \\ illiarn II.. II. 3JfS, j7s: Ecu- 

mcnicily of the Confcfrncc, I, 10: Mi»- 

stuns. Sucial I'Tugrnx. and Peace. I, 355. 
Hurst, John K., The Philippines. I, 496. 
HnnoB. M. H.. II. ^j; Arahta> I, ^35; The 

Society and the Mistionarieit. I. 130. 
Hrtnn-books foi Missionary Mectingi. I, 

e6i. 
iKaaraaee on Mlsiiont. I. tvj, 160. 
Mlileracf in non-Christian Lands, II. iSB. 
Illuiiiations of Misiion Work. Sec Anec- 

d<ilei. 
[IhiitTatiqn*, Pnwrr of, II. %j. 
ImprrtMon* ol the Conference, I, 56-58- 
Impremion. Uclalion to Expt^ssloD. 11, 

ITtrlSO. 

Incentive to Missions. I. 80, ttH. 
Incidental Kelationt of th« Uisiionary. I. 

Indemnity for Uitsinn Losses, f, 33A. 

iDderendem Churches, I. tot; Missionaries. 
I, 313. iT9'- Missions, I, 189; Native Work- 
ers, II, 371, 37^ 

India, I. 97: General Surver. I, 5qi-U4. II> 
j6j; .\dT»nc« Toward Ctvilixalioo. II. 107: 



Oible Translalors, II, 63; Bonds UnhinK 
with Christendom, I. y>9, 510; Christian 
Colleges, II. i(V|. 137, 141; Colponage. II, 
»rc'. Co-operaiion, I, j6o; Diatrent 
Ciassct. II. 8<; Divcraily ol Race, Lan- 
guage, and Heltgi'un, I, soi; Educated Na- 
tive* and Chnttianviy, 1, jio-jij, 11, 73. 
331; Famines, II, ^1: forward Move- 
ment. I, 406; German Missicns. I, 41$; 
Government and ULssiuns, I, 33S; High 
Cattes, II, 103-104; Illiteracy in, II, iHt; 
Indirtci ErTect of Chriiiianity, II. 3j8; 
InduitriaJ Education in, II, 147, 1811 In- 
dustrial Missions in. II. 157-164: Itinerat- 
ing in, II, tab; " Lecture Mcelmes " 
Among nan-Christian Women. II, 96; 
Leprosy in. It, 343: Literature, Chris- 
tian, for, II, 41. 4'. 47. ii. &$. 77t Sc^ 83, 
II, tSi. Married Missionaries, t, 314; 
Medical Work, It, 1B9, loj, 103, itt; Mis- 
sion l*rcs%es, II, SI 1 Mohammedan 
Prcsiet, II, 7j; Native Chntlian* of, t, 
S'3- n> >*!• 38e; Normal Education. II, 
170; Particular Evils in Native Cliurches, 
II, aSi; Needs nf, I, (76; Opportunity in, 
n, 346: Outline Study 01. I, 144. ■•IS, >u: 
Religious Condition of. I, 308,. Self-sup- 
port in. II, 3JI-JJJ; Social Life ol, I. s'"! 
S. V. M., I, laj; Widowi o(, II. i*-243; 
Woman's Wort in, 1, 9*. liT. S06. SM". 
II. 131, 104; Universities. I, jii: Ziegen- 
balg Ueginx Bible Work, It, ttt. Sc« 
DruiRiAni^ni; see Hinduism: see Hindus. 
" Indian Mission Industries, Liiniled," II, 

Inoians. Uniicd Sutcs, Work Among, I, 
4oi British Columbia, 1, 46^ 4'^S- StouK, 
Tlieodorc Roosevelt on, I. 4o; of South 
Amenca, I, tp, 480-4B4; Transformation 
of, I, 4ft; Work Among, I, 488. 

Indifferent. How to Reach the, I, loc 

Individual Churches, Support of Mission- 
aries by, I. ]ii6, t?*-!?!^. I9j-«a». 410- 

Indore, College at, II, tsl. 

Indnstrial Commission, Operationa of, II, 
tcS-160. 

Industrial Education. II, 147-167, 369: (or 
Children, II, 186' Civiiiiing Power ol. It, 
153: Comparrd, II, 179. "Br; Opportunity 
for, II. i^i-iti;;: of Orphans. II. 152. Se« 
Manual Tiaining: ace School. 

Industrial Missions. II, ijj, IS3. i57-i^ 

Induiirial Minions Aid Society, II, 153. 

Informed Church a Transformed Church, I, 

153- 

Inlanticide. I. 333. 

Ingle, J. A., Native Church, II, rfj. 

" Innrr MisMon" in llennany, I, ^ifi. 

Inquirers, How Deal with, II. loi. 

Iniililiitiiinal Chrittiantly, ], 73. 

Institutional Work in Mission Field, II, 

J158. 
Intclleclual Heathenisms, I. 147. 
Intelligent Christians. Need of, I. 196- 
Intercollegiate MnTemrnt in Uritain, I. 109; 

V. M. C. A. in Japan. I. jj6: Young 

Women's Association. Relation to the 

SluOent Volunteer Movement. I, lOJ. 
Inlerdenominaiional Conference at New 

York. St Cfinfrrences. 
Interdenominational Jealousies. I, sjj; MuI- 

tipticaiion of Organiiationt. I, isj; Study 

of Missions. I. 13s, 143. 
Interest in Miwonv. Sec Missionarr Idea, 

Culture of. 
International Missionan' Union. I. 9. 
Irresponsible Agents, I, 313. 
Islam. Sec MohAmmedsnism. 
Islands of the Pocilic, See Oceanica. 
Israel, in the Evotuiioa of the RaM, I, 360. 
Italian* in South America. I, 48J:. 
Itinerating. II, ft. 

Ilo, Marquis, ProgTeMfve Ideoa, II. 167. 
J«chaon. Samuel Maeauley. Previous 



47« 



INDEX 



CoBimncci, I, tg-13: oon<Chrtili4n Kc- 
lisioni. I, j6j. 

J&ckion, Sticldoii, Alatki. I. 4^. 
Acobitcs in Turkey, I, 44y. 



Jallna, Misiiion (.'oltrec di. II, uH; Nnti' 

Januica, Divi«ion ol 1 
fstnc*. Prof.. Lrarnini 
lanim^n. M.. II, j;i. 



illcgi: 
MCistrncc <.i( C*»i*. I. 

Jstnc*. Prof-. Lrarning by l>oiaii. li^ ir?- 



l-'it^ifi 



'. >ss. 



in iHao. 

mice Ti>- 



iMit, ticneral Survey, I, iJSU^i 
1, 4ni', (rom i)<7j-igoo, I, 411; Adv. 
ward Civtliialion, 1, ^i, 11, io«; and 
America, 11, ;[._; Bible Vvurk Ucsun in, II. 
iB; Children'^ Studjr of, I. 143; ami Cbina. 
I, Snt 5U, C-'iirimian I.itrtirture in, II, 
4^ «. ro; Commercifll Progrcs*. I, 5*5: 
Co-opcnttlon in. I, lit. tiH-tsi: Decay ni 
Rdigiuii in. 1, $18; Education in, I, %jfr, 
uB; KiaJeiuaitcn Uurk in. II. lu; 
Ethical .ind I'tiilosophical SyMemi uf, 1, 
ajb-J03; Fcdrraiion, 1. j7j; Cricviincca 
Againft Chri«Tianii]f'. 1. tif, Lt^proiy, II. 
MS; Medical Tiaininic. II. iX». Miinion- 
ary Pi-ubktn, I. vj8; Ntitivtr Clitiatian 
Church in. 11, i^y, Nalivc Kvangclitti, II, 
356: Nasasaki Woman'i College, 1, w. 
Opened lu Mimionx. 1. 407 i KcliKiaai 
and Educatiunal Proti!ciii« in, I, s^ui; 
Sc1F>Kpvemment. I, s^j; Setf-iupmirl, II, 
agS; S. V. M.. I, 10?; Woman's Work. I, 
Sji, II. 100. 
Jjliancae, Cliaiaulcr of. 1. 4it, 5JB. jja 
laitancsc War, ]i» Efifect on Cliina. 1. SS'- 
Jarvis, Lucy C., Study of Misiions. I, 146. 
Java. Duidi Mistiont, I. 4«/; Orman Mi»- 
siona, I, 4iji Seminary of Dcpote, I, 4i9. 

cTtuAlem, \Vo(k Anionic ttic Sick. I. 311. 

etiup, William. Syria, I, 440. 

ciuil«. in Maiingavcar. I, 474. 

eiup, Morri* K.. II. jjj: Aadress. I, j3. 

tvi\ fcc llcbrews. 

ohanneaburK. I, MT' 

ohn. GriffitTi, jciumry in China. I, 407; 
Tranilation* o( the Bible, ir, tS. 
John, King of Sunn^im. I. i;j. 
Johntan, Mtt. S. E.. Medical Trminins. II, 

32Z. 

Johnson, T. S-, Hindi Lang^uge, II, 41. 

Tobniton, R., II. 365 

Joac*, Harriet N'ewclt. II. jCi; Miiiionary 

Litrralvire, I, iti. 
lone*, J. P., Sell-supporl in India. II. 3*4- 
J ones, Mr*. J. !•-, Ahundant (iivinar. I. 176. 
Jud*on. Adonlraro. Character of, 1, 74, 11& 

119. 
Indian, Edward, II. J75- _ . . 

Jvivrrnilr Socictir». See C!iildr«n'* Socwttet. 
Kii«hlnn. of Burma. I. jtS. 
Kodiak laland. 1. 4^ ,„ . 

Kaflira. Attilude of Coloniala, I, 469; Work 

of Lovrdale Initituie, It, ii6. 
Kangaroa, OriBin tit Name, II, «. 
KaniC'yiD-wr'i, Oiinc(« Kclorrocr, I. SSS> 
Kapurtbatb. Hajah of, I, 5^7. 
KaTcns. Work .\inonK. I. or. S18. *'»,, , 
Krrry. Crcorge. Chrixlian Literature. II, 63. 
Kerry. Mrs. C. II. 3^1. 366. 
Ke«ub. Turkey. Revival in, I. 4H- 
Kh.-irluni. Opened. II. 33t 
Ki\sm,T. R.. 11. j6o. 
Kimhal). Grace. Nfe'ds of Turkey. I, 4Si: 

Medical MUnion*. II. 10*. 
Kiniteigarten in Foreign Missions, II, lat'. 

)^-i«; in Japan, II. lU- , 

King. I',, A.. Relalion of the Miaaionary 

10 Science. Crnnmrrcc-. etc.. T. JJJ- 
Kinfi. H. M-. MiT«J'>niiry Comitj', I. ajj. 
King, lofteph. Anntrala^lan MminnB. I. 

4x4: Aunlralian Dckaation, I, 31: N'jtivr 

Workem. tl. »6s; Oceanic ConverH. I. 

Mq: Relation of the Mitiionary to Sci- 
ence. Commerce, etc. I, jag- 
King. M.a. J. II. 3*i , ^ ^, ,. , „, 
King, W. C, Supjjorl of Indmdiul Mlv 

itloruimf, I, 196. 



Ktltredgc. A. E., tl, j]6. »?■ s6t, 33^ 

Knapp, Miaa S. T., Training Syatcm, ta 
jio. 

Knspn, Mrk, II, j6i. 

KneeUnd. Mn. U. D., MiMiooary Litera- 
ture. I, 158. 

Knoit. Ileory, Tahiti Literary Work, 11. la. 

Kiiun'lcd)[c, Baais of InttrMt, 1, isi. 

Knoa. I>. \\'„ Feiltration ol Miavnaut 
.^gencieA. I, 171; Lcason* from ChritteO' 
dom in Japan. I, sjo; PhiloKrphy 
Cliina and Japan, 1, j^. 

Kobe. " (ilory KindcrKartcn." II, ta4. 

Komn, Ncceswty (or ^^Hil>^a^ir■ to K 
II. 99; and New Testament. II. ji. ^ 

Korea, Survey of, I. 97. 534*J3;; Chins' 
I apa n War. 1 1 . 306, 309; Educaiioul 
t\ ork. I, 536-537; blbical Sjrttcms ol, I, 
^; Hospitals in 1. xu; Literature for 
GtrK II, 70; Medical Training. II aat; 
Medical Work in, t. 535. sj? ; Native 



Chriiiiani of. I. as; Upenink of. I. iff 
m6; nppurtuniiy in. II. 34b; Poverty in, 
Tl, joj; Srlf-*ii[ip<irt, II, 



lOJ. 



Clppurtuniiy in. II. 34b; 
joj; Srlf-^ii[ipiirl, II, JOI, 309, Jtii 
Succei* ol \\ ork. I. ys- 
Koie. E. B. r., II, isr- 
Krjiuf, Lu<iw>;i. (icographical Work in 

Africa, I, 3jd: in ^jtit Africa, I, faS. 
Krishna Pal, tarcy'ii First Convert. II, 1 
Kuraler. Mrs. J. P. E.. II. 3'.6. 
Kupler. Carl r.. Stability of the CbittCM, 

1, J44. 

Kuaaic. Training ncbixds at. I. 494. 
KuakokiriRi Valley. Alaska, Moravian* in, 

I. 469^ 

Lnbrndor. The Work ot tb« Uoraviaiu 

in. I. *S7. 
Lackihire. Mr.. II. ty. 
Indict* Sociciy for Native Female Kduca- 

tion, Calcutta, Organiied, I. so6. 
Ladrone Islands I. 4iH- 
La Keln. I. II.. 11^ 357. 
l,aHorr. Work of the Univcrsilie* in. 1. 

S'>. 
Lahoul. Moravian Mi»»ion in. I. yn. 
I^mbetU Cootercnce. on S. V M., I. tC3- 
LamliLiih, Walter R.. Sclf-^iupport. II. 3x1; 

tircanization ul the Conference. I. 11. 
Lan^^ard. \\ illiam Ji.. .Member ol llic Com- 

mitiee nn the Advitabilitj of Callins the 

Conference. I. 11. 
Lansuagci. .\caui*itioD of, t. 31s. 317. II. 

an, 9t; Dini^ultJes in. I, 4>8; Number o< 

m ibe World. II, aa; Reduced to Writ- 
ing. I, 3x1. 
Lantern \ icws, l'« of, I. 133. H. 9*- 
Laoi. Condition Among, I. jioj^i : lleltn 

to Mission \^'ork. 1, ^m; Petition of 

Women m, I, j"- 
Laui^lilin. J. II.. Famine Victims. II. ajo; 

Native Chnrch and Polygamy, II, JS7. 
|jiwe9. W. S., in New Guinea, I, «^ 
Law«, Robert. Education in Africa, I, 45!. 

Manual Training. II. 1^3. 
Lay MiBMoiurica in Industrial Work. II. 

IS9- 
Laymen, nn Mission Hoards. I, ity. and 

Missions. I, 180. 
I..ay Wi>rkcr*' Union, I. jr;. 
Leafleli, How to Use, I. tS7l Intprovemeei 

in, I. lu. 
Lecture Mectingn (or Women. II. 06. 
Lcg^e. Dr. James, Educational Work in 

China. II. 119- 
I,ei}>*ic MisKon, The Fields ol. I. 413 
Leonard. A. B., Teacher a» an Evanselilt, 

II. iiS 

I.enen, Million Work Among. II. a45-a$a; 
Hornet at Cbandag, 1. ijx: in Uadii|^< 
car, II. 300; Treatment of. II. a4*, 

Leprnsy. (..Iiacactcr of. II. ay; Conftrtnce, 
in Berlin. II, u6. 

Leaser Antilles. Well Evangelxaed. I. 478. 

Lfison Scheme ff>r Mission Smdr. I. 144. 

Let«nn« ol the Century. 1. 4JO-433- 




INDEX 



Lc*uii. The, Wcfltem Aaiit and, I, jUf-4V> 
Levering, Ida Fav, HoipitttU and Oifp^n- 

arics, II, it6; Phystcina a« an EvaoKcl- 

i»t. 11. iHg. 
Lcvjr, Mark. Tho Hebrews. I, 446. 
Lewis. A. II.. n. j6a 
Lrwii, K- K.. Aliundant (tiving. t, 175. 
Li Hung Chang on Medical Mnsion Work, 

II. ipj. 
Librartc*. Oiurch. I. tio; Misiionary, I, 

1S4; ni>n-Chri»tait, 11, (i&: Suoctay- 

■cbaul, 1. ijs, U>e ol, in MiMion Study, 

1, iij. n6. 
Llnii.ui!on» of Mitisionarjr Comity, I, ajj- 

Lincoln. Abraham. Emaacipatiun Cudi- 
pared !□ \^ omen's Work, 11, ij6i 

Lmiior Traffic, Conference at Brussels, I, 
j&i; Rtiiridion of, I. 383; in Phtltppines, 

I. jBs; in Soath Seai. 1. 381. 49S- 
Literature. Oirislian. II. 7^; Aim af, IL 

£6; for Children, II, 65; Cnmiiy in Pre' 
paration of, I, j6i, II, SN JOl DWiribution 
of. I], 96; Kducalional. Ii. 85; Cor Girls. 

II. 74: in India, I, 177. II, jj, 77; in 
Japan, IE, 4B, ja; in Cnina, 1. sjo, II, 
4S. 6j-e4: Official TreBtn)i.-iii of. It. 58; 
in Medical Miti»ion>. II. Jij: Pltai 
for. I . i79> 399- 45T , 550, II, ^. 4$, 
6j*&i; Sale of, II, jnj; Suirielies Hound 
to Protfiifp, II. 4j; Suggc^lionft on Piib- 
Ibhins, II, ■kB-fti; STtps Taken to IVn- 
vide. If. 4048; I'lace of in Millions, II. 
4B-4o: Periodical. 11. 67; Sunday-tchonln. 
II, fi; in Korea, II. 70; for Spanifth- 
■peakiriK l^nd«. II, jq; in Turkey, I, 
440, II. 44. 

Literature on Mi<f.ionii. I. 1^-174: BlblioK- 

raphy ol, J I, )j>. 
Liiemtiirr, non^Chrittian, Arabic. II, 46; 

Mi>ii«n»rie<i Need to Krudy. I. $oy, in 

India, II. '>7- 
Liverpool. Sludcnl*' Conference at. I, no. 
Liverpool Conlercnce on Mi Ml on*, i860. 

I. 31. 

Ltvinittone. Career of. I. 408: Missionary 
Life a PriTilcge. Not a Sacrifiee. I. jf. 
Yottth of, I, 119; Geographical Work in 
Africa. 1. jjo; on llic Liquor Traffic, I, 
,ie<i; Twirin* in Africa. I. in. II. ic6. 

Livfngitone CoUepe. II. ato. 

LLvtnifionc MiMiaa in Central Afriea, I, 

Livinir«i(mia, I, 41a: Number of School*. 

Lockiiart, William. The Medical Mi«ion- 

ary. II. Joa. 
Lodiana School of Medicine. II. >iQ. m. 

London. Student*' Conference at. I, 110; 

S. V. M. (I. SLirted in. T. (oo: Centenary 

Conference, 1K8S. I. «; on Polygamy, It. 

jTfl; on Literary Work. 11, 70. 
London I^y Worken* Union, 1. 337. 
I^ndon Missionary Society. 1. 57. "'•*'"• 

in Amoy, I. j66: History of. If. ;^; (iItU 

Schools in Inrfifl. I, 506; in Madagascar. 

iB6j. I. 471; in tfic Soalh Seas. I, 4CH. 

401. II. jSj; in !^amoa. II> 965. 
London Tract Society. See Rellgiotu Tract 

Sodtty. 
Longacrc, A., If, j6ft. 
LorJ, R. D.. n. .!«». ^ „ 

Love, AuiTionty of, I, 6g; Need of. II. 

87, lOJ. 

Lovedftle. {'nllcgc DejWTiinenl, II. isfi; In- 
rliiMrial .School. I. 467: Infliirnce of, on 
Cinimiinity, II, ij6; non-SccUrinn. II. 
irt: Normal In*titulr al. II. 1J5; Sydeni 
of Paynient in School. If, ia6. 

Lovett, Richard, fl. J64; Cliiiition Litera- 
ture. II. 40. Be. 

I.nir-caste Peoplea. I. .ill. 

Low. Seth, The Busineij Men'* Meet-ng, 



f. 47. II, m; On the Coaterenoe (All-day 
ineclinK), I, 14. 

Luwry. If H., Chinese Cunverta. I, S(|. 

Loyafty- Island*, I, 401. 

Lucknow. Christian Colleges in. II. 104: 
Mixiiunarv Publicatiuni m. 11, 73; Mctb- 
oilint Puhlitfaing tlousc in. II, ja; Wom- 
an's CoKrgc, I, 97' 

Lutheran Miwonary Soeii'tieii. I, an. 

Lyni:h. F. V., Pbysician As in Evangcliit. 
II, 1S8. 

Lytin, M,->rv. 1, »|8. 

Mu1j1i>> Henry C. II, lU, ati. 13^'. Aim 
Qf F. M.. I. 81. 

Mac Ariliur. R. S.. IL 377- 

hIacUonald, J. A.. The MiaMCmary So- 
ciety, 1, 3IJ. 

MacGregor. Sir William, Missions in Aua- 
iralitLa. t. tx. 

MacKennal, Alexander, On S. V. U. 
.Motto. I. loj. 

M.-icKen«ir, Sif A.. I, ^}. 

hiackay. Donald Sage, bp 



pecial Appeali, I. 

M^ckay, Cieorge, On Comiiv, I. xSa. 
Mackav. K. I' , C-lioice and QuiIlB cat ions 

of Missiooaric*, I, 301- 
.Madaaa>caf. Survey of, I. 401. 408, 47>-47Si 

Medical .Mission*. I. 47-». II. 'flB; Self- 

suppori, II. v^ci. 
Madras Kihtc ^ocietv. II. 79: Christian 

Liieraiurr Society 01, II. fi6; Vrce Church 

College in, I, 4*1!; Pre»idenyr, Primant 

Schools iTi. 11, 1^1 ; Tract Society. 1 1, 

74: Univer!iities in. I. ill- 
Madura Miuion. A. B. C. F. M., Littrmry 

Work. II. tio. 
Magazine*. Mi^islonary, I, i&x 
Mahrattas. Tlie. Literary Work. II, jfc 
Malay Muslims. HoMility of, 1. 41&. 
Malnyalam Literature for the Blind. II. SS- 
Malaysia. 11. 356- 

Malta. Antcrtc.in Board's Presx. II. 46. 
Manchuria, I. p, ss'. H. -U" ■ Self-support 

in. II. jr4; Church. Sermon by. I. ii6l 
Manehus in Chiilu. I. S44- 
.Mandnrin Version of the Bible, II. iS. £!■ 

Mangalorc, Uookiiindcry of Sax) Mission, 

II, i£i. 
Manual Training. Aim.i ol, II, rra-iSj; for 

Ciirls, M. 155: for Negroes II. 184; in 

India, It, 147. '^: Power of, IL 184; 

Me*utl> of. It, 181; Will-culture by. 11. 

•84-187. See IndusiTlat Education. 
Maoris, The, of New SCealand, I, 4t% 4JC, 

*V>- 
Map. The Conference. I, 24. 
Maps and Cliart*, Missionary, I. ii|, ilSa, 

ih(, jj6; I'roTnolers of Co-opcration. 1. 

36a. 366. 
Maralhi. Christian Litrrnlurr. II, 78: Em- 

hiiKted Litrralurr frr Hlird in. II. Jj: 

MUsion, todustrial Training, II. 140. 
Marquesas I*land«. Paris Evangelical MU- 

sionary Society in. I. 4Q'- 
Marriage of Misxionaries, I, ji'-ii?, 
iNtar'di-n, Samuel. Parent ol (he Maori 

Mi'sion. I. nx. 4^6, iQt. 
Marshall Island^, Under German Govern- 
ment. I, 404. 
Marsovan. Theological Seminary al. I, 4g6. 
Martin. C. The l.ao<, I, jij. 
Martin. Paul, II. 371. 
Manln. W. A. P., Readers in Chioa. II, 

i«S. 
■Marlyn, Ilenry. I. 403. 397. 
Martyr. I, St-Sj. See Wiine«s. 
Martyrs in Mission iMcId*. 1. 40S, 41J. IT. 

Mnis Meeting in Interenl of Famine Sut- 
feren in Inrlia. II. 373; for Men. II, jya; 
for Women, II. 3(A 

^tassachusett.4. Public Libraries in. I. 163. 

ManMcres in Turkey. Results of, I. 151. 



ji 



INDEX 



llaM«», The in lodiA. L sos-jofi. 
Maumoro*. U«auel. Bible Aotk to Spain. 

Uuecr, K. M., Marriuc of MtHiooane*. 
I. ais: Dr- N^tu'a Work in China. It. 

»teri«l Oevelopmcnt, God'* Purpou to. 

I, toi. 
klaleiial Piogrcu A Help to Missions I. 

loo. 
HcAfrc. Oeland B., ReUlion of Expreutcn 

to Imprcssibas iq TcActutiK. II, iflo. 
UcCuIiicy. J- H., Medical Miuions in 



China, I, uj. 
McClurc, W. G.. Self-snppon. II, ju 
McDowell. W. P.. Rcipon>tbilttr of^ 

Church ai to Mistions, I. ixt. 
McEwm. H. T- 11. pi. 
McIntoOi, Cilbcn. UiMinn Pm»e*, 1, a^S. 
Hclniokh, J, B., II, HI', DcBominatianal- 

iim. I. iss- 
IcKibbco. Willi . 

Icrcace. I, •£; SeU-iuppurt. II, juq. 
IdcKiiilrr. William, Addrci* by. I. x. Wcl- 



the 



UcKibbco. William K., II, <f>y. The Con 



^?l^ 



J, •. iiiia.i 

corar of. I. iftf. 
UcLarca. Duncan, Scll'tuppon, II. jit- 
McLaren, Mt&. Duncan, Kctponftibililir of 

Women lor Mn^iunv I, 114. 
UcLaiiria. John. Admiition and Diiciplinc. 

Native Churcbct. II. *7S: Uariiagc uf 

Miuionarie*. I, jij. 
UcMnrry. Frank Morton, II. j6g: CoDUoll- 

Ins Idea* in Curricula, XI, f}*, on Teacli' 

loK. It, 170 

McNair. T. M., II. w. ^- Co-opcration. 

I. »<£; SKintoi»ni, I. ml 

McNair. Mn. T. M., Nauvc ChrirtUn 

Womrn, [1. 36B. 
McQuMton. Xlr*. I. N., 11. 35* jW' 
MmiuI Micfion*. 11, 16&-2J9: Authority 

for, II, aoi; and Chriitian Literature, 

II. 'ij; CoTnity in. I. atj-a*^. j6j. 
11. aor; an Ivvangdiaing Agency, T, a99- 

gi6, 410, 4J7-U0, «j. II. II)! 1^. *M. »s; 
rrmaH. I. 414; Native AMiiimi* "«.,'•. 
aij. siS, 919; Need of, 11. U4. *>;; Scll- 
auppcrt in, I. 147, ll, loj. in. jij. jtti, 
j6o; Staii«ti« of. II, i«: Station. Equip- 
ment of. 11, xA. aj6; in China. I. 543] 
in Korea. I, ws, SJ;- Sc« IIo»pital» and 
l>i>pcnnrie>. 
Medical Misfionarirs, Kvnniretiit*. 11. 146, 
joo; Field of, 11, joi; and Foreigner*, II, 
loil InRuencc of Women. I, ^, 4lOi &44. 
II. iS^, 191, kA; Ilincraling. iI, Ml, aoi: 
Need* of. II. mi: Opportunities of, I, Jt»7; 

8uali&cMt<>ns 01. II. 3o< iin. tti: PriinarT 
'ork of, II. x£: a« a Soirial Factor, ir. 
aaS. 
Medical Training. The Be»[ Possible, t. 
«8, II, to9: on Misiion Field, Need of, 
11, ajs; of Native Helper*. II. ji8-M9, 

364; of Native Wnmrn. II, 3H. 

Meif*. F. E.. II. 374 

Me1ane*)an Island*. Work Begun in, by 
Dithop Selwyn. I. 403. 

Memlirrs of E. f.. 11, 395. 

Merentby, A„ German MiMirniary Meth- 
od 1. 1. 306. 

Mestitoa, Work AmonE- in South America. 

1.479. 
Methodism in Mi^oion Organ iiat ion, I. 3S1. 
Methadijt Epiacopnl Church Mission:, f 

aai: in Northern India. II. >6ji: Press ai 

Fuchau. I. 148: Publications in ^{cx■cn. 

II, (^j: Puhliohinft House. Luckoavt. II. 

ja; MeTbocU of Sclf-aiippDrt, India. II, 

yu; Woman'* Foreign Mifsionary Sn- 

cicty. II. lOJ. 
Methodiit Episcopal Church. South. I, au. 
Meihnda n( Awakening InceceM. I, 131. 
Mfthodi Distinct from Aim. I. t<, 
Methddi of Roman Catholic Propaganda. 

I, afo. 
>Irxic(i, II, 3S7; Modern. I, 4K4. II, 64; 




Bible and Tract Socittica. 11. 6*: Cis-II 
GoTCTamcai and Cburch of Rome. I, 477; 
Co-opention in, I, ajA; Educated. II. tf. 
Newspaper* of. II. 64: Prc4byienaB Preai 
in. II, 49: MiMionatY Pabticationt in, 
II. 6«, 63: Protcfiant Miuiooa tA, I. «<; 
Roman Catholic Religioii, I. 479; Sett-aup' 
port in. il. jg6: Spanisli Bwod in. I, 

Micronriia. I. 4Q4-495: W'ork by the 
Hawaiian EvangeltcaJ AuDcialioo. I, ^a. 

Mildmay Conference, ifo& I, a>. 

Miller, Mrs. E H.. 11. j6a. 

Miller. F. S.. II, JM 

Jliniv^terial Sctf-iuppon in MiasiOD Fid^ 
11. J^i. 

Mimttry, A Miisionary, 1, tja. 

!kl mnrBpoIis, Minn.. A LibrWT Experi- 
ment in, I, ijs- 

MiMion. The. I, 178: Adttiiniairaiioo N«C«fr 
(arv, I, J79: Xot a Churcli Cuurt. J, ^A; 
RcfatiuD tu .Native Christians !■ ^il 
Unit ih- Station, 1. tj9. »57- 

Mitftion Churche*. See Native Church, 

Mikiion Study, Uroad Scope ul, I, ux; m 
Theological SchotiU, I, isr; Hetirr 
Knowledge o( Fields. I, 3j6; Hiitory ol. 
I. zSq. See Mtaiionary Idea. Culiuxe of. 

Missionary. Ttie. I, 3at-3Ml Appointment 
to Special Fieldf. I, a(^; Bible Transla- 
tors, II, a6-j8i Care in Selection ol, I, 
Jtti; Care of SouMite, 1. U4; Clainu oC 
I. 4S3; Conferences of, I. Jj^a*. aWi 
<"onrte»y. Need of. I. J41; Culture. Need 
of. tl. 110; Educated tiie Orst. I. 197, 
4(8; Kflect of Ileatheniiro on, t. ui; 
Effect of Retrenchment on. I. jpi; En* 
vironment ol, I, 31;; ihe family. I. jia, 
J49: Separation of TamiUen. I. ^i; Equip- 



4 



mcnt, I, 45^: Furlough Problem. I, u; 
Health of, I. ji^, jji jji; Hume Life of I. 
Ji7i Ilume Work nf, I, rjij Homes 
(DuichJ. I. 418; Hostility to (China and 
rurkey"). I w«; The Ideal. II, jj8; In- 
dividual Work Best, I, jm; Isolation of. 

I, 4K. 3<i3; Language, 1. jij. 117; liUr- 
riage of. I. /j6. joj. jiijir; Not Per- 
manent in Ktcid, 11, *55; Partner. Not 
Agent, 1, X37; Pcrtonal Character ol. I, 
V. «4, aSo. Jot. fUjM. ijo; As a Preacher, 

II, 8$-iii; ProfeMional, Aim of, II, 119; 
Relations to Board. I. ii$xij. 3y>-. Re- 
lation of Native Workers 10, II, 3fi-j$5, 

Sep; Support of. I. jt*. II. J17; Teacher, 
OSlible Power of. fl. 1*7, 148: Teachers, 
Ideas lor, II, 16R-1S7: Trial* ol. I. 4S6. j.-ni 
a Troslee, I, 7*: Variety of Demand* 
Upon. II. a?j: The Veteran. I. a«; A 
Wiiars.!. I. 81. ia6; Wi»e». Eogliah and 
American. I, 315; Women, I. 93. 

Missiinary The. Incidental Rc1atlun^ ol, I. 
jJSJrfi: to Board OlScen. I. zjo; Pio- 
neers o( Civilitation. I. ixj: Colonttation, 
1. JJi; Cnmrieree, I. jji, 341: Discovery. 
I. J»J. S'f'i fJeoffraphy. I, .jj.-.; Heathen 
Philosophies. I, tij: Mat-mal Progrcsa, 
1, 100: aon-Chri^iiiun Religinax. I, 337: 
Science. I, 3^5; .>iicval Reform, I, 3jj! 
Supported bw a Sincle Church. I. iQj-au. 

Missionary Aiologetic&. X, au: Apologrtis 
Problcroa, I. 357. jOi: Chrialtan IlociriBe. 

1. jra. 

Missionary Hiojiraphy. I, ijS, 159. 
Missionnr'y CiilleKc, Character of. I. ajs; 

InterdenoTninational RelaiioBa. I. a40; 

ManajtTient. Principles of, II, nftJiL. 

See Culleae*. 
Missionary Committee Jn Every Church. L 

T«. 

Missionary Enteriainmnita, I. 14a. 

Missionary EzhibiL. I. i& 

Missionary Force, W'ithdrnw-nl nf. II, a6$. 

Missionanr Id^a. The, It* Culture in the 
Home Churcbei. t. loj'^t Campaiffo of 
Educaliuii. I. ijt. t«o, i^i, 153; Pniatlt- 





INDEX 



475 



Tseatal Idra at ihc Church, i, 73. lii; 
Uarne TraininK. 1, [j4, 144: Mcrhodi of 
ATouiiDK intercut. 1, 131-141; Literature on 
Miaiioiia. I. m, isj-i&J. ■&?. 1&8. 11. 417; 



MUtionary Ilux», I, 13^; Mii^ninnary 
PeriodicAlu, I, i6yiu: Public MecltnKs> 
I, iji, tja. t4>: Student Volunteer Movc- 



rocnc, I, t04-i>4: Syitcmatic Study, I. i4j: 
Uic 1)1 LibrariM and N'ewsjiupiiri, I. i6a- 
i64i Tlie Fa-it<>r'» Duly, I, iij-ij'i, 173-174, 
i8g; YouuR People and Their Societies, 
It7-IM. i^s, lift. ijp. T^e, 157; Young Peo- 
ple and Sunday -tcncwlB, I, 99, iji, ijs- 

MiMtDnary Libraries, I, 15J, i6o-i63. 

Mi»ionary Liirrature. bre Missionary 
Idea; alito Literature, Ncwipaijcri, Feri-- 
odicala. 

MisiLonary SdiuoU. Sec School*: Educa- 
liun; Trainin([. 

MIssmnnry Socictira ol 1800, I, 4im. 

MiMionan^ Society, The. I. aog-aT?; ^m of, 
I. mo; Govirrincnt of. I, m, jti, uc-uii 
and the Hume Clitircli and Denomination, 
I, iio-xts, jjli iji. 410; U.I I>uiie». 1. JD9-J19, 
as; Itt Pinanceii. 1. aji; Li*t of Haarda 
and Societies. II, 365. xfti--. and the Mia- 
ntunarj, I, uyaii. ^S-jSj>; NeceKtity for, 

I, iin-iC3, 3IS-XX). 131: Namlier o(. I, 99; 
and Other Agencies, T, »jji77; and the 
rre»», 1, l&4'i;4. -tij. II. 4^: Relation* 
with tlie Native ChtiTch, I, ^190. II, IS1. 
^3-3'i' Wontcn's Hoard*. I. li^-aJo. 

Mia«ionary St«ti«ic», 11, mB- 

Misjionary Succcm Tested by the Bible, 

II. .5- 

Miminnary Training. See Training uf iiit- 
(lonarics. 

Mia&ion Trtsiea, II, 3(17: An Aid li» Miv 
tiani, 1. 101 : Cornttriitiiiii Detwccn. i. 
zn; Mantffrinent o(. II, Jo; Native 
Worker* in, 11. ss: Self-iupport ul. I. 
3Si; Supeiinticndeni of. 11, $4: Support 
nl 11. SJ- 

Hiilioni. Foreign. Apoitolic. I, 06; Au- 
tbority. I'Mn-ote. »nc Aim. 1, fr?*?; Ci>« 
o(, Cctnpatid. 1. tea. 17S: Delined. I. 66; 
General FhiSanlhrony ot. 1, »us> ^L 4J0- 
Mo; In iltf.ory, I, 147. io6. jm; Holy 
Spirit in, II. 88. jrf; Modified Con<li- 
tioas. I. uO: Modern. Ilegun by Ilotlatid. 

I, 417; Practicul Saggeitiuns on, 1. 189. 

II. tj: Pcrmancnl Hrsultt of, see Native 
Churchc*: «l*o Native Workers; Rea.ion» 
for Supporting. I. 6^-130. i*j-itM, 49c; 
Reviews of \Vorfc. [, 4P1 js8. II, ps- 
M9i The One Suecntftil Thtrg_ in China. 
1. ui. See Industrial ^l!s-ions: alao 
Medical Uiasianc also Study of M<»- 
>iOD*. 

Miuions and Govemroenl^, II. jSj, I, 91, 
3J3-J|fi. 45*. yi- f'OvrmiTicnt OtSciatt. 1, 
w*: Ally of Good OovcmmenI, I. juo; 
Appeal la Force Nol Made. I. mi, 3*4; 
Cituen Riglilx, 1. ^5, }4t, ji^; tiinfnrtn 
to Law, I, j4j; Dlicriminntion Agsin-it, 
!■ 3J7; Friend'y tnlervcntton. I. 3*3: In- 
demnity for Loss, I. jj6; Jealousy of 
Political Influence of, L 139: Relation to 
Diplotnacy, 1. jj8- See Govemment'. 

Miisioni-. non-Chri<ii.in, I. i<u. 

Mitchell, Arthur, Model Misf^ionary ?a»lor. 
I. Tjg. 

Moab. I. 3<m: Medical V'crk. I, 4Ji- 

Modem Bible Work, Beginning of, II, 
15-17. 

MofT3n^ Rohert. African Chief, I, ]S4; 
Work in South Africa. I, 404 ; Grrai 
Work. Literan-, 11. 63; Convertation with 
Liringstoae, I, i». 

MnhaiRRiedat* Lands, II. 356; Illiierncy in, 
H. 168; Africa, I, 3??, II. jii; Arabia. 
I. J64. a6: Egypt. ^.4^; iJidia, I..J»; 
Java ar'l .ui:iatia. .. ^i^, 'joi North 
AfricK. 1. 4j6> 4¥>'i Persia, I. 134; the 



To- 

ntro venial 



Sudan, 1. 4i>; Syria, I. 441; Turkey, I. 

Monammcdaniun, I. JM-J97; Attitude 
ward Ctiristianily, f. j^u: Controve 
Liteialure. I, jg^i Convert? from, 1. JW, 
418, 4ti, 11, a6a; Education for Girl). 1, 
44>; Fanaticism Undermined, L 4j8. 44J: 
FuiidaoieniAl Conception o(. L J73; Fotit- 
ity uf. t. 134; Hai tin Saviour, It, gg; 
Mow 10 IniSiirncr, I, jig. 11, 107- Idea of 
God, I, >m: Law, a Special Difficulty to 
Mltninn Work. I, jjS; Nol a Preparation 
for Christianity. I. yu; Pulitical System 
Rather than a Kcligion, 1, 411; Polygamy, 
II, 17H; Prcsn-s, Activity of. II. 7J: Sec- 
nlar Education a Blow to. II. 14] ; Spirit 
of anti-Christ, I. joj; Students. I. tea; 
Waning Power of, I, 431; Wherein Like 
to Christianity. 1, 158; Effect on the 
Lives of the WtJincn. T. jS^, II. iSo- 

Mohaminedant, Hutch and Germ&n Mis- 
sions for, I. 418, 4it; Uterary Work. II, 
tS: Medical Mission* for. I, 396, II, 197; 
Number of. II, jj6; Under ChnatfAB 
Hulers. I, 4JI. 

Money Factor In Missions, II. 305, jo& 
See also Self-support. 

Money ProUlem, Relation of Student* to. 
1. 106. 

Money Given lor Missions and for Educa- 
tion. II. tJ4. 

Moncv-poncr in Education, 1. ijb; in Phi' 
lanlhroiiy, I, 177: in Soul-saving, i, [76. 

Montevideo. I, 4Ha. 

Montgomery. Mrs. \V. A., U. 36ft: Worn- 
an't Mi.isionary Societies. I, 31$; System- 
atic Study of Missions. I. 14s. 

Moody, Mrm. E., .Vli^sianory Liter*lnrc, I, 
ijy. 

Moody, n. L., 1. 100. 173. 4og: .\da]>taiion to 
Hia Work, II. 3^9; Among the Jews, I. 
444; C;iR)paiaas in England, 1, aev: Re* 
»lv*l Work. 1 1, lid. 

Mpore, J. I'.. II, 374, 

Mor«l Code. Uuddhltm. L 516- 

Moral Questions. The Native Cliutch and, 
IL J73-iS8, 

Moral .^ense. Need al Culture ot, II, 6a. 

Moravian (Tiurch, Gifts of, 1, or- A Mls- 
sion.irj- Society, I, sn: Most Missionary 
of the Oiurcltes. 11, 346, 

Moravian .Missions, I, 4U-4J1; Extent of, 
1, 7ii; Fields of. I. 413; Assisted hy (Jtber 
Chureliei. I, 13R: and Comity, I, aj^; 
Incentive to Worfc. I, 7**); Three Mat- 
toes of. II, 317: Attitude Toward Polyg- 
amjst*. IJ. J74. 

" MorainK SlAr," First Mmsionary Ship, 

I. 4yt; v». Prit-ale Yacht. L IJJ- 
Monis. Cl.urlcs S.. .\n1err.c3n Nrjirnrs in 

^Vfrica, 1, 469; Industrial Education, II. 

156. 
Morrison. Robert. Begins Work in China. 

L 403. 5S&. 
Moroccu. Missions in, I, 440. 
Morton. Inhn, Marriage of Missionaries, I. 

jn; Self Mippon. II. ws- 
Mosquito Coast, German Missions in, I. 

4t4; Moravian Missiona, I, 47B. 
Moss. L., IL 3711. 
Mutlier*. Influence of. I, 116. aiQL 
Motives tor Study ot Missions. I. 146-T48, 

1S6, JOI. 
MotT, John R.. II. 371^ Evangelintion of 

World in IIiik Generation, I, 9s. 
Movemenis, Student, and Other Young 

People. L 55, 
Mtesa of Uganda. I. jas- 
MClUer, Max, On Hinuuiini, I. jjg; Hea- 

sngp 10 Educated India, II, 331. 
Murdoch, I^hn, Literary Work. IL 41. 7?: 

Missien Pressei, I, 249: Native Preachers. 

II, j;^; Plea for Chriilian Literature. II, 
76; Schoolbouki, II, &t. 

Murray, !>., 11,^. 



476 



INDEX 



Murray ■ Syitem for Tcachiag Chinese 
Blind. II, 34J-Z45. 

Music in Missions, Power of, II. ijs- 

Musical Directors of E. C, II, jiif. 

Muslim, see Mohammedan and Moham- 
medanism. 

IWavBBKkl Woman's College. I, 97. 

Nanking, Treaty of, I, 406, 

Nashville, Young Ladies' Missionary 
Union of. I. 135, 

Natal, German Missions in. I, 466. 

National Bible Society of Scotland; Its 
Methods, 11, 37; Organization and Sta- 
tidies, II, 17. 

National Educational Association, a Nor- 
mal School, II. 160. 

National Welcome of the Conference, I, 38, 
tl. 3SJ. 

Native Agency. See Native Workers. 



Native Christians, Character of, I, 463, 500, 
5'3, S'f 53S. 545, S46. »« also Self-aup- 
port; Best Apologists, I, 370; Employ- 



ment of, II, 147, IS7, 162: Relation to 
(Governments, I, 417, 418, II, 377: to 
Heathen Festivals, 11, 177; Needs of, II, 
160; and non-Christians. 1. 514, 515; Pro- 
tection of. I, 337; Relation to Mission, 
I. 2831 Religious System of. Must Be 
Indigenous, T, 290; Self-support, II, zq> 
393: Work tyf, 1, 100, see Native Church; 
Training of. 11, 60, 01, 164, 256. 374. 284, 

I. wo; Trnining and Work, and Influence 
of Their Wcinen, II, 266-270. 

Native Church, I, 77. H, »?»: Admission, 
Administration, and Discipline. II, a/j- 
3fW; Burdens of, II, 273; Character of, ll, 
273; of the Future, Character of, II, 27S; 
( ontrihutioni of. I, 300: Uangern of, I, 505, 

II. 277; Dennminationalism in, II, aSy, 
Discipline. II. 276, 288; Education. Il, 
a97; in Mexico, (lilts of. II, 296; Gov- 
ernment nf, II, 25H; Self-Kovernment of, 
II, 275; I'rcsi-nt Sfcmbersliip, I, 99; Ne- 
ci-ssity of Instruction in, I, 501, 11, 60, 
311K; and Polygamy, II, 286; Promise of, I. 
<»; L'uality of. II. 312; Purpose of, I, 77! 
Relation to Mission Committee, I, a86; 
its Resources, I, too; Responsibility to 
Heathen. II, 300; Self-support, II, 285-324; 
Triining of. I, 300. See Native Chris- 
tians. 

Native Colporteurs, Employment of. II, 19- 
Nalivc Converts. Sec Native Christians- 
Native Evangelists. See Native Workers. 
Native Helpers. II, 98, 123. i^; Medical, 
1 raining of, II, itJf-nj; Training of. in 
America, II. 319. See Native Workers. 
Native Indiiitrial Schools (India), II. 140- 
Nativc Medical Evangelists, Work of, II. 

219. 
Native Pastor. Qualifications of. II. as?; 
Relation lo Mission Churches, II. 291; 
Training of. I. 245; Training of, Abroad, 
II, 226. 
Native Medical Practitioners. II, 228. 
Native Preachers. See Native Workers. 
Native Teachers. See Teachers; also Na- 
tive lIcTpcrs. 
N.itivc Women. Education of, in Foreign 
Lands. II, 221; Medical Training of. fl, 
221. 222: TraininK of. II. 221; Workers, 
Trained and Untrained, II. 267; Workers 
in TurW-y, I. 451. 
Native Workers, I, 458, 450, 1 1, 255-266, 
272; Comity in Payment. I. 285; Evan- 
gelists. T. 404, 44J. iia. II, 2SS, 260. 313; 

in Hospitals and Dispensaries. II, 214. 
219; Independent, II, 271: Import.-ince of. 
n. 251. 252. 260: in Mission Printing 
Houses. IL ss, 57: Pastor-:. II, 258, 290, 
2or; Relations to the Mi'^si'innry, II. 251- 
2^s. 2511; Treatment of, II. ic,;-:^i; V'.irious 
f)ccupations of. II. 251, 272; Training of. 
I, 418, II, 257, 360, 261. 2A3, 264. 274- See 



Teachers: s;e Natirr Hr'pcr*: sLk: Na- 
tive Women. Naaivc P^suw. 

Natives and ForeicB Opft^mee^ Ahra. 
I. 467-469. 

Natives, Interests oL WaxAzsg =wer. L 
415- 

Natives, Medical TiainisK fcr Ot^iev Tfeaa 
Helpers, II, 227-229. 

Nats, The, SupcrhnmB Sp^g» cc S -aaa . 



.cs td \*—^^^-^ 1, 



I, S16. 
Naval Officers As Crm. 

334- 
Need of the World. *a ArrE=g= iar 

Comity, I, 26&-270. 
Negro, Education of, 11. ifij, 
Negroes, American. A \Vcsk i^c. E= Aba, 

I, 469-472. 
Nestorians. I. 435. 449. 
Netherlands Missionary Sooecck L ip. 

117-421 ; Success among Mo&x^s&edu:^ 
419- 



1: 
Nevius, Rev. J. I_. D.D.. - Uetaods ef 

Mission Work," II, jct. jcz. ja& ^^ jii. 



312, 321 ; in 
of, IT, 311. 



if 



in Korea, II, jsi-jas; Crsicsos 



New Britain, Work Becnn in. I. «>a. 
New Caledonia, Failnrc of tbe Wivfc in. 

Newell,' Mrs. W. E., Reflex iBfocace of 
the Support of Missions, 1. aac 

Newell. Samuel, Appeal of. 1. ic=: Prepam 
the ■' First Book for ChildrTai." IL 66. 

New Guinea, I, 425-426; Jonmcr in. I. 
329; Occupied, 1. 412; A\ack in, I. jjt, 
49>- 

Ncw Hebrides, The, I, 4^499: Beginntng 
of Work in. 1, 491; Bible Tisnslatioii. 
I, 49S; Converts in, I. 498; Drink Traffic 
in, I, 381; Nations of, 1, 497. 

Newspapers, for Women in Korra. II. n: 
in China, I, 550: Illustrated. II. sj: and 
Magazines, Need for, IL 4:1, 49; in Mis- 
sion Fields, Support of. II. 4a 

Newlon Centre, Mass., Hasseltine House 
at, I, 309. 

New York " Evening Post," I, 6c;. 

New Zealand, Beginning of UissiaBS in, 
I, 403; The Maoris of, I, 425. 426, 492. 

Niles, Mary, Work for Blind GiHs in Can- 
ton, II, 243. 

Nineteenth Century to the Twentieth io 
Bible Work, II, 32-36. 

Niu«. Work of the L. M. S. in. I, 491- 

N on- Christian Public, Interest in Missions, 
1, 164. 

Non-Christian Religions, II, ^1; Apolo- 

fetic Problems, Relation of Missions Ia 
, 3S7-3??; Elements of Truth in, II. 86; 
Good Elements in, I, 372; Learned from 
Men, Not Books, I, 363; Necessity oi 
Familiarity with, II, 99; the Problems 
They Attempt to Solve, II, 75; and the 
Women of Asia, I, 387. See also 
Heathen. 

Non-Christians, and Christians in Ceylon. 
I> 514, 515: Under Christian Government. 
I, 421; Social Reformers, I, «3, 

Normal Training Institute, Ovingstonia. 
and Lovedale, II, 125. 

Normal Training, Need of, for Mission- 
aries, II. 169. 

North Africa, I, 440. 

North America, Abongines of, I, 484-489- 

North China Tract Society, 1, 44. 

North India School of Medicine for Chris- 
tian Women. Lodiana, II, ai9. aai, 2*2. 

Northen, W. J., Need of More Abundant 
Giving. I. 179. 

Northlield. Mass., Bible Study at, I. 104. 

North German Mission. The Fields of, I. 
■<'3- 

Norton Sound. Alaska, Work of the Swed- 
ish Missionaries in. I. 4S9. 

Norway, Student X'oluntecr Movemeal in. 
I. III. 



INDEX 



Norwegian Mitsioaary Society, Work in 

U«(ui|[a«cjr, I, 474' li. 'y?- 
Norwtcfi. Conn., Ott» Liravrv. I, i6^ 
Noan \ id)ra»gar«, on ih« KL-rnkmair of 

Wido%» in India. II. Mi- 
NuTRcs. Native Tiaining of, II. 127- 
Naurifch, Work among. I. 44J-MJ. 
Nushts«k VMIcy, Ala.ka. Watk a( Ulc 

Moraviaiu in, I. 48g. 
Obe41«nee. F. M , 3 Mailer of. I, g; 
Ubieci Lcwoiu tn Ttachinn. II, 177- 
Obligalion of ihi* G«neraiKta, I, ^i-io^. 
Ocrnnica, Convirt*. 1, 499'Suii I'rogTcsi ui 

Mitnion* in, t. 400. 
Oldham. VV. F,. ?r»<Titing the Gosp«l. II, 

Bj. 
0|ieti DtMtrs, II, 107, 394, Hi- *0 ^^< rhUip- 

pines, 1^ 496-497. 
Opening boiion ol the Confrrcnce, I, ti. 
Opium. Attitude of Chmiian Mldion* T» 

ward, II, ajq. 
Opponuniiies ol the Prtftcat Siluatioo, 1. 

14. 11. JJIJ JM. H3. 

Orange Free Siaic. S. V. M. in. I. iii. 

Orsaniit*. Volunteer, at E. C. II, j8i. 

OryaoiiAlion and AdministTalion of Na- 
tive ChoTchci, II, tji-tji- 

OrHnniiatinn, Adraniaffc nf, I, agoj Rasia 
oT the MisiioD, I, tji: Carried Too Far, 
1. au; in Evangctixaiion. I, irji: in Giv 
ing, 1, 186; l-mi tlian I'crsonality, \, aji 
Nut Drcidcd by Clirinl, 1, ij#. 

Organtuiion dI thir Conference, I, ij-lf 
Commiilces, II, 3?^-3fit. 

Oriental Church, bee EaBtcm Ctn'Tch. 

Orphans, Work fur, II, tja, 337; IQ Urfi. 
Turkey. II, ajtuA 

Oiborne. Mrs. I,, li., II, fia. 

Otis Library, Norwich, Conn., I, i&j. 

Outline ol MiMion Study. I. i$3- 

Outlock for the Coming Century. It, JM- 
S39- 

Owen, O., I denominational I km a Hindrance, 
I, 'U: Potrrf of Public frraclting, II, 
104: Misiionary Force in China, 1. m'! 
Reform Movement in China. I, SM: 
Words of Farewell, [. n. 

PmcIBp Thr, liland^ ol. Sec tJe'anica. 

Passn Conception at Ilrligious IJfe, 1. 174- 

Paaaniin) in South America, I, 476. 

Pafesline. 1, 4u; Mobammedanitm in. I, 
J94; Spread oF Minion* from, I, jst. 

Paigrnve nn Mohammedanism, I, jas. 

Palmrr, Alice Freeman, on Practical 
Coiar^e* of Study. II, ijS. 

Pantheiain. what It ha> Done for India, 11, 

jJO. 

Papuan Race in the South S<a lalands, 

I, 4flO. 

Paraguay, Neglect of, I, 478; The Indian* 

of. I. 4&0. 
Parapcrj. Aicricnlttiral School of ibc Baael 

Mi "ion ai II, i6j. 
Parent*. Obligation of A* In Miuiont, I, 

if^. 140. 
Pari* Evangelical Missionary Society. I. 

491- 
Parker, E- W.. II, 356. j6i; Bible a Factor 

in Misiloni. II, 31; Co-up«raiion, I, a6o; 

Native Worker*, II. j6ji Seliiuiitiort, 

II. 3M- 

Parker. The«dore, on A. Judson. 1, 74. 
Park*. II. U., American N«|roe* in Africa, 

I. *,-i. 
Parinetee. H. Franci*, The Conference, I, 

Parri*h, C. H.. The Conler«nce, I. $7. 
Pamona, Mita E. C, Study of Miuioti*. 

I. (44. 

Pascue, Tame*, Work in Mexico, I, ijy, 

Pa^^ton for RedeeminK Humanitv, I, 190. 

Pattor. The. I. ijj-ijo. "*': a Slinionan' 

Biihop, I. 117: Pcrvative Pernunality of. 

1. iBp. tfti; Power, I, 130: Resnoniiibility 

and Privilege of, I, las. lyt; Use ol Lit- 



erature by. 1. iS9i. 171-174: and Teaehins 
of Prajrer Life, I, i8t. See Native Putor; 
also Native Worker*. 
PatcFBon, Georae, Chrinlian Literature, II, 

P«on, John G., II. 358, 356. 3^; Teacher* 
with "Uol Hearts.'' 117 87; The Drink 
Traffic. I. joi, 305. 49B, The .N'cw 
Hebrides, 1, -n?. 

Patriotism and Missions. II, ij^ 

Paul, Commi«tion of, I, 73: First U1»- 
*ionary, 1, 70, 3^1 ; Model V\ itness. 1. 63; 
Kc]alii>n to nun*c:hriilian Religions, I, 
368; nnd JutU>i.m. I. ^7. 

Panlinui. a Forcian Missionary. II. Mi- 

Peace. R<)>t>on of .Mi»)on> to, I, 347-1^. 

Pcarcc, Thomas \V.. Co-O[»ration Prac- 
tically Exemplified. I, j6ii Self-suppori. 
II, jia; Teacher a* an Evangeiiiit, II, 
110; Open Door. II.jss- 

Peck, A. P., Medical Tnining for Natives, 
II. it7- 

Pedagogical Training lor Misaionafini, II, 

P«ke. H. V. S., II, 361; The Conference, 

I. 58- 

Peking. Mitsion Pre** at, I, 248; Univer- 
sity, 1. us, II. rti. 

Penick. Bishop C. C. II. 365. 

Penny Per Week. ReswU* of. I.ni. 

Pcnicco*!, I>ay of. Meaning. I. ^j. 

Penlecosl. Geuruc F., Lvangcliiing the 
High Castes. 11, iin; Outlook lur Ihc 
Coming Cenniry, 1 1, 316; The PaMor 
and the Forciiin Field, I. ia$. 

Penzoto, Francis. II i> ConvetaioB and 
Woik in Buenos Ayres, I, 4&i. 

Periodicals, Christian, Need fur un Mission 
< Iround. 11. 4^, tij: M imionary, [ , 133, 
160; Missionary, in Mexico, II. si; Pic- 
tures in. 1, :6H; fur Women, II, 73. See 
Lilcralucc: also .\r<ritia[iet!i. 

Perkins. William, Need of More Conac- 
craicd Giving, I. 184. 

Perrinc. S. A., Wild Men of Aiutn. I. 511, 

Perrinc. Mr*. S. A., II. jss- 

Perry, Commodore, (.)iicn Japan. I, 407. 

I'er«ec«lion, Ovemiled. I, 337. ^fii, 4*3, 467, 
it', 474. 4«S. 4^, in. W-'. iA II. JW 

Periia, Survey of. 1, 434-4JS; Medical Wofit 
in, II, ju;- I'ow'cr of a Miwonary Life 
in, I, 93; Relation of Mission* to the 
OovcmmFnl in. I. 3^; Home* in. I, 357, 

Personal Element in Misalonary New*. I, 
iftS. »«■ 

Personality, the Power of in F. M., I, 80, 

II, iiu, ito, 15^. 170, 335. 

Personal OTiligation, I, 07, 81, 03, 03, in, 

t^u, i;i, 188. ai7. See Reflex Influence. 
Personnel, I, ly See Members nl E. C. 
Peru. Missinn Worker* in, I, 478. 
Pervasive Inllnence of Christianity, I. «!> 

4A*. 

Peschcl Oscar, Educational Need ol In- 
ferior Races, II, 1F5. 

Pethawur, Mi^*ion* and Plplotnacy, I. jsB. 

Peilee. Nlr*- J. H., Plea for Christian Lit- 
erature, II, 70. 

Phallic Worship. Poot-bindiag the Seal of. 
II, 191. 

Philamhropy of Missions, General, II. »ya- 

Philipcine Itlinds, II, 356; Drink Traffic 
in. 1, 383: Natives of. I, 497; N><d in. 
1| A971 Open Door in, I, 4ig6-4P7; Prob- 
lem of, I, M7; i'rogres* of Gospel, II, 
jo; Sludv o(, I. i&i. 

fillips. Charles. Itopefulnesa of Work in 
Africa. 1, 4fA. 

Phillips, Mauricse, The Conference, I. 57: 
Christian Literaiurr, II, 74; (•ovrmmeni 
and Mis*ioniricv I. (oS. 

Philosophical Aspect ol Mission*, I. 154. 

Philoaophtcal System* ol Cltina and Japan. 
I. 3^J9J 



P^li 



J 





fhraacr. WiUos. II. ^7; S<M-«opT>on. U, 

195. See Medical Mimobs. 
pictora in MtMioaarj Lrtrntnre. I, 159, 

4to. II. U. 4t>- 
Pienoo. A. T.. II, a^ 9?9- 3^: Ultsiecurr 

Litenturc. I. iw. P/iwu t/f Co<t'i Fnw 

■ad Blcutng, il. }iy 
rktcn. A., n, J&7; Krlifiaiu Mid Educa- 

tionat Problem* to J^V***' i> S*?- 
Pilgria'f rro^rew id Clitne*«, II. 72. 
Pioaeer UlMioiuhci. Uuiltfiottofu of. I. 

3QS- 
Pioneer Work. I. it?. 4M. 11. Jt*. 
Pioocen ol Bible Tramlaiioa, II, li. 
Pitt, R. II.. AdmilUfrraUon of the Mtsttoa. 

1. tfS. 
Pin, Irrautible. tor AdrUKe, II. iiS-S9>- 
Pled»e*j lndivi«Iaal. 1. 187. ijj. 
Point Barro*. Prc^bruniB Minion m, I. 

Point Hope, £pi*cop^iaa Mitlion in. I, 

Politick Influences in Devetopmetn ol Mif 

lion*. I. ««. .. ,. , _ ., 

Political ReJorfDation Noc Aim of F- M-. 

Potlical World and M iuioctaric*. I. 4^ 
f^litr Ukoifctt in Miuiioo OrgaiuutiMi, 

Pofnanr. Altitude of ClinMMB Uimoas 

Tomrci. II. i7^ K9. ^Bb-aW. 
PolrneiU. S«* Oceanic*. 
Pona[>e, Wofk in. I. «s- , , 
Poena lionie (or Hinda \\ idowi, II. ttt. 
PopoUce and the MiHionar)! in Chma, 

Popaw Meelin(% Committee on, 1. it, 11. 

jBi. 
PopuUlion, Nattre. ol Special ImporlAace 

in Tropical Countitc*, I, 4>^ 
Porter. J F. H, j&*. *^ „ ^ ^ 

Porto Rico. Bible \\ork in. U,3f>: ind the 

Ruah of the Dm [>niitu lions. 1. x-j. 
Poit, CbfistUn Fredrrick, I, 4SS. 
Po«. George IL, The Place ol Medical 

Work in Mi»ian», IT. !«. 
Poner. Buhop H. C. II. 3S3: On the Phil 

ippine*. I, 497- . ,. .- 

PowcTk, F. reiTT. Mi»iunarte« and Nation 

alllics in Turkey. I. ta 
Prayer and Hfntficence. I. 175-*™- 
Prayer, for Ulcsiing on ihe Conference. I, 

13. 6a; Calendar!. Miiiionary. I. iss; and 

(n*iRg. I, 1B3: In*pitation of. I. 1B3: 

Life, Dcirelopmeni of. 1. iSi; The Gau)|e 

of Power. I. at 9<MM. "Ai: Sr^iematic, 

1. iH 
preacher. The Misfionar* A». II, Sjiii; 

Training of. II. 86; Need of. I. tn- 
Preaching. Adftpialion ot. II, gj. 86; Power 

of. II, iDj, loti; in Native, not Foreipi 

LanKuaEr, I. w6. , . „ , „ 

Prrliminary Work ol Iht Conference. Nar- 

raiiwe of. I. lo-i*. . „. 

Preihyterian Church in V. S. A. fNonn). 

and the American Board. I. aai: Miiiioo- 

arie* Supported by Individual Cnurche*. 

I, i«: Cittaity. 1, a«. Mi. **3. at*. 'J". 

'S^ II, «. 6j _ . 

Pretbyterian Church In England. Comiir. 

I. a»; Swalow Prcst, II. 7a. 
Presbyterian t:iiurch of Ireland. I, 97- . 
Presbylrrion Church of Nova Scolia. m Iht 

New Hebrides. I. 441. 
PrcibTlerian Church fSouth). I, 97. 
Presbyterian Co-operation in Japan, I, a^- 
Presbyteriani. United. I. 97- 
Pre^rntitiR Ihe tlospel. Manner ol. II. H-94- 
PretWent MeKmlrv. Ser McKinley. 
Press. A Channel for Missionary News, I, 

164, i&j- Sec Literature. 
Press. Misiuon, Character of Emptoyeea. 

II, ((, j6; Character of Superialendeat of. 




tVD&X 



II. 54: Maaageneot of. II, 90. 51; CoB- 
ity and Co-operatioD in. I, a«8-^i. II. jr. 
an Individual School, ll, 56; Prayer Ser*- 
iees m. II._s6; Power of. I, 101. Support 
of. II. s^: Caefulnesa ol. II, 51. 65 

Press. Satire^ on Rehyioui Insiittitioni al 
India, I. sen; nnn-Chnstian. II. 68: Power 
of. in Turkey. I. -jt; Teitimoay ol. lo 
Ui%«innf. Brazil. II, uo. 

Pres* and Publication Committee. I. 17, H, 

Preston, Sliss E. A.. GcdctaI Wort l«r 

Women, II, 100. 
Previous Confctvaces, I. ta-ai 
Price. Mias E. K.. S. V. ^|.. Cbicafo, I. 

Price. F. M., Micronesia, 1, 495, 
Pncsfhwd. Brahman. I. joj; Romaa. in 

!>ouih America. I^ 47s. 
Pntxiarr Schools. .Sec Elementary SchooJi 
P^ipJe* of UtssKin CoIIcbc ManagemeM. 

I J ■ 1 4^* 149. 

Prmung Prr»a- Sec Press; also Literature. 
Problems in the Relations ol Mitsions to 

(jOTcraraents. I, J3s-j4«t 
«t>gramme Commincc, II. jft^aSf. 
Programme of the Conference, ll jei-in* 

^u'^;7in.^i. 1^ ^ '"■ ^-'"^'S^ 

P^tTr%* ct Naijon*. Handmaid of Mh- 
»K*n». I. loii Influence of Missions oa. 

Pr^s of Cod's Favor and Blessing. JI, 

Proportionate Givins, 1. 141. iSi, ifla. 
Proselyting Studems. t. 440. 
^otection of Converts. See (lorcmmeata. 
^'*'"""'' ^'"■'"' °' Adherents, it 

PU&.C Ubraries. Ut.Imng, for MUsionary 
Literst uie, I. t6t- I&i. 

Pubjk .Mreimgi on Missions, I. i.r-i4i 

I ub. cation and Pre»s Committee. H.jtt. 

Pubhoitions on Mission Fields Sec Lit- 
erature; also Presn. 

Pullman. Dr.. II, jj?. 

Pulpit Sef^i« During Confercace, I. iS. 

Punjab, ITie IVvaa ^, II, jjB. 

Purvey. Ceorge T \l. ..j; ReUlioa ol 
Mitoons 10 .\polog(!:C Problems. I, jri. 

Pyeng Yang Slatmn. Korea, I. ew *^ 

Pygmies, Africa. Work amonfc II «e. 

4tn«k<.r«. See Friend.. "^ *"" 

Uualifieationf of the .Medical Misiionary. 
11. »;.3To; of Misstonaries. I. jot.jgg. 

nndcliffe-. VaTlace, II, jdA; Not CoBl- 

pclilioii. bu! ((vopcraiioo. I, mi 
Rattwayt in Africa. | 4' 1, 
Ramabji. PiinJita, Work for Hindu Wi*- 

ows. I], att, 
Ramsay, H«nry. II, z^g. 
KBndafl. Mrs. J. H., Consecrated Gnrii«, 

RankiM. n. C.J Use of MisakMi Lileratnre 

by Putors I. 171. 
Raratonjra. Work ol the L. M. S. in I m 
Raymond. A. V. V., II. j^. "• '' '"■ 

Reader, R. R.. Teaching. Il, ty^ 
Reading. Development of Taste for. II, 6& 
Rebmsnn. John. Geogtapbical Work ia 

Africa, I, jSTf. 
Reed. I^wis T., Social Influence of H'la- 

sions in Turkey. I, 456. 
Reed. Mary. Story of. I. 174. II. ^48. 
Reflex Influence of the Support ol Ml>. 

tions. I. a. 139. aoo.mg. See Rctalra. 

Incidental. 
Reform Movement in Cbina. I, S4»-ssa. 
Reformation, Bible Society the Corollary. 

II. w: Mission Work of the, 1, md. 
Kefornied Churcti in the V. S., I, gy, 116, 

'3^- 4JJ. *3T. spa. Jfii, s»7. II. *Ta. 
Regions Beyoiia Missionary Union. I. 



I 



J 





INDEX 



479 



Held, C F.. n, 3S4, 3731 S«l^tuppcrt in 

Korea, II. jiA 
KeligiDni ol the World, StfltiMica ot, II, 

M&- 
RcligiciUK and Edncaliorut ProbLemi in 

Japan, I, sj:-534- 
Keligiau* Sy&ttciM ul East, II. Jjt>. 
Rclt|ioui Teaching in Ui»p«n»aric«, II, n6. 
Keligious Tract hocirty, LoniJun, 1, jjj. 

II, 40, 81: Work lor Mi»ioi]«, II, 4'- 

44. S^ 

Krmmnnkyo Seel, Japan, I, $3;. 

Rcpon*. Annua). I, i^. 

Kepofis on Literary W'nik. Need of, II. te. 

Kescrv4iiuD«, Indisn, Prosreti on, I. 41- 

Keipansibilhics, of To-dny. I, im; of the 
Church, I. iu-ii;; Our. I. 76; of Women 
Respcclinc Mission*, I. 114-117. 

Reiulia a1 MisMon*. Fertnancnt, aee Na- 
tive Churchcf. M, *rj-rf*: ««' Native 
Worker*, 11, «i-a;i; •« ScH-sttpport. 
1 1 . rf<». "9- 

Resuhi. Incidental. I. jo*, «I4i sas-JTT- S<c 
Keflex Irflucnce, 

Review ot the Century. I. 4("-4i]> 

KcvivaU in Mit^ion Lanilii, !l, 116. 

Rheni»h Miition, The Fields of, I, 413: 
Melhada, 1. joo- 

Riec. I.uther. I. 118L . 

Richard. Timtuhy. Literary Work m Chtna. 

RidiaidV llcnry, llopefulnen of Work. 
Alrica, I. 46j; Manner of TrcaenhnK iiie 
Goaivcl. II, B J- . . - . 

Richards, W. K.. Relation of the Society 
to the Miasionarie*. I. aao. 

Ridley, Bi»hop William. Il, lA 3^: In- 
diana ut British Columbia. T, 46; Story 
ft, I, rjc, 4%' 

Ricr»> C. T.. b. V. M.. Auburn, I, tia. 

KijiKt. Edward. II. 363; Greeks of Turkey. 
r 4SSi OiriMiitn l,ittr»itut<, II. s;. 

RiKRi. Elia». I. «!. 

Rinman, John, The Conference, I, 57- 

Robbcn Inland. Moravian Million (or 
I..epcra, II, J47- 

Roben CoIIcrc, Conitantinople. II, 1*9. 

Robinixjii. W. E.. II, j(m. 

Robson, GeuriEc, II, j**' Mt»iioni, non- 
Chriiiian KcHgioni and A[>oloK<t>c*> I. 
jiU: S, v. M. Watchword. 1. loj. 

Rockford. 111., Advance Club of, I. 163. 

Raman Catholic Church, in China. 1.^ J65: 
Mis*ian« in Madagascar, ID, joo: in Suuth 
America. I. »«, 477, 479. A^- ■t'l*. H- UJ- 
in Central America, I. ATI: (>ppa*itiun to 
ProtesUnla. II. i»; PropaKanda. Meth- 
od* of, I, 480: Number of Adherenu, II. 
336. 

Koou. U. B. St. }., II. 174- 

Rooaevrlt, Theodore, Address by, I, 40. 

Rou, John, Qualiticaiiona of Misiionarics, 

I. ]0I. 

Roth, W. J., Ilopefulneai ol Work, Alrica, 

I. 4&5- 
Rowe. Phoebe, Women of India, II, log. 
Rudi^ill. A. W , Mi»'injn Presses, IT, sy 
Ruk. Caroline I«lard*. I. tiiS- 
Rufl-iia. The DibEc in, II. n, ij; in China. 

!• 5S7- Million in Persia. I. 4JS- 
Kyckman, K. B.. Iicnominationali«m s 

Hindrance, I, ijt. 
SrotIAw. lo Giving. I, i96; by Convent. 

I. 4** Sec Native Cliristians. 
Sadharan'Samaj, the Dtred Result of Chrla- 

tianiry, II, 338. 
Sai Mun An Church, an Illniilration in 

Self-tuppon. II, 303- 
St. Hilsire, B. de. on Buddhism, I, 359. 
St. Paul River. Africa. Induatrial Work 

ol the Lulheran Church. II, 153. 
Salary of Native Workers. II, aji. ^55. 37*- 

3u; Overbiddinf, I. 341. 



Salvador. Republic of. Per Cent, of Spaaiih 

Blood in. 1. 47ti- 
Salvation Army, I, aaj. 
S.imrKi, I. 491. ]l, j6s- 
Sampwrn, T. R., Literature. II. 56. 
Sander*, C. S.. Native Workers. II. jjo- 
Sandwich Islands, f. 9;, ioj. 49>^ 
Sanford. A. B., II, 369. 
Sangir I., 1. ,119, 

San Luis I'olosi, Convention in. I. ajfS. 
Savase Island. I. 491. 
Scaadituvian Socictict, I, xjs. 
Scandinavian Volunteer Movement, I, tii. 
.SchaeBrr, Mrs. A., ]i, JJff. 



SchafT. Philip. II. 

- ■ - 11. 3SS. 
Schaui^er, Mrs. A. F., Mi&ttoury Inlcrest 



Schaiifflcr. A, V 



11. o. 

■■-. IL 



and Literature, L t^ 

Schicrrr, It. A., II. 370. 

Scholl, CeurKe, 11, ^s: Induttrial Educa- 
tion. II, !«; The Miasionary Society, I. 
anq: The Sintion, I. j^. 

Schoolbociks, Power of, II. 61; PreparaiioB 
of. II. 60: in India, II. 47. 

Schools. Danger of Ftirgettirig Their Aim, 
I, 75; Dilfieultica, I. 459; tlcmcniary in 
India. M, iji-ii3; in Korea, I. sy>; Evan- 
gelittic Aicency. II. 115, ijS. ui; Style 
of. Demandrd. II, 114, 1(9; Superintend- 
ence of, II, iza; in nyria, 1, ^i. See 
Eductilion; Ekmcniary School*; Col- 
lege*; Teachert; Training Schools. 

Schrciher, A., The Cnnfcrence, I, 57; (tom- 
i'y. I. W} Hutch Missions, I, 4^1; Ger- 
man Miuion Work, I. 413; llopefulnesi 
of Work, 1, 465; Kesponse for Gcrnun 
Uctcgation, 1, 331 Utiliiing the Secular 
PrcM, I, 169. 

Schutman. Pre*.. Drink Traffic in tbt 
Philippines, I, jSs- 

Schwartt, C. F., in South India. I, .(Oi. 

Sehwrinitt, Paul dc, Aim of Miaiions. I, 
79: Comity. I. ijSi Dutch Guiana, I, 
4^3; Native Wcckcr*, [I. a&i. 

Science, Coiumcrec, cic. Relation oI the 
MiiiiunArv to, I, 325-333. 

Science of Miuions, Educational V'ftluc of, 

I. JOT. 

Science. Western, and Govemincnta of noo* 

Chrii^lian Nations, II, ti6. 
Scientific Research Not Opposed 10 Evan< 

gelisltc Wnrk, I, J39. 
Scope and Significance ol the Co'nlcrenc«. 

I, 49-'S- 

Scocland. Conversion of. I, 144: Bible Diffu- 
sion. II, tj-jo; Medical MUiii)ttT, I, 4i(v. 

Scullish Miinionik and Srlf-svippon, [I, 314. 

Scott, Mr5. J. E.. Missionary Literature. 
I, t6i. 

Scripture. Dr^ On Sympathetic Develofh 
mrnl from Training, II, ij^ 

Seriiitnrcs. See Uibic, ~ 

Sciiddcr. Mr*. D. C, II, jSi. 

Scuildrr. Ijrwis R., II, 374: The M*IM1 in' 
India, I, 503. 

Scuddcr, Uyrau t., Relation of ExprcMion 
tu Impressions in leaching, [I, 176. 

Secretarial Assistant* in the 1:.. C, I, 16. 

Sclf-sacri6ce ol Ciiavcits, I. 463. 

Self-iuiiport, II, 1H9-334: Agreement in. II. 
310: ui)>1ical Light on, IX, 317. Cuaclu- 
siona on, II, 3J3; Comity Essential to. 
I, J4]. 344. M9i Difficulties in, II, mj, 

I. 78. 203. 3S3; Governor Roosevelt's Re- 
mark. I, 43; General Principle* of. II. jS»- 
997. jao, 321; Inrtuence of, II. 91: (nde- 

(endcnce Essentia) lo. I. jS6; Medical 
Vork. Aids to, 11. ws; Mission Presnea, 

II, J3; Native Churchcn, II. jStasMi Need 
of Judgmeiit in, II, 3*1 ^ Not Melhnd, but 
Men. 11, 3)*: Present Sintws. II. stt-sm 
ivcottish Mission*. II. 31^; Short-cut 
Method of. II, jut; Suggestion* Beaririy 
00, II, 319-3U1 Training in. II, 993. 316: 
ol Students, L SJfl Working ol, in th« 




4Ho 



INDEX 



F1«ids. II. J9>-3iv- DufBU, tl, 3W, Chink. 
II. jiu; Egvi'i, I, 4X1; Kuch^u Ci^llesc, 11, 
iji ; HoniiVonK, IT. jt j; Shantung, 1 1, 
318; Ejitt India, II, ^s: ln<lta. II. 3»7: Ja- 
pan. II. J96: korvB. 1. us. II. r>'. 3U. yxi: 
MMUgoscsr. II. joo; Manchuru. II. ,314; 
McKicui I), i^; Sumatra. I. 3001 SiajD, 
I. S'j: South Scat, t, ym; Tutkery. II. 
;«. 

ScUyn. Dithop, Work in ihe MctaoMinr 
ItlaiiOk. I. 4<u. 

Sconi Mahva. InJuitrial Work 0! the 
KrtBlii^h FrirntU ct. II. tu. 

Seoul. MfJical Furcc in, "I, 344; The Sai 
Mun An Oiirdi, Self-siipToi^- "• J** 

Scpuy Mutiny, liffect of, I, 407. 

SerniDiHirc Bajiliiit Miuicn. I. 405; Literary 
Worfc of, LI. Bj. 

Seven Vrsri ol Mi>i«Jnn Studjri (i (43- 

S<ymour, \V. F.. II. 36J- 

Shan^anistn, I. si^ 

Shangliai Conlcrroce of 189a. I. 4n; Mis- 
sion t'rp^Ji at. I, *4*- 

Shaat. (il BnrmB, I. s>^ 

ShaniunH. Dr. >!«vius'> Work in, II. joi; 
Sdf-»upport in. II, jiS. 

8ltatliick. Mill C, Native Women in Tur- 
key, I, >iu: Onibanx in t'ffn, II. ^jb. 

Shearvr. G. L.. \\'orV of American Trail 
Society. 11, 43. 

ShelfielJ. D. Z.. II, j6^. 3Ji; 
t.ileraiure, II, 4s: Naliva W< 



. ChriMian 
oricrM. 1 1- 



»6i. 



Sheihadri, Narayan. nn " The FirM Bo^A 

for Children." Tl. 66, 
S)iini<>i«m, lliaractCT ot, I. J9J, s^; Alti. 

iu<3e Toward Oiri^tianity. I, $3'- 
Shopinatrr, Mr*. G. K-, II. jfu. 
Siani. II. J.^s; Influence ot .Misiiom in. I. 

sn: Livins: nuddhiiRi. I, 3tt4: Mitsion 

\Vork in, 1, $31; Poiirion of Wnmtn in. 

I. 5»'. 
Sierra Lconc, Liquor Traffic in, I, 36.^ 
Stttnificanec tit the Conference. 1, 56-64; 



Simoni, Mil*, II, j6r- 
II. t^ 



Siminona, E. Z., 



3SS1 Native Wotkeri. 



Sini^csc, Difficullic» of Bible Translntloti 

in. II. Ji. 
S^ngh, Lilavsti. llor EagcrneH la Learn 

Eaglisit. I. 47: Higher Kducalion ul 

Women, It, ijj. 
Singing, VaLuc of, in Evangelittic Work. 

Sioux iTulians. Theodore RooMrcil on the 

Vk (irk nnxinf, I. 40. 
Sitka, Indusinal Schnul at, 1, 4^ 
Slave Trade, .\biilition ol, I, 40J, ■|OS. lf'7- 
Sloan. H aller U., H. fif. Lhc Conference. 

I, s6; Native Churdies, 11, 277. 
Sluwan, \V. J.. Help* tr> Umlerstandiiia tht 

Bible. It. J7; .Scotland and Hiblc Diffu- 
sion, II, 17. 
Smith, Hdwin, The Lonlercnee. I. 58- 
Smith. Crforgc, On H. V. M., I, 10*, 
Smith, Jainr*. Industrial Etliiutlon, II, M7. 
Smilh. Judiun, II. aw. 47«. 37^: A<idre«» 

hy. I, K}-, Vi«it to EBgland in Interest of 

the Ci>nf(Tencp, I. >i. 
Smith. Mr». Jiid*on. 11, jfifi. 
Smith. Mtip- Mo»c». If. .)!9; Penults ot 

\Vaiiia.n'i MiMionsry Societies, I, J17. 
Smith. Stanley. Member o( " Camliridgc 

Seven/' I, log. 
Smith, Sydney, and William Carey. II, 307. 
Smith. T, S., II. 369: Native Chrittians and 

tion-ChristiBHs. I. 514. 
Smith. Wilton Merle, II. 370: Support of 

Mitsionahe* hy Individuiil Cburcbes, I. 

Smyrna. Flicdner in. I, 3" 

Smjlh. iiccrge B., The Chrirttan CoHeRe, 

if. 130: The Native ChuTcli, 11, aSx 
Snyder. F. L.. H, 355. 



Social EliQuette, Vsliit o( KiMwt«dc» oC 

1. 3116. ' 

Social Influence ol Mission*, I, 333, 33b 

430. 4S6. *S7- 
Social Life in India, I. jto. 
Social PiugieKi 4nd Peace, RcUlioo of Mia- 

NionK to, 1. 347-3S& 
.Societies Missionary Bnnrds and, Lilt, lit 

38jS. See Miiiionary Socictjr. 
Society for Promoting Chnatian Koowl. 

edge, I. 40J. 
Society tor Promoting Female Education in 

the Ka^i. I, 118; (_>TKaniie<!, I. 306. 
Society for the Propagation of Chr^atlui 

and Gencial Literature in China. II. 4$, 

(ij, 74- r". - , 

.Society fiir the Propagation of the Gotpa 

in Forciftn Parts, I, 403; KehooK in Inilia. 



I. 506: Work in .\»*)im. I. $13. 
lomai, see Arya-. Brahmo-. Cbr 
Sa d riara n 'Soma j . 



.'wnier^'ille. Mary, I,.eader in Woman'l 

W<wk, I, 318. 
Soothill, U. E.. II. 364- 
Sopcr, Jullut. Cif-.ipernlion. I. iyi; RcU- 

fiiiui 2nd l-Iducaltoniil Pruhlcma in J&paOi 
. S3': SeHnuppnrt. II, agft. 
Suorce of Power. I. 8?: Coti«e*Tailoo. I, 

«.); Go*|>el. 1. qi; I'rayer. t. v- 
Suuth Africa, Berlin Miision in, I, 300: 
S. v. .M. in. I. lur. III. 



South America, Survey .of, I, ^Z^^* ^^| 



Clainix of. II. 33a: TSivtsion 
I. iSj; Ignorance of Christianitv. I, 333; 
lllileracy in, II. 168; Indians of, I. 4fo- 
48J: Lancuagea of, I, tft^: Marriage Cua- 
toni». ]l. aSS; Priesthood in. I, 477; 
Roman Catholic Mit«ions, I, 479; not 
Spanish nur Christian, I, 474. 

South American Evangelixativn Society ol 
Toronto. I. 478. 

South .American Miuionary Society, I, 483; 
Tierra del Fucgo, I, 4781 

South Sea lilantU, The Beginniag of Mis< 
sion* in. 1, 451; Discovcriet in, I, 491; 
Race* of. ]. 490; Trader in, I, 491; Trana- 
farnialiuii in. 1, 477. 

Southern BaiHist Convention. I, 119. 

Southern I'lc^liyteriaiui, I, 07. 

Spain. U'l.rk nf the Scoili»n Bible Socictv 
in. II, iR. 

Spanith, Call fur Co-opcralion lo Secure 
Chriilian Literature in. II, u. 

Spanish- American War, I, 161; Cott of. 
I, 178- 

.■^ccia! Appeals. Giving, I, ifli-iu. 

Special Meetings of the K. C, ITai'^S- 

Sfiecilic Objects for Financial Support, I, 
136, See Giving. 

Speer. Hoberi E., II. j7S; Pulygamirta in 
Native Chuicli, II, sBb; Pen^ia, I. ^mi 
SignlGcanci; uf the Keiimentcvil Cianlrr- 
cnce, I, jH: Supreme and Uetermlninr 
Aim of F. M., I. r-t. 

Spencer. J. O.. The OpponunJtieB for In- 
dustrial Traininii. IT. 164. 

Spirit and LimiUiions uf MiMionory Com- 
i'y, I. a3J-'J5. 

Spirit Wor»liip in Burma. I, S'Sl 

.Spiritual Povrcr in Miftsionn, n. in. 

.Sprrng. Mm. K, M., II. jto. 

Sjiringifield, Itl., Unman** Miiuiatiary So- 
cial ITnion. I, i^. 

Stability of the ChineM. I. S44;S4S- 

Stanley. Iltnrv M., 1, loi ; Coniribntiona 
to Miisioos. I, 3*5: Geographical Work. 
I. 33<'; On .Mioions. I, 12^ 

Stanwood. Mi« E. H,. II. jfii. 

State Federation of Women 1 Clubs, I, 145- 

Slation, The. I. »!•*/•; Book .\gent. Need 
nf. II, Bo; Centrn). Advantages of. I. t^i 
Each an Ei^temial l'*H, \. jSo; Number 
of Mis^onaries al, I, ato; Organiialion 
Governed by Polity. I, aSi; Poorly 



I 



INDEX 



4«i 



[«»io«ar)' Pcriodieali, I. 



Uaaucd, a Wutc, 1, J95; S«kciion oE. 

I. M- 

Slatiatjcs, Sumnurv of, II, jjj; C!enlenniat, 
Abstract o4. I, 4^ .ijn. 

Suiiitics No >i»siir« of PmitTCW. II, jjS. 

Siatiitic*. CoramiilM on. II, jSt. 

SUtius. the Pott. 11, w. 

Sirphrfi, KirM WimetK, 1, 8^ 

StFi>)irn!t, E. O.. II, 369. 

Steven». Dr., II. 360. 

Stevrns. Iltfiry. of Vermont. Caxtoo Ex- 
hibition at Bible*. II. 14- 

SleveniwR, J. Ka««., Tli« Student Volun- 
teer Movrment, I. int. 

Strwart, Jamc*, Hi* Work at Lovrdale, 

II. tx6. 

Slock. EuKcne, I mpi'cu.'tjon* o\ thf Coo- 
frrcncc. I, s": Diversity iti Native Work- 
ers. II, 173; Obllgatiua of Thii Genera- 
tion. I, 91: Ouiloctt for the Coming Cen- 
tury, Jl. 3iA: ReUtioii ul ihc Misiiooary 
to science, L'ummcrcr. etc.. I, J2g; Kela- 
lion nf ihc MHi^irrniiTv Society to the 
Denomination. I, aaj; Review of the Cen- 
tury. I. 4111; Student Volunteer Move- 
ment, I, 111. 

Stone. Mnry, Medics] Training of Chinese 
tlirts. II. 3JJ, 

Story of E. C. I, 9-64. 

Straclun. Mr*. E. S., II. 359. 

Strategic I'ainl lor Mia-iton^. t. 169. 

Strotuc. A. H., Authority and Purpose ol 

StroBg.'E.* E.. Miwit 
165. 

Strong, lodiah, " The New Era," [, 71. 

StuddT C. T.. I, tr>9. 

Studebafccr. Mr.. A. H., II. 3*1. 

Student Volunteer Miuionary Union (Eng- 
land) Ontsnitation, 1. 106. rce-io». 

Student Xolunlcer Movcincnl, I, 99< <o4- 
114; Anglican Uiahopi on. I. loj; Char- 
acter of. I. 4uq: Etluraliiinal Uepaftinenl 
ff. It 1541 '^y. Lihrary. I, 1 ij ; Mr-txage 
to the Churchc*. I, tu: Respontibiliiy, 
I. ]os; Watchword, 1, e;, 103. 111. 

Students and Young Peunic, I. 48. 

Student*. Chmlian and Heathen. 11, iij; 
in Government College* in India, II. 141; 
Mohammedan. I, 10^. 

Study of Mission*, .'^rt'emaiic I. 106. 113. 
14J-U8. 151. lii, ibj. 174: Study Course* 
S, V. M., I, 106. 

Sudan. Ea*lem. Covtrnmcnt Prohibition 
ol Mioionary Work in, II. 33,ii-, Latett 
Advance* in. I, tn. Opporlunilio in, II. 
jii: FrohitiiliuD of Liifuur Tc.ttric. I, jfj; 
Wilmrrt Hroolte'* Mittinn to, 1. jjo. 

Suffering, Power in. I. 96. 

SuHeringi of CliriiC, Incentive to F. M., 
1. 8n, 

Snhin. South America. Marriage Cusioms, 

It. jes, 

Sumatra. I. 97: Ctcrman Miaiions in, I, 
300, 331, 41V 

Summary ot the E. C, Programme. I, jo. 51. 

Summer Campaigai, S. V, M., I. 106. 

Summer Conferences of Drilioh Student* 
Union. I. 106. 

Sunbeam Society, I, 119. 

Sunday-school, Liternttire, Need for in Mis- 
sion Land*. II, ii\ L«Mon Rolls, [I. 96; 
Mtif'tonsry Ltbrane*. I. t;;: and Mi«- 
sions. I, 134. 140; >[ovemcnt. Baptist. I, 
t(9; a Kr^niirce. 1. Ofl- 

SoperiTi'rntl-ing Providence nf (lod. in For- 
eign Mit*j'in». 1 [. j>^ 

Supefi(itcndtn(<i, Missionary, I, i£. 

Superstitions ol Heathen. II. no- 

Support (if Missionarien l>y Individual 
Churches, I, 193- jwv 

Support of .MiisiO'nB by the P'T'fr, tl. ijt. 

Supporting Pupils, I. 1^5. 

Surinam. Ctcrman Missions m. I, 414- 

Survey of Ihe Field. I. 381358; nb«lac)es. 
381-4D0: General. I. 4<ii-4J3- 



Sulherland, A., Comity, I, J67, .73- 
Sulherland, W. S., Hinduism, I, 3971 Train- 
ing-KchnoK and iiigher Education. II, 

Smiee, The Last Imtance ol. l.JOO- 
Swaiow, English Presbrterian Mission at. 

II. 7'- 
.Sweden. Student Volunteer Movement ia. 

I. m. 

Syllabic Writing. J, 4S9. 
Syllabus of Mission Study. I, 153. 
Syria, Survey uf, I, ^jui-i^i; Ueirui, 1, 97; 
Medical Work in. II, 104; Sell-suppon, 

II, 331. 

.Syrian Protestant College, I, 97, 441- 
Sy!>icinatJc Beneficence, I, [81, ii!s: Duty 

ul. I. iSb-ioo, jn- 
Systematic Prayer, T, 1851 Prayer Cycle*, 

I. iSi. 
Svsicinatic Study uf Mlsiions. Sve Study. 
TMvnloiK language. Gospel Trauhlation 

in, II, 30. 
Tahiti. Work of Ike L. M. S. in. L 49J. 

I], ft*. 
Talitha Kiimi. Orphan Home at Jerusalem, 

I. 3" 
Tamil, Literature for the Bliml, II, sj; Mia- 

sian in lailiiL, 1. 401; Traiuilati«n of the 

Bible, II, i<,. 
Tanjore. First Proieitunl MisMon 10 India, 

I, Sfs- 
Tautsm. Mingled with Confucian Elbica, I, 

3S9; Tolerated in China. I. si5- 
Taylof, F. Howard. Medical Missionary, 

It. aoj 
Taylor. Mrs. F. Howard, Independent Na- 
tive Workers. II. t?\; Woman's Outlook 

in China, I, ^7- 
Taylor, Joseph, II, 369; Particular Evil^, 

Native Churches. 11, J81. 
Taylor, ]. Hudson. China Inland Mission, 

I, 174, JJ3. S3^". Conlerrnces cf Mission- 
aries, I. »7i; Marriage of Missionaries, I. 
315; Source ol Power. I, S7. 

Taylor, S. Karl. Mean* of Arousing In- 
terest in Miisii^ns. I. i>> 

Taylor. William. Work Through Inter- 
preter*, II, 88. 

Teacher As an Evangelist. II. iiB-ut. 

Teachers. Ideas for Missionary, II, iiSB- 
187; Character of, II. 87; Heathen, Use 
of. II, qK. laj, i44i Mission Colleses, In- 
fluence of. 11, Mj; Necessity ol Normal 
Training lor, It. iss; I'owcr of. II. 61; 
in Primary Schools, Character ol, II, tu; 
Qualifications of, II. 170- Sec also Educa- 
tion: also Schuotaj Induttrtal Schoola. 

Teaching, Laws ol, II. i;o: Necesaitv for 
Training in, II, 168-17*: Relation ol E"- 
presvon tn Impression*, II. i7£-iSo. 

rechnical Education. Necessary Linca ol. 

II. 149. 

Tcljgu, Embossed Literature for the Blind 

in, II, «. 
Telugns. Work among, I. 97. 411. 
Temperance, Gilt of Missions la Turkey, 

Tcnrltyo Sect, Japan. I. S77. 

Terra del Fucro. The Language of, 11. 21; 
Marriage CuBiiin*. II. j!58; Work ol the 
South American Missionary Society in, 

I. 47S. 

Territorial Diviiton, I. ^34, 236. 
Thealoctical SehooK, Mission Study in, I. 
tsi; Problem of. I, 149; Teaching in. IL 

Thohum. Isabella, HiRher Rducatiotu II. 

K; Plea lor Christian [.iterature. II, ya; 
we* of Educated Womftrhond. II. iji. 
Thobnrn. J. M., I. 103: The Evangelist, 

II, 106. 

Thoma*. Jame«, II, 374; The Bible As a 
Factor in Missions, II, 30; DifEctilHct 
(n RihTe TrsmUtion. IT, ». 



i 



48» 



INDEX 



Th«nui>. J. S.. II. ju. 

ThompkiDR. L. W., 11. jCj. 

ThompKin. E. W. Lttenry Work in 
My •ore, II. 76. 

Tbonii»on. R. W^rdUw, I. la. II. jOs; The 
laUod \\url(i. I. w; Lesioa» ol the Ccd- 
I1U7, I, 4jo: UanKcr ol SrculariitnE Mic- 
nkiti School*, II, II.*: Krislion ol lh« 
Society lo the Mtoionarir*. I, ii$; Bc- 
«ponitc f^'f Utitiih Drleaxion, I. ji. 

ThoRiian. W. H.. Choice and Qualifica- 
lion* o( MuMonariet, I, 304. 

Thoipr. Mr*. C N., II. 363. 

Thrclkeld. E. L.. Worli in New Sooth 
Wales, I. ui. 

Thurrton. J. L.. It. 375. 

Tibei, Marnvinn Missions iti. I, jo?; An 
Unopened Coomrv, II, MS- 

Ticket Committee, 1. 18^ IT, J0I. 

Tientsin, Hospital. I, 917, 11. 19^ 

Tilhrs. Use of. I, i8i. 

Tiilnagn, Mnr.-ivian Missions in, 1. Ml 

Todd. Mr* H T. II, j(«. 

Tokelau l<I>nd<. I, 491. 

Tonga Islxnd^, I. m*- 

Tomince. David W,. The Hehre«k«. I. 
444; HoRpiuIr and Dlipcaurie*, U, jij. 

TourinK. II. m. ioi. 

True! SotietiM. II, 40. 

Tract Society, A t'nion in Mexico. I, jst. 
II. 64. 

Trade JournaU and Mistionary JourtuUa, 

I. 167 

Trmiaed Workers, Puvrcr o!. II. ^j. 

TrvininK Initituic. Tung Cbi>w. I. 9;. 

Training. Manual, Aim* of, H, iflo-iSj; 
WiJl-crlture by, U. 183-187. 

TfAininif ol Mi«ionnritt. I, j^jio' in 
Business. II, 58: in Medicine, II, jm- 
sec bUo Medical Mts^ium; Kced of 1 
110. JJ7. j«9. II, 85. 86, 90; ProlMlionary 
lc»i». I. M. 311, 31^, 

Training of Native Convrrts, II, 91; a« 

Nuitck, II, t3?; m% Medical Helpers. II. 

Ji8-2ag: As Evangelistic Workers, II. .-5; 

370. 
TraJnlng-Kbool (or Oeaconcssca, New 

York, I, 310. 
Traintng-scfiooK I, ^, 496. II, m. uj. 

Sec Schools. Kdtieation. 
Training Systems, Kiumples o(, I, 300-111. 
Training in Teaching, Neces*ity lor. II. 

Training and Work o( Native Christian 

Women, II. lUftjo. 
Translation and Distribution uf the Bible, 

II, 7-15: India. II, bs: tj'w nl .N'aiivcs in, 
H. if,. Sec Bible- 

TntnsTnlioR and the Jajtanne. II. 4JI 
Tianavaal. Carman MisMons in, I. 466: 

llluslration from the. I. 129: InequaJity 

ol Whiles and Ulacks. I. 4^7. 4*9; S. \'. M. 

in, I. III. 
Travanenrc. Medical Training ol Native 

Helpers ill. II ttS. 

Travelrrs «>, ("Htics. I, 333. 334, 

Traveling Bishop*, Missionary. I. JJ8. 

Treaty Kighl* ut MiiiionariL-s, I, J44. 

Trent, Council of, II. 14. 

Trinidad. SeH-nuppnrt in, 11. SQ}, 

Tripoli, Missions in, I, 4j0- 

Trueheart. Mrs. S. C. Means of Aroutiog 
Interest. [, lA 

Tung Chow. College ol ihr rrrsbyterian 
Etnard at. I. no; Training Intlitute. I. K 

Tunis. Minions in. I, 44c. 

Turkey, Survey of. I, 449-4571 '« ift», 1, 
«oi; American Missionaries in, I, ai; 
Dislribution and Sale ol Books in, II. 5S; 
The " Capitiihlioos." I. 34J: Euphrates 
College, I, g;; Greeks of. I, 455- 
456; Persecution in, EI. jqj: Production 
ol School-boaka in. II. 6t: Relation ot 
Missions to Ibe Gorcmuient in, I. 33B, 



34t : Natirr Pastors and the Missioiy 

ary, II, jijo; Self-support in, II, agti So 

cia) Influence of Mission* in. I. 4SO-4S7: 

Treaties with. I, 34'- 
Tiu-ncT. Bishop. Work in South Africa, 1. 

4;^ 
Tuskegee College. EtIncation Largvly In- 

duntriat, II. 1% 
Turniieih Century Fund, I. i66l 
t'mind*. I, ^, «i4: Bcginniag of Work 

in. I, 31J; (umracrce in, 1, jj6; Oppor- 

iiinilies in. II, 33J:. 
I'lphilas. II, I--. 
Vnalaska. I. *B». 
Undenoininalioiul Magaiincs, Valoc ol, t. 

il«. ib9. 
I'nilerwood. H. CI.. Self-support ia Korta, 

II. 301. 
Union Miasioaary CoaferciK«. New York. 

ittM- I- >S. 
Ilnitrd Ilrethren, Christian IJnioci of, I. m. 
United MeibodUt Prec Churches in Africa. 

I. 461- 
United Presbyterian Church ul Scotland. 

I. K'. Literary WorV of. II, jt. 
Unitcil Picabyicnan Church. Young Pm>* 

pie's Union. 1. iji: Kttypl. I. 4A 
United States, The Dnnk Tra£c I, ^ 

f7: PresTige in Atia. I. $46: and Turkey, 
Ml. 
Unity ol Chrlaliani. I. jj. 34. SS- 5^ ^J- ^"^ 

Unircrsitics, Birth of. in India, etc-, I. in- 
University of El Aahar. Studcnii in. I, 

1(0. 

riioccupied Fields, I. t^ jOS, 436. 4^7, II, 



Unpaid Service. I. iii. 316. 

Unwana, Africa, The Wonicn of. 1. 115. 

LMa, .Maimcre o) .Armenians ai, IF, to; 

Work for Orphan* in. ]l. 336238; Work 

Since the Maanacrc. I, 4S4' 
Uruguay. I, 47^1 Mi»!>ii>n Workers. 1, 4177. 
Uieftil or Oronmenial, I. lAo. 
L'tica Public Library, I, 1A3. 
Uirecht Mission Association, 1. 419- 
Valve of Public Meetings un Miiaioofc 

I. 141 I4J- 

Van Allen, Frank, Hospitals and Dtspcn- 

nries. It, 117. 
Vance. J. I.. Supreme and Dclcrminiag 

Aim oi F. M.. f. 85. 
Van Dyck. Curnelius. Translation oi Ihr 

Rihlc, Into .Vr^bic. I, -139: Anecdote ol, 

I. J07- 

Veda*, Basis of Arya-Samaj, 1. fi^ 

Veneiurla, Proportion of Muaronaries to 
Pupulaliun, I. 4781. 

Venn, Ilcory. 1, p. 

Veilicck. ttuLdu I,, I, 171, 

Vrrnacular t.iccraiurc. See Literalurc 

N'emacular Schools. See Education. 

Victoria Univemity, S, V. M. in, I tta. 

Viilsgc Kvangcli*!. Character of. II, iia 

VilUgc Hand Industries II. 14a. 

X'illage Schools, Livingiitonia. II. laj; Pri- 
mary, II, IJC-W3; Superintendence oif, II, 
tit; Syria. I, mi. 

Village Women. Work tor. II. 9$. 

Villagea, Work in. I^ 44^. 

Vinton, C. C. Opening of Korea. I. SM- 

Vinton, Sumner R., Sfili-iupp«n m Barm. 

II, 197. 

\'irgin of the Falls (So. America), 1, 414. 
Visayan Language, Gospel TransIattoD in, 

II. y 
Visits of Missionaries. T. 13I- 
Vocabulary of Snv.iges. Limited Cbaiacler 

ol II. It. 
Volunteer Band. Work of, I. iia. 
Volunteer* in Missionary Work. T, ^ 
Wakrfletd, T., Capacity of the Alficui 

People, I, 46). 
Watayat, Alt, a Martyr. 1, 314- 



n 



INDEX 



483 



Wilden, Miia P. J- Uiiiioiuirr Inlerm 
«nd Literature, I. 160. 

W'ftUbe. W. (!., Literary Work in China. 
II. 7* 

War and Miisioox, Conparcl m Civiliia- 
ing Agcnciei, I, irS. 

War. HcauIlB erf, A* to Miisiont. in Philip- 
pines, I, 4q6. 

V^ irnrck, Giutav, I, 77; Adminintration ol 
the Mi*«ion. I. JM9, w- 

Warriog Secu Nol Seen, I. 164. See Com- 
ity. 

Wvi with China. Effccl of. I. S54- 

Waihbiirn. (irnrgp, 11. ybji Ami ol Mit- 
■iona, I. 76; Clirinisn Callcye, l(, lay: 
The Conference. I. s6; MissionariM and 
Government iti Tufkcv. I, w 

Waste in r.ivintf, I. 180; Ilow Reduce, 

Waichword. S. V. M., 1.94- '"S- "'• ""-. 
Waterbury. Mr*. N. M, II, jfit; tteiulta 

oi Forming Woman** Missionary Si>- 

cielicf, I, 314. 
Waterman, LDciu% Quoted, IT, 8. 
Wataon, Miis. It. J6i. 
Watt. Toba G.. I, la. 
Watt Mr«. lame*, ll.JfT- 
Wealth oi Cnurch Sufficient. I. 171;. 
WmIUi, Consecration of. I, i;s; Reiponsi- 

blllty of, I. idi, 13J. 
Weitbrechl. On Clih»iian Literature, l(. 77. 
Welcome, AddrcMes of, I, J631; Response* 

to, 1. J1-J7. 
Wells. J. D.. Need and Value oi the Mia- 

iinnary Society. 1. Jij- 
Welth Calviniitic Melhodistit in Assam. I, 

Wcnii Ttan*latlon of ihe Bible, 11. i!t. a4. 
Wesley, John, and the Moravian*. 1. 414. 

n. 3-r- 

Wesleyait Church, I. M. 

We*leyan Meihodift Mi*»ionAry Society, 1, 

am; Literary Work in Myiore, II. 78. 
Wesleyans and the Kailin, I. ^9- 
Weil Indies, 1. Jjt, 11, JS7; German Miit- 

■ioni in, I, ^14. 
Went, John. Girci the Initiative to work 

among the IndUni. I. 488. 
Weitcm .\*ia and the Levant, i. 4jf45r> 
Wheaton, Mrs. A- Miwinnary Literature. 

I. [60. 
U'hcclvr. .Mr*. A. J., Voung I'eopk and 

.Miaiiuns, I, 117- 
W heeler, Evereil P., Pr<)udic< of Race 

and of Religion, 1. 370, 
Wherry, K. W., Literary Work for the 

Mohammedans, II, ;8. 
While, H. W., II, 374. 
White. .Motei Clark. Medical Training of 

Natives 1 E, ^19. 
White. Mm. V\cilington. Medical Work for 

Women, I, 544^ Blind Girls. II, a^j. 
Whitman. A. O.. II, 357- 
V\ hitman. B. L., Young People and MU- 

ftions, I. lan. 
Wider Relation* of Misaiott*. I, mt-JS^i- 
Widows uf India. II, ijfi-w- 
Wisiam. Mr.. Etiuuiion, II, aS. 
W iTberlorce, William. Labor* for MiailOM, 

I. 403- 
Wilhur, Mif- N.. IT. 364. 
Wild Meii of Assam. I. $ti. $u. 
Wilder. K. P.. Cam^MLgn in England, I, 

ioq; and S. \', M., I, ie6, 
\V ilkic, J-uliii, Kduc^iled Native* of India 

and Christianity, t, 511; ReUlive Values 

in Hijjher Edacaiion. 11. i»o. 
Witl-cullure by Manual Trainrng. il. i8j- 

iSr. 
Wtliiams. Charlca. II. 364; Micsion* and 

Peace. I. JS4. 
Williams George, and Y. M. C. A.. II, 1*. 
Williams. Henry. Work in New Jtcaland. 

1, 404> 49^ 



Willlanift, John. .'Uaptation lo Hia Work. 
II, 3^; Murdered 4t Erruiuonga, L 491: 
Voyages in Polynesia, 1, HOf-^oj. 

William*. William. Work in New Zeidand, 

I. 404, *9». 

Williamsoft, Aleicander. Bible Work in 
China. II. iS; Literary Work in Cbi&a. 

II. 4$. 78. 

Wilson. C. T.. Fir« Miuionary to Uganda. 
I> J^s: Mottammedaniam, I, 393; Palettine. 

I, ♦43- 

WiUon. Daniel, Objeet* to Vonng Women 

Missionarie». 1. 410. 
WiUoD. Jessie C, Medical Mii»ton«. II. 

aoj. 
Wingatc. Mit* M. D., Uusineia Method* 

in Givliw, I. 191JL 
Winsor, Richard, Oriitian Pl^ilaathropy. 

II. 3J0. 

WinCon, Kcv. G. I!., Chriittaa Literatiirc, 

11. 59: Selt-iuppon. II. 1^ 
Wiichcrafl. I. in. 
Witness, Mistiunary A, I, 81, 9a; of Cliria- 

tian Living. I. 4J^. 
Witter, W. E.. As^am Plains, I, ixt. 
Wolf. L. H., II. jtij; I-Iducaied Natives of 

India and C'hriiiianiiy, I. $ta: Famine 

Victims. II, m; .Marriage of Miuion- 

aries. I, 314. 
Wom^n'!! Clubs, Mission Sttrdy in, 1, IS3- 
Wonian's Missiniury Social Union, I. 164, 
Wnman'K Missioii^iry Socitiics. Advance in. 

I. 410; Results aE Forming, I, ji4'ZKi; 
Influence on Churches, 1, ji6; Opposi 
lion 10, I, jij; Origin of, I, Ji8; Sttident 
Mtivemcnt Drawn from. II. jjB, 

Wfiman's Union Missionary Society of 

New York. I. Ji8. 
Wonun't VVarli in Mi&iiuns, I, ^, 47; Co- 

it>peraiiun uf Native Paitor in, 11, 9(1; 

(,rowth o(, in l'atr«line, I. 443; Lecture 

Meetings. 11 iC; Medical Work. I, S44. 

II. iB^-'flS". OpportuBiliea, II. jjj; Pet- 
»onal Talk», 11. jH. lug, ijMi Reading 
Matter far Women, II. 73; Touring, II. 

Womanhood. Educated. Power of, II. i^ 

133; Degraded. I. 387-389. 
Wuiiian Physicuii, Opjiorlnmly of, I, 544. 

11, iS^ips- 
Women MissiuiidrieR, Their Work in India. 

I, su6, ioj: Merhnrfi of Training Con- 
vert*. JL IM, »66-J7"; Methods of Reach- 
ing the People, II. j8. <m. iA too. lot, i«- 
[j;; Need of Preparation for the Work. 
M. IJ7; Single, Germoii) Usage, 1. 414^ 
Tril>ulc io, Ij 46. 

Women of Mission Lands. Ability of in 
Turkey. I. 45$; Advanced Education lor, 

II, iui43i ia China, I, 547-U9; Colleges 
for, X fly; l>cgradBiion of. 1, JB7-JBQ; 
Dwarfed Intellect of. I. jft>; Educated 
Women, II. ijj; Change Caused ty the 
Gusnel. I. 454, II. t^, 135-rjH; Influence 
n( Woman, I, 3188; in India. II, 189; in 
Japan, I, 531; m Laos I. y. Key ol 
Future in Their Ilandi, i, 506, fioj: 
Among the Xusariych of Turbcy. t, 44>: 
Seclusion And Suffering. I. jH?. jM: Jn 
Syria. I. 4^1; Tamil IVoverb on. I. 114: 
Training and Work. It. jfifrj^o, 

U'omcn. Responsiltility Respecting Mia- 

M'fins l> 114-117. Jt8. 
Wood. Dr., WVrk in Pent, I, 4re- 
Woodman, E. R., Theological Training in 

Japan, I, sjr. 
Woods C. R.. II. 3«o. 
Woolman. Mary SchcDck, Aim% of Manual 

Tratniog, II, 180. 
Worden. iV., II, 364. 
Worker*. To Enageltze the World Now. 

Li*. 
W'orfd'* Student Christian Federation. I, 

iw. 



484 



INDEX 



VVomll, H. R. L., Mcdtul Miwtoiu in 

Arabia, I. 4J7. 
WriEhi. Mf». C. D.. n. jtj, 
Wyfie. Wi« M. R.. The N«i»»rir*h. 1. 41^- 
Wjrmao. A. J.. II. M6. 
W)mlioo|). 1. S.. irjS6; Calponcun. II. 

tfo; non-ChTisl^Kn Rclnrinn*, I, jf-j- 
Xnvirr, St. Frand*, rim IVcschcr in 

/affna, 1, sij. 
Nimca**. CArdinal. II. I|. 
Yakniai. Wufk ol the Swcditb Ui««ion- 

atirfi in, 1, 489- 
VbIp Hand, I. i8?. 
Yale. MifMonnry Library at. I, im; S. V. 

M. in, 1. iij. 
YaH-5. Matlliew T.. Voulli ol, I, 118. 
Ynr-bonVii, M-tsmnai)', L, 15}. 
VouiiK. v.. W,. II, J5S- 
Youflft I^diri' MiHiioDary Union, of Nasb- 

villc. I. ijs- 
N'uung Ladies' &ocic(ic». I, 135. 
VciunK Men, Christian, Kmpluyrociil lot 

<lndia>. il. ijt. 
Yoiihk Men af the Fuinr« Ministry. I, 14H. 
Youns M«n'( Chrictian AfiQCtailoD tn 

Japan. I. jig: in Minion Land«. 1. loo. 

Ketaiian 10 the Siudeni Voluiitrcr Move- 
ment, I. loj; in Itabcrt College. II, ijci. 
Vouni Mitsionariea, Character of. I, iig- 
Younf reoi>l«. Bible RefercQCC* to. 1. 117: 

influence in Support ol MUtion*. I, Jno- 

wS; pDiaitii lilies uf Work Amons, I, 48^ 

HeUlinn tn Mission*. I, itT-izx; Knpon- 

■ibilily of, I, m. 
Young People a Societies. I, ^. ui. M*. 

(58. iSi. See Children'* Socielie*. 
Youns People's Union ol the U. P. 

Church, I. III. 
Young Women and Child rent Work for, 

II. j63. 

Young Women** Chriilian Aitociatlon, 1, 

y!'^. S C. E. Mrmbcnbip, I. i». 
Yukon \'B!1cy. Work at the Epi>co(iat 

Church in. I. 49q. 
Xahar-ol-Hakk, Convertion and Work 

oi. 11. ji. 

21eitl»eTccr, David, Imprisoned in New 

York, I. 4ffl. 
Zenuiaa, Bible Teaching in. II, i>^. 
Zicgenbuc, fiartholomew. Pioneer of Mnd' 

cm Blbk Work. II. 16: in South India. 

I, ^1. 
Zionifm. I. +tl- 

Zoiar. Ornhant Home. Beirnt, I, jti. 
Zulu*. Work Among. I. iiVS. ^7". 

INHKX TO ANECDOTES. 

African. Inielligcncc o( an. I, ^71- 

Bible, an Entrnng Wedge in Syria, I, 

441. 44.t 

Diblc Tranilalion in Tclugu, II. >S- 

Rihlc Work, Conver«ion« Due to. II. Jl. 3»: 

Sticee«» of, in Bueno* Ayre*. Fraoci* 

I'crroio. 1. 4ttj 
Buddlilam. Powerle»« to fomfon. I, 361. 
lliri*t. Sway Over the Hindu Heart, II, 

104. 
Christian Ciriliation, The Desire lor by 

llcaihrn Women. 11. 19]: Utmtine, 

('onverbinni Uur to. II. 6). 
Christianity. Indirrcl Influence. I, *33; 

Tran»forming Power of. China, 1. S47i 

Labrador, I. 487- 
Comity in India. I. tf«: The Moravian 

tHiurch in Gieentaitd. I. «Jo- 
Conwer^ior* Due tn Bible Work. IT, JI, 3J; 

to ChiHOtan I.tterature, II, 6$. 
ncgradalion oi Women In China, t. 541. 
DtnominiLtional Rivalry. I. js;. 



luicrciKii M the Uiapeuiafics, 
Be of the Very Bnt. 



Uevotional 

11. ^j. 
Education Shotild 

II. 141. 

Enthosia'Ri. Povrer of, 1. j6o. 
Faitfafulnt*s of Native Convrrt*. Africa. 



I, 



4&J. 4641 (Jhina, I, i46-. South Sea lalatKia, 
I. 499; Draih of U alayii All, T 
Fees for Medical Work. II. ii«. 



Giving, t'norgaoitcd. 1. iPg. 

CMpcl. Pfcicnicd by Act Aa Well A& 

Speech. II, 9J, 94. 
CfOfpcl PingreKH in the Philippine IsIanUv 

Heathen World. Need of. Cootran wUk 

London. I. Mi. 
Heltiing and Being Helped, II. jiX. 
Higner Education, Prime SliniUcr of Jcy- 

(liirr, I, jjj, 
HinduismrAttiluiIe Toward Manual Labor, 



n. ijs- 

Individual Sup) 

Inliuntanity of kubber Traffic in 



jpuTt. Succe*! uf, I, 



4*8- 



195. 
AIri 



ea. I. 



[nteltigencc of aa African, I. 4;i- 

intcrcil in Mi'-Moas, How Airakcned, by 

Arthur Mitchell, I 159, 
Lepen. Cnielly to. 11, 3^6, 
Mieraiure. ChriMian, Converstona Due lo, 

II. 6i; Ofienial, Value of lu Appnc-a- 

tioD by Mi«*ionarirs I. joj. 
Love, Taaaiag Ii On. I. irf. 
Medical Mi«*ions, Power lo Open Closed 

l)oor», II. iW, 189, iM, xA, «* 
Mohammedan Objection to Educaiton for 

Cirla. I. 441- 
Muney, Uae and Abuse in ConnedMn with 

Native Heln. II, p6. 
Mother Vainly Praying to BtKldha. I. pa. 

j6r. 
Uothcr'* Influence. Lifp Jacob Cbamber- 

lain. I. 116. 117. 
Native Converts. Faiihfulneiu ol, Alri£^, 

I. 4<^Ii 4<4; Chitu. 1, uc; South Sea 

Island*. I. 443: Dcaili 01 Walayat Ali, 

^ I. s«»- 

Naltve Nurses, Their Courage and Devo- 
tion, II, XJJ. 

Need ol the Heathen World. 1. 36S. 

Non-restaianee. Ili Power. I. 485. 

Opposition Overcome, William Cany. 1. 
■ 18. 

Peace. ProriMtni hy .Minion*. Converted 
African Chirfiain I, jsi 

Pioneer Agency, McdtoU MiMiou At, II, 
iSB. 189. 194. ao6, 309. 

Politeness. Value of, in Dealing with Ori- 
entals. I. J06. 

pT»ver, Answer to, I. 17s; Exercites at the 
I>iapenMrirs, II. auj; That " HtU the 
Mark." ]. ly. 

Preaching. Brings Native In Contact whh 
the Foreigner, II. 10c 

Preaching Christ in Mexico. I. 3?i. 

Rubber Traffic in Africa. Inhumanity oL 
I. 468. 

Sunday-school Literature, lis Inftnenoe. 
11- SS^ 

Support of MfssioDaric* by Individtnl 
l-hnrche*. Success of, I. 195. 

Suspicion of the Missiottaries in ChiiM, 1. 

Transforming Power of Chrittianily. China. 

I- 547- y^'- 1"ihradnr. I, 4S7. 
Woman's Pow^r. It* Hidden Source. I, 116. 
Women. Degradation in China, I. iu: Tn- 

flueflcc Over Men. I. its: Work amoog. 

in India. II. loi. 
Young Penple. Need of Mi^stcmary Train- 

»ng. T, 137. 




1 






3 LIDS QIS Q71 S23 



H 

^^^H 


Stanford University Librariei 
Stanford, Califomia 1 




Return thli book on or before date du*. 




\ 

w 

\ 






^ . 



